Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 28 May 1998 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Thursday , 28 May 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , last Friday Mr Eric Tabarly , a very distinguished French yachtsman , was knocked overboard in heavy seas off the Welsh coast and is missing , presumed drowned .
My father , Sir Francis Chichester , was a great competitor of Mr Tabarly 's .
I would just like to pay my tribute to this very great , French , single-handed yachtsman , and I crave your indulgence , Mr President , for so doing .
Mr President , as I speak a football match is taking place in Marseilles between England and Tunisia .
The latest score is 2-0 .
It has finished and it is 2-0 .
However , I was very concerned , indeed , to hear of the actions by mindless hooligans during that match , and I want to say to this House that the behaviour of those people in no way represents the genuine English football fans who are as disgusted and appalled as any by the behaviour of those people in France .
( Applause )
Mr President , I intended to vote against , instead of for , Amendment No 4 to the Arias Cañete report .
I wish the record to be changed , if possible .
Mr President , I wish to speak about something that does not concern the Minutes , but is a question of procedure .
This week the results of the working party 's discussion on MEPs ' pay , travel and other expenses will be made known here .
These have been leaked to the public , to the Swedish press for example .
We Finnish parliamentarians , at least some of us , have had to answer questions on this working party 's conclusions .
I do not know whether they are right or wrong , but this kind of leak must not be allowed to happen .
We have to be familiar with the contents of a report at least at the same time as the media , to be able to reply to the questions we are asked .
Mrs Matikainen-Kallström , I think Mr Martin wants to speak about the same subject .
Mr President , the Press Services have just drawn my attention to the coverage in the Swedish press of the Members ' Statute .
I wish to say that , firstly , they are not leaks , because they are entirely inaccurate : they do not reflect the contents of the report .
Mr President , as you know , the report will go to the Bureau tonight and until it has been to the Bureau it is not an official document of this House .
Secondly , the report does not mention a salary at all .
It simply suggests that , in future , an MEP 's salary should be a percentage of a judge at the Court of Justice 's salary but does not mention what that percentage should be ; and , thirdly , it states that the percentage should be set by common accord between this Parliament and the Council , so Parliament would not be able to act unilaterally to set its own salary .
The reports and the figures quoted in the Swedish media are entirely inaccurate .
Mr Martin , you have just answered it for me .
Mr President , unlike the previous speakers , I would like to make a point about pages 17 and 18 of the Minutes and the vote on the Arias Cañete report .
An amendment was tabled to this report , Amendment No 1 , which was the subject , on the one hand , of a request for a roll-call vote , on the part of the GUE / NGL group , and on the other hand , for a split vote , on the part of our group .
The results of the roll-call vote are recorded in the Minutes , both for the first and the second part of Amendment No 1 . However , in the results of the roll-call vote , in the Annex to the Minutes , we are told that the roll-call list for the first part of Amendment No 1 will not be published for technical reasons .
I would like to ask you why this is , and if any measures have been taken to ensure that such an incident does not happen again .
In fact , I think that as regards requests for roll-call votes , it is not just a question of having the exact result , but it is also a question of knowing how the votes are divided up for each group .
So , have measures been taken to ensure that such regrettable events do not reoccur ?
Certainly , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
The electronic system broke down .
We have done everything we can to ensure that this problem does not reoccur , and in particular to ensure that the electronic system in the new building is even more advanced and at least provides us with the possibility of an alternative system .
Mr President , I am getting a little disoriented , because I am constantly seeing something approaching on my left , on your right , and it says PPE here .
But I no longer know whether that is the right name , and whether since the merging with everything related to the Allianza Nazionale and so on , there will merely be one group here in this Chamber as far as cooperation is concerned .
Could you please establish that the centre will remain here where I stand ?
Mr Wijsenbeek , it is a matter of Members ' freedom , which I am sure you recognize .
Mr President , I wish to draw attention to this magazine called the Parliament magazine which purports to be a record , and to represent the opinions , of this House .
This is a special edition on nuclear safety , for which I was asked to write a piece , which was later censured because of the heavy advertising of the nuclear industry in this magazine .
Either this does or does not represent the views of Members and if it does represent the views then it should not be censured in this way .
If this happens in future , I would like Parliament to request that this masthead be removed from this magazine .
I will be distributing to Members the article which I was asked to write for the magazine on the nuclear question so that we will not be censured in this House .
It is a private magazine .
If they reduce the length of the articles which are given to them , unfortunately we cannot do anything about that , because it is freedom of expression .
It is not an official magazine of the European Parliament .
Mr President , that is my point : it should not purport to be an official magazine and should not carry the masthead or purport to represent the views of this House .
We will check that it is not , in any case .
Mr President , I just wish to make two points .
Firstly , I wrote to you in connection with the Arias Cañete vote , because there was some confusion there .
Secondly , could the Commission make a statement to the House this week regarding the recent Court of Justice ruling , which effectively means that many of the NGOs and the programmes that most directly affect the people of the Community have been put on hold as a result of this Court of Justice opinion of 12 May .
This is causing considerable alarm and great distress to many NGOs which have had their funding put on hold as a result of this Court case .
If the Commission is not going to make a statement about this week , why not ?
And , if not , could it make one at the next part-session at the beginning of July in Brussels ?
That has been raised in the trialogue , and we are seeking clarification of the question you raised .
Mr President , briefly and sadly I wish to inform this House that a fishing boat from Mallaig , a small town in the far north-west of my area , was split in two by a German tanker .
It sank instantly with the total loss of crew .
The saddest thing of all is that they are all from the same very small town , which is devastated .
I wonder if it would not be impertinent to ask if you could perhaps write some kind of letter of condolence .
I can assure you that I will do that immediately .
Mr President , I believe I speak on behalf of the vast majority of the people of England , and I use the term ' England ' today advisedly , to say that we are shocked , angered and ashamed at the antics of certain people in a French town who have purported to be English soccer fans !
I wish to say to the people of France that I apologize for their behaviour .
I would particularly like to apologize for the behaviour of those English fans who have been attacking French citizens of North African descent .
They are fascist thugs !
They do not represent the people of England .
I wish to conclude by saying that if this behaviour continues , then the British Government and the English Football Association should consider withdrawing the English team from the World Cup .
Mr President , if we are going to sympathize with every misfortune that occurs in the European Union , or at least many of them - and indeed rightly so - I would like to ask that we also acknowledge the rail accident which occurred in Germany and I would ask you to write a letter of condolence to those involved .
You are absolutely right , Mrs Mann .
In any case , I can inform you that I sent telegrams expressing this Parliament 's condolences to the German authorities , the President of the Bundestag and the Chancellor immediately after the accident .
Mr President , I assume that you too will have heard that dioxin levels from the wasteincineration plant in Strasbourg have been as high as 360 nanograms .
In Germany 0.1 nanograms are permitted - I say this to give you an idea of the dimensions , that is those of you who do not work in the environmental field .
We could perhaps say that this is our job , but we must show concern for our colleagues so I would politely ask you to write to the authorities in Strasbourg to ask that this waste-incineration plant be closed down immediately , as we have a responsibility towards our colleagues .
I shall tell the mayor this evening . He is dining with the Bureau .
Mr President , as you are aware we have a serious problem with Sellafield and British Nuclear Fuels that cannot be ignored .
I would like to call on you , in your capacity as President of this Parliament , to demand that the Commission investigate BNFL which has already applied to the British Government to considerably increase discharges from its nuclear operations into the Irish Sea and which would result in over thirty billion litres of effluent being released into the Irish Sea over the next ten years .
Secondly , that BNFL and Siemens , the German ...
( Interruption by the President )
I am sorry , Mr Fitzsimons , there have been quite a lot of resolutions on Sellafield , and I cannot add anything to what this Parliament has already said .
Mr President , we have changed the subject now , but I cannot help going back to what we were talking about a little earlier .
A short while ago , a British Member very rightly said that people who behaved badly with the French at football matches do not represent the whole of Great Britain but a part that he and many others disown .
I am happy to hear this .
I would nonetheless like to recall here that when the Italian police were put on the alert for a match in Italy , given the fact that the bravado of these fans was no secret and that prevention is the best thing - it is better to prevent problems than to try and solve them afterwards - the British press unfortunately severely attacked Italy and the Italian Government .
So , considering ......
( Interruption by the President )
Mrs Marinucci , we cannot start telling stories about incidents at football matches .
This is not the time .
Mr President , thank you for your letter which I received today in reply to my question to you .
I noticed in your letter that the Bureau will be meeting tonight , 15 June , to discuss the 50 % attendance .
Will they take into consideration the contents of your letter which seems to indicate that the majority of people not able to attend 50 % of the votes have some difficulties in either arriving in Strasbourg or departing from Strasbourg ?
I do think that some consideration should be given to these points .
Of course , I expect that Members of the groups will discuss these matters within their own groups and reach a final decision on it .
You can be absolutely certain of that .
Mr President , I would actually like to endorse what was said by a number of my colleagues , as well as by David Martin , about Members ' salaries .
A similar article appeared on the front pages of the Dutch regional press .
I would like to ask you as a matter of urgency , Mr President , whether you could issue a press statement this evening , perhaps jointly with the working party , saying what is true and what is not .
It is absolutely essential that , for once , this is also reported .
I also have a second comment .
Today is the deadline for tabling amendments to next year 's calendar of part-sessions .
We in the Group of the European People 's Party would greatly appreciate it if we had a little bit more time to talk about the agenda .
Amendments to this agenda are not terribly labourious .
I would therefore like to ask you if it might be possible for us in the group to have until tomorrow , let us say until 7.30 p.m. , to do something about it .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , you are absolutely right .
If there are no more interruptions , I hope we shall have approved the agenda before 7.30 p.m. , and the matter can be discussed in the political groups .
( The Minutes were approved )
Calendar of part-sessions 1999
The Conference of Presidents has decided to propose the following calendar of part-sessions for 1999 :
11 to 15 January27 to 28 January8 to 12 February24 to 25 February8 to 12 March24 to 25 March12 to 16 April3 to 7 May20 to 23 July13 to 17 September4 to 8 October18 to 22 October3 to 4 November15 to 19 November1 to 2 December13 to 17 December
The deadline for tabling amendments to these dates is 8.30 p.m. this evening , which gives an extra half an hour for the political groups to discuss it .
Mr President , that was not what I meant .
I have a feeling that we should have a look at the Dutch-Spanish interpretation .
I do not think it is always all that good .
I had asked whether we could have until tomorrow evening to table the amendments , tomorrow evening until 7.30 p.m.
It would be impossible to set the deadline as 8.30 p.m. tomorrow , but we could make it 12.00 noon tomorrow .

Mr President , if this might lead to problems as far as translating is concerned ; they are extremely simple amendments .
That is my first point .
But we could also vote on Thursday .
Why not ?
We will also be voting on the Cardiff resolution on Thursday , an important topic , so we could also do this on Thursday .
So I would like to ask you if we could have until 8.00 p.m. tomorrow to table amendments .
In that case there is no problem .
If the vote takes place on Thursday instead of Wednesday , the deadline for tabling amendments can be 8.00 p.m. tomorrow .
Amendment of Rule 48
The next item is the report ( A4-0293 / 97 ) by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on the amendment of Rule 48 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure on written declarations .
Mr President , Mr Dell 'Alba has been detained and has asked me to take his place as rapporteur , which I am of course happy to do .
Mr Dell 'Alba 's report relates to an amendment to Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure , which concerns written declarations .
This amendment to the rule is based on a proposal for an amendment to the Rules of Procedure submitted by Mrs Aglietta in October 1996 , pursuant to Rule 163 which states that any Member may propose an amendment to the Rules of Procedure and have it referred to the committee responsible .
This proposal related to Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure and was drawn up on the basis of a decision by the enlarged Bureau on 7 July 1989 , according to which written declarations ( Rule 65 of the previous Rules of Procedure ) cannot be signed by more than one Member when being submitted .
Following this proposal , the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , which appointed Mr Dell 'Alba as rapporteur , drew up four amendments to Rule 48 , which I would like to summarize briefly .
The first amendment relates to the fact that , up until now , only individual Members have been able to submit written declarations of not more than 200 words .
It aims to allow written declarations to be signed by up to five Members , in order to take account of the fact that within Parliament there are many collective actions and that it must also be possible for written declarations to be submitted by several Members .
The declaration must then be entered in a register , along with the names of the signatories .
The second proposal is that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities wants the declaration to be included in a register located in the immediate vicinity of the Chamber .
Until now , Members had to sign written declarations in an office which was not always very easy to find , which explains this reference to the location of the register .
Other important changes include the fact that when a declaration has been signed by more than one half of the component Members of Parliament , the President will immediately inform Parliament of it , and the declaration will immediately be forwarded to the institutions to which it is addressed .
In addition , it will be included in the Minutes of proceedings of the last sitting of the corresponding part-session .
Those are the various amendments that have been introduced .
They will make it easier for Members to exercise their right to table declarations .
In a way , it is a kind of democratization , an additional step towards a more broadly based democracy , which makes the right to submit such declarations for possible signatories a reality .
I would like to add that in addition to the four amendments tabled by the Rules Committee , which were in fact approved unanimously , a fifth amendment was tabled by Mrs Crawley and Mr Janssen van Raay , who would like such declarations to be entered in a register .
This is of course already contained in Mr Dell 'Alba 's report , but this fifth amendment would mean that the names of the signatories would also be recorded .
Personally , I wonder if it would not be rather labourious to enter not only the declaration , with the names of the initial signatories , but also the names of all those who have signed it .
I have not been able to determine the rapporteur 's feelings on this matter and I am therefore only giving you my personal opinion : I believe that it would be somewhat tedious .
Mr President , that is a brief summary of the proposal that has been submitted to you by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
I call upon the House to approve these amendments .
Mr President , I should like to say that I will be broadly supporting the Dell 'Alba report that has been put in front of us by Mr Fayot , the chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
There is a past history to this report .
It used to be possible - at least in the previous Parliament - for Members to collect signatures on the basis of Rule 48 resolutions which meant that on a reasonable number of occasions - perhaps three or four times a year - the requirement of half of the Members of Parliament signing was actually achieved .
The reason that was changed some time ago was due to rather over-enthusiastic lobbying - some might say arm-twisting - by one of the opposition groups , which led to a demand for a change in the interpretation of the Rules .
The present interpretation was adopted which , in fact , only allows for one initial signature to be on a Rule 48 resolution and for people having to sign it in a special office , which avoids having to walk a line of people demanding that they actually sign up to particular Rule 48 resolutions .
The result of this has been essentially to kill Rule 48 as a means of getting a resolution passed .
On only one single occasion in the past three years have we actually obtained the necessary number of signatures , and that was fairly recently on a Rule 48 resolution on violence against women .
While the Dell 'Alba report addresses a minor part of this problem , we will be supporting it save possibly , in my view , Amendment No 3 , which means that we will no longer get a running total of how many Members have signed , or the second part of Amendment No 1 which seems to be overly cumbersome and not recognize the procedure which is actually followed in the office - because you do have a record of who has already signed .
Nevertheless it would have been preferable to return to the status quo ante , but that would require Members to be sufficiently confident of their politics that they did not feel the need to be protected against overly attentive lobbying .
Obviously this is not the case in this Parliament .
Hopefully the next Parliament will have more about it than the present body or the lobbyists will have less about them .
Mr President , Mr Ford has spoken about the history of Rule 48 .
The question now is about the opening up of democracy and returning to somewhere nearer Parliament 's former position .
It is about allowing Members not only a clearer and more positive way to express their own political points of view on matters of topical and international interest , but also , perhaps more importantly , the chance to put down a motion on behalf of their constituents - those they were elected to represent .
The rapporteur should be congratulated for his amendments which generally , with the reservations that have been outlined by the previous speaker , seek to simplify these rights and opportunities and also to make the publication of the motions more open and more easily available .
Mr Dell 'Alba , the rapporteur , has also made provision for more than one Member to initiate the process , and five Members collectively may do so .
Once again Mr Ford has outlined the history of this process and I need not go into it any further .
Many reports are complex and lengthy .
This report and the amendments distinguish themselves by their simplicity and clarity of presentation .
These features are also reflected in the aims and objectives of the report , which are clarity , openness and simplicity and those are objectives which this Parliament should welcome and which we should be supporting .
It is for these reasons that I and my group have no problem supporting this motion .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Article 366a of the Fourth ACP-EC Convention
The next item is the report ( A4-0194 / 98 ) by Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the draft Council Decision on the procedure for implementing Article 366a of the Fourth ACP-EC Convention ( 5644 / 98 - C4-0156 / 98-96 / 0050 ( AVC ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in January last year the Council consulted the European Parliament about the proposal for a Council decision on a framework procedure for implementing Article 366a of the Fourth Lomé Convention , as revised in 1995 .
This is the article that stipulates that in the event of an ACP state having failed to fulfil the essential components of the Convention , namely respect for human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law , this can lead to the suspension , either partially or fully , of the Convention .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation subsequently decided to draw up an interim report pursuant to Article 80 ( 3 ) of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , and also called for the opening of a conciliation procedure with the Council .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation , followed in this by this entire Parliament during the part-session of June 1997 , laid down recommendations in the interim report to amend the Commission 's text so as to give Parliament the right of assent on each proposal to suspend or resume cooperation .
The Commission 's text had proposed that Parliament merely be informed afterwards .
Unfortunately the Council 's response on 6 March 1998 completely ignored the opinion of this Parliament , arguing that the assent of the European Parliament is , legally speaking , completely ruled out .
The situation has not improved because the Treaty of Amsterdam , which will be ratified by the fifteen Member States at the beginning of next year , provides only for information to be given to Parliament subsequently in such matters .
We do not have a legal leg to stand on to enforce this assent from the Council .
It would therefore have been enough for the Council to wait until the beginning of next year to present us with a fait accompli during the implementation procedure .
That is why we responded very quickly in this interim report and developed a fallback position which amounts to the setting up of a consultation procedure instead of an assent procedure .
We are therefore taking a step backwards , but are still asking for a little bit more than has been provided for according to the letter of the Treaty .
For that matter , this request for consultation is not new .
When we were discussing the Oostlander report on enlargement towards central and eastern Europe Mr Henderson , President-in-Office of the Council , gave us a commitment which goes in the same direction , namely that Parliament would be given a suitable opportunity to express its views to the Council before the Council takes a decision ; a perfect description of consultation , in fact .
That is why , as a result of this decision and Mr Henderson 's statement , I immediately contacted the President-in-Office responsible for development cooperation , namely Mrs Clare Short , to ask her whether the British presidency would also grant consultation to the European Parliament .
In the meantime we have had two discussions with text proposals which are aimed in the right direction .
Not everything has been acquired yet , but we are on the road to consultation .
It is essential that we conclude this issue before the end of the British presidency , which is approaching fast .
That is why we have an interim report proposal before us , which received unanimous support from the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
The essential components are provided for in parliamentary consultation .
Secondly , Council decisions must be made by qualified majority in the case of a partial suspension of the Convention , and unanimously in the case of a full suspension .
To give you a clear idea of this , ladies and gentlemen , even in the case of Nigeria , the full Convention has not been suspended .
It is therefore only in highly exceptional circumstances that unanimity would be called for .
The third element is obviously the call for conciliation with the Council , in active cooperation with the Commission .
I therefore venture to express the hope that approval of this report may lead to us being able to reach an agreement with the presidency within a few weeks time .
Mr President , Mrs Aelvoet deserves recognition in drawing our attention to a very important issue , in order to stress the role of the European Parliament in such a very remarkable situation as the EU reacting to the fact that human rights are being flouted in a country working in cooperation with ourselves .
I also congratulate her on being so coherent in this matter earlier on .
It has to be said that it is not just a matter here of the European Parliament getting its opinion across and having the opportunity to discuss it . This is also linked to that big problem the EU has at the moment , namely its approval by the general public .
Its legitimacy for our citizens has perhaps dwindled .
The European Parliament is justifiably seen as a public forum , one that represents the people , in those matters to which the people in general turn their attention .
It is very easy to imagine that Parliament might well have been rebuffed here on judicial grounds , for political reasons .
However , I do not wish to claim that that is the case .
That is why it would be a good idea to approve this report and take it very seriously .
Furthermore , it must be realized that the matter will be taken more seriously in the country in which these human rights violations have occurred if the European Parliament focuses attention on it in its capacity as a public forum .
Mrs Aelvoet 's report deserves support and I hope it will be approved with not too much opposition .
Mr President , I too wish to thank the rapporteur very warmly for her work , and as she described the whole legal background for us with her usual clarity I would now like to go into some political aspects of this procedure in the two minutes I have available . It has become a tradition in the European Parliament that we ask our partners in development cooperation : " How do you deal with human rights ?
How do you manage the running of the state effectively , in terms of good governance ? How do you ensure legal certainty for your citizens in the legal system ? '
I believe we must not limit the discussion to the area of human rights alone . We must always bear in mind the other two areas as well .
Of course , one is not necessarily conceivable without the other , but from that point of view we have actually always adopted this joint approach in discussions .
With this procedure - if we implement it in the way the rapporteur described - we have clear legal certainty for the ACP partner countries and beyond , as we are in the process of extending our cooperation to include to a greater extent the least developed countries which do not belong to the ACP .
Some parts of this procedure could therefore be applied here .
It is sometimes noticeable that when human rights violations , bad administration and corrupt government persist for a long time , the stringency with which such sanctions are applied occasionally diminishes to some extent .
I believe we should agree to proceed with equal intensity wherever we observe such shortcomings , and must continue to do so resolutely until the situation improves .
Mr President , the Union is getting the opportunity to give its human rights policy flesh and blood .
The democracy and human rights clause can be made real by the Commission proposals .
With these proposals , operational agreements are being made about how the democracy clause should be used , and on the basis of which criteria .
The Union has a powerful instrument in its hands with the human rights clause , and should also wish to use it .
Clear criteria and procedures will increase the transparency of EU policy .
The countries concerned will also show more understanding of EU policy , and they will have an impetus to stick to the criteria .
That is why it all started .
However , the present state of affairs in this debate on procedure is extremely disappointing .
The Council wants to decide on the use of the democracy clause alone .
My group utterly disagrees with this .
Informing Parliament about the suspension of Lomé cooperation , for example , is by no means enough .
In these kinds of situations public pressure from Europe 's representative body is needed .
Initiating Lomé cooperation requires assent from the European Parliament .
So it should follow that this same Parliament should also give its assent to the suspension of cooperation .
The Council 's reluctant attitude should not deter us from our principal position , namely that democratic participation and control is a primary requirement .
The Council and Parliament must consult with each other in order to find a solution to this conflict .
We should not surrender something in advance .
The Council has also given the European Parliament a considerable role in the context of the accession partnership , after all .
For that matter , this also applies to the start of the procedure .
Not only should the Council and the Commission be able to initiate a suspension procedure and dialogue with a country , but the European Parliament should also be able to request this .
The rapporteur rightly asks for this in her report , of which I greatly approve .
This Parliament plays an important role in the human rights policy of the Union , and the ACP Joint Assembly is also an important instrument .
On the basis of this , the European Parliament deserves to be given an important role in the entire suspension procedure .
Incidentally , that is true not only of the suspension of cooperation , but also when cooperation is resumed .
Precisely now , when the Union wants to make cooperation in the Lomé context more political , the parliamentary dimension must be strengthened , otherwise it does not have a leg to stand on politically .
Which ACP country , for instance , will allow itself to be convinced by a moralistic European Union , which itself also violates democratic principles ?
Mr President , I support a strong political dimension for the new cooperation agreements with the ACP countries , especially in the fields of human rights and good government under rule of law .
It is right that we should consistently emphasize the importance we attach to the steady integration of the ACP countries into the world economy and that new trade arrangements should be compatible with those operating within the World Trade Organization .
In fact , remaining tariff barriers must and should be removed to the greatest extent possible so that some element of fairness and equality of market access can be introduced .
In negotiating new ACP agreements , it is essential to stress the need for simplification and rationalization of aid instruments with a view to gradual evolution towards direct budgetary support for African states .
Due care and attention must be shown so that as trade liberalization takes place no damage is done to the fragile working of the African economies .
I welcome the declarations which were issued by the leaders of the G8 nations , following their meeting in England last month , relating to reducing the debt which African countries may have to pay back to the wealthier countries in the Western world .
As the new millennium approaches , African states will not be able to make that stride to self-sufficiency if they continue to be crippled with debt repayments .
The Western leaders must put in place structures and procedures to ensure that blanket reductions do not apply to all African states across the board .
Mr President , I , in turn , would like to express my complete agreement with the Group of the European Radical Alliance on the two main proposals contained in the report by Mrs Aelvoet .
Firstly , in June 1997 we asked that the European Parliament be able to give its assent to the Council in the case of suspension of the Convention .
However , it would seem that such a provision would be contrary to the Amsterdam Treaty .
We accept this , but consider that this is yet another example of the Treaty 's inadequacy .
Having said that , we agree with the simple consultation procedure proposed by the rapporteur so that Parliament can at least give its opinion a priori .
In addition , following the example of the rapporteur , we think that the European Parliament , just like the Commission or any Member State , should have a power of initiative for the suspension of the application of the Convention .
I , for my part , am not certain that in a classic , orthodox view of the separation of powers , a parliamentary initiative of this type is valid .
However , as a militant and firm believer in European federalism , I would say that until the institutions provide Parliament with real legislative power , we will have to encourage similar encroachments by our House on the executive role .
Nonetheless , with the speed at which the framework procedure for the implementation of Article 366a of the Lomé Convention is being set up , there is a risk that it will really not have enough time to be applied .
That is why I would like once again to draw the attention of the Commission and the Council to one of the provisions contained in the Rocard report on the future of cooperation between the Union and the ACP countries .
Mr Rocard had proposed - and our House had followed his lead - that the criteria relating to democracy and respect for human rights on which aid would depend should be defined by the recipient countries themselves .
I believe this proposal would improve the political legitimacy of the provision on conditionality and would lead to increased efficiency .
But although we agree on the substance of the proposal , we must realize that its adoption would involve the ACP in the procedure itself .
We cannot ask these countries to define the criteria for aid , and therefore conversely those relating to the suspension of the Convention , without involving them in the decision to suspend aid to their country .
Consequently , we need to use our imagination and work to restore the balance of the entire procedure , so that it becomes an example of a truly fair cooperation policy .
Mr President , we support this request and particularly the idea behind it , although in our opinion it does not go far enough .
A consultation procedure is certainly necessary ; an assent procedure would be the better solution .
We wish to announce one thing now : if there should be no solution during the British presidency , we will try to persuade the Austrian Government that this topic should be accorded particular importance after the change of presidency .
I also have a few general comments on this very important issue .
On the basis of its own history , Europe should proceed with great caution in the field of human rights .
If Parliament succeeds in dealing with this problem itself , every care will have to be taken and we will have to ensure that we are not tempted to make generalized premature judgements .
The fact that we are becoming active in this area is to be welcomed , but each individual case must be examined closely .
The relevant countries , which are grouped together here , are at very different stages of economic development .
A measure may affect one country very severely and another less so .
The list of human rights which are constantly mentioned does not include , for example , the right to food and education , a right which is threatened when cooperation is terminated due to a lack of democratic development .
One thing we must bear in mind is that our role is not to act as judge , but to promote and support democratic development in the individual countries .
Mr President , it has never been so important for the European Union to provide itself with a mechanism for suspending cooperation relations when human rights violations take place .
This is shown by the great number of urgent resolutions in this Parliament , which devotes a special heading to human rights , session after session .
By definition , that mechanism - insofar as it is a legal instrument - has to work , both for the sake of the credibility of the EU 's foreign actions , which is now somewhat reduced , and , above all , as an inescapable requirement for the real achievement of the objectives established in the Treaties .
In order for it to work , the procedure for implementing the human rights clause cannot depend on unanimity in the Council , or pass through Parliament surreptitiously for information only .
The system of unanimity in the Council is unanimously recognized as causing paralysis in the decision making process .
We have known that ever since the empty chair crisis of 1966 , and we are aware of it now , when one of the challenges of enlargement is to modify a decision making procedure which , being based on unanimity , is not flexible enough .
So we do not think Parliament is making a revolutionary request in asking for decisions on this important matter to be adopted by majority .
The Council should not view this proposal with suspicion , because it is not an attempt to attack the current interests of the Member States , but to strengthen the policy and interests of the European Union in accordance with the principles established in the Treaties .
For Parliament to request to be consulted on one of the areas of foreign policy which most affects it - human rights - is not only not revolutionary , as Mrs Aelvoet says in her report 's explanatory statement , but is entirely reasonable .
Consulting Parliament would have avoided a lot of the contradictory situations we now find ourselves in . For example , in this very partsession we will be presenting a resolution on Equatorial Guinea , which has just passed 15 death sentences , asking the Commission to think again about resuming cooperation with that country .
Let us provide ourselves with the necessary mechanism to sanction the violation of human rights , so basic and essential , and let us do it properly , with transparency and , above all , with guarantees .
Mr President , I apologize to the House for not being in my place when the debate started .
Unfortunately my plane was late .
I congratulate Mrs Aelvoet on this excellent report .
The PPE Group unanimously supports it .
Suspension is a very serious matter and it is important that Parliament 's views are heard .
However , it is important to remember that the assent procedure very much ties us in to what happened in Amsterdam .
If we cannot have that , then at least we should be allowed to comment when some situation like this arises .
We in Parliament also have to accept that there can be various kinds of situations .
For example , there was the horrendous situation in Nigeria when the former president hanged 19 people .
In such cases , where serious violations of human rights have taken place , the Commission may want to suspend a country immediately .
In others a very slow process may be building up where , simply because of what is happening in the country , it may be possible to alleviate the situation before it goes too far .
For instance , I have just been in the Comoros and was quite horrified by the situation which appears to be building up there .
One island , Anjouan , has declared independence and , at the same time , it expects to continue to get aid from the European Union .
We pointed out to them quite clearly that they could not continue to be in Lomé if they had declared their independence .
It may be that eventually we will have to suspend them .
That is the sort of situation which we should discuss .
Human rights and democracy are vital to our continued support for developing nations .
Quite honestly , good governance is probably even more important .
I would have thought that Africa was the natural continent to move on to after ASEAN .
Having seen the problems of ASEAN , many industries want to move out .
Unless countries are stable , people are simply not going to invest in those nations .
It is therefore important to work with other African nations to try and keep countries stable so that we do not have to suspend them .
I hope that , if we cannot have the assent procedure , the Commission will at least keep us very closely in contact with any situation arising where we may have to suspend a nation , and that the Committee on Development and Cooperation in particular would get any reports that were prepared .
Beyond that , the PPE Group will be delighted to support this report when it comes before the House .
Mr President , after years of lip service about compliance with human rights in the ACP countries , Mrs Aelvoet has managed to find a method whereby we have come a step closer to the effective functioning of the European institutions with regard to human rights compliance .
Moreover , the role of this Parliament has been strengthened .
I agree with Mr Bertens : it is not good enough yet , but it is a start .
Bravo , Mrs Aelvoet !
But how can this proposal be successful if an important country like Angola continues to arm itself heavily ?
Angola has sold its oil supply for the coming three years , and with this money it has paid for the weapons in cash , weapons from Brazil and Russia - Russia , a member of the troika which has to supervise the peace process , would you believe ?
The fact that Angola , a one-party state , can take this decision without democratic consultation with the legal opposition represents a failure of the democratic Lomé test .
So I urge the Council and the Commission to come up with a concrete proposal and an interim report from the European Parliament for the ACP counties to adhere to the arms percentage laid down in the Treaty . Obviously , they should also adhere to the good governance referred to by Mrs Günther .
Only then will democracy and human rights have a chance in the ACP countries as well .
Mr President and Members of the House , it is clear that during the course of the debate a number of issues have been touched on that go beyond the strict terms of the second interim report of Mrs Aelvoet .
That is understandable because Parliament 's interest in the proper implementation of the Fourth Lomé Convention and more particularly its human rights aspects is very great .
For example Mr Corrie has mentioned some examples of horrific conduct that give rise to consideration of what should be done in view of the close relationship that the Lomé Convention gives to the European Union with the countries where such conduct takes place .
Therefore the question of the application of the procedure provided for by Article 366a of the Lomé Convention , which is designed specifically to deal with that kind of situation , is obviously very important .
The Commission has carefully studied Mrs Aelvoet 's second interim report and notes the amendments tabled which would envisage Parliament being consulted at the various stages of implementation of the procedure .
The Commission expressed its opinion when the first interim report was adopted on the desirability of involving Parliament more closely in the implementation of the procedure and it is clear that the current proposal for a Council decision is more explicit in this regard .
It provides for immediately informing Parliament in full on any decision taken in implementing Article 366a .
We do not feel that a process of formally consulting Parliament on the various stages of the procedure is feasible ; not because we think Parliament 's views are unimportant or insubstantial , but simply because of the specific provisions of the Treaties , in particular Article 300 which in effect sets out a procedure which is envisaged for situations such as this .
What is proposed would run counter to what is provided for in Article 300 .
The Commission wants to be as sympathetic as possible and is certainly prepared to undertake to inform Parliament of any initiatives it takes or any proposal it submits under Article 366a and Parliament of course is in those circumstances more than able to take steps to make its views known .
If they are known then they would immediately be something that would come to the attention of the Commission and would have to be considered .
The Commission will continue to take into account all opinions expressed by Parliament in this regard .
I regret the fact that there has been a delay in setting up the arrangements under which Article 366a can be invoked where necessary .
I hope that as a result of this debate and what has been said during the course of it , both by Members and by myself , it will be possible to move as quickly as possible into a situation in which Article 366a can be invoked because the necessary procedure for doing so will have been agreed .
Genetically modified micro-organisms
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0192 / 98 ) on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive amending Directive 90 / 219 / EEC on the contained use of genetically modified microorganisms ( C4-0031 / 98-95 / 0340 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Trakatellis ) .
Mr President , one of the most important fields of biotechnology concerns the applications that are carried out with the use of genetically modified micro-organisms .
These applications have a significant effect on issues of health and disease , diet , the protection of the environment , agriculture and other important fields of human life and activity .
As a result , it is essential that increasing the possibilities of genetically modified micro-organisms goes ahead , since it promises a great deal .
However , since the nature and extent of the risks to humanity and the environment which are associated with these micro-organisms are not fully known , it is imperative that relevant work is carried out in certain areas which are clearly defined for each class of risk .
Work carried out under containment conditions is regulated by Directive 90 / 219 , which aims to ensure on the one hand a common framework for the development of the new technology , and on the other the protection of human health and the environment .
Moreover , since the adoption of this directive , new scientific knowledge and applications have evolved , while , in parallel , since its application , relevant legal experience has been gained .
As a result , it is now right to amend and update the directive .
In these amendments we must aim for the greatest possible legal flexibility which , however , must not prove detrimental to safety .
On this point I sound a note of warning since we must not confuse a flexible and clearly defined framework with safety measures .
The risk of a future accident is increasing since the field is expanding rapidly .
A simple accident would be sufficient to give the biotech industry a bad name and lead to a crisis . We must avoid that by putting the appropriate safety measures in place .
Although the Council took on board a number of Parliament 's amendments , substantive amendments were finally omitted from the Council 's common position .
Your rapporteur takes the view that the common position only partly reflects the positions adopted by Parliament at first reading .
As a result , the recommendation for second reading proposes that the amendments which approximate to the position and spirit of the amendments adopted by Parliament in part-session should be reinstated .
The principal points are as follows :
Amendment No 2 : the term " contained use ' must be clarified so as to specify the containment measures in respect of work involving GMMs .
Amendment No 3 : provision must be made for the reexamination of risk assessment where the competent authority has been notified that this assessment is no longer adequate .
This allows the relevant authority to intervene .
Amendments Nos 4 and 9 : provisions must be introduced regarding liability insurance for users , given that despite all the containment measures , a risk exists , even if a very slight one .
It is therefore legitimate that there should be insurance cover and liability in case third persons are injured by the use of GMMs .
Amendment No 5 : the user should have the opportunity to request formal authorization from the competent authority for category 2 uses .
Amendments Nos 7 and 8 : the public must be notified before contained use begins , not only about the emergency plans , but also about relevant safety measures . Provision must also be made for public consultation .
Amendment No 10 : inspections and other control measures must be organized by the relevant authority to ensure the correct application of the directive and the containment measures .
Amendments Nos 11 , 12 and 13 : Parliament must be involved in the procedure for drawing up and amending Annex II , Part B concerning the criteria for excluding certain GMMs from the field of application of the directive .
On the same grounds it is also proposed to amend the risk assessment procedure in Annex III , Part B. We cannot accept the exclusion of Parliament from the process of drawing up such an important part of the directive .
This will allow the Commission better to exercise its executive powers and will also make it easier for Parliament to control the Commission .
On this point , we fully agree with the Commission and expect it to support our positions .
Amendment No 14 : this concerns the risk assessment procedure .
I wish to stress that the precise assessment of the risk is the very " heart ' of the directive .
The Council has taken on board only general guidelines . We insist that the risk assessment procedure be clarified .
Finally , I wish to raise once again the matter of the choice of legal base , which should be Article 100a and not Article 130s ( 1 ) .
In industry , work relating to GMMs is regarded , among other things , as having significant repercussions on the terms of competition .
As a result , I think that Article 100a would be more correct .
Also , following the approval of the recommendations concerning BSE , it has become clear , and Mr Santer has committed himself to it , that in issues relating to public health we must have codecision .
I wish to conclude by saying that the Commission must support our positions , which aim on the one hand to ensure the development of this new technology and , on the other , to protect human health and the environment .
Mr President , first of all , it is important that we all thank the rapporteur because of the enormous amount of work that he has undertaken in dealing with this extraordinarily technical and very complex directive .
I congratulate him on his grasp of the technical detail and his understanding of the problems associated with it .
This is a very topical report in the sense that this issue - biotechnology - has attracted a great deal of public interest and concern over the last few years .
This is an extraordinarily important report .
Biotechnology , as a science , has the potential to give us enormous new advances in the next century if it is used properly .
It can bring enormous benefits to the human race in general and increase prosperity for all of us .
But it is important that we build public confidence and trust in this technology .
To do that , it is necessary to have higher levels of protection to ensure that public health is protected and to ensure the environment in general is protected from any dangers that might arise from experimentation .
This directive essentially controls experimentation in contained facilities or the use of GMMs ( genetically modified micro-organisms ) , again in contained facilities .
The rapporteur 's amendments seek to ensure that those requirements are met and that responsible care is exercised by all the practitioners in this field .
On behalf of the Socialist Group I should like to say that we are certainly in favour of the development of this new science of biotechnology .
But we believe that it is necessary to ensure that ethical public health and general safety concerns are respected and considered fully .
The rapporteur 's amendments help us in seeking those reassurances .
I would commend them to the Commission and the Council .
The common position , as it has come back to us , is not a bad common position .
But there are still issues of concern , that the rapporteur 's amendments address , and that we would wish to support .
Firstly , there is the whole issue of classification of these micro-organisms .
It is very true to say that the vast majority of micro-organisms that are experimented upon are , by and large , harmless and cause little threat .
But there are some that present enormous dangers , particularly those that are associated with traditional diseases , for example , the micro-organisms associated with things like bubonic plague .
We need to exercise the greatest caution when dealing with those .
Consequently we need to ensure that the containment and safety measures taken are appropriate to the risk of the micro-organism .
The rapporteur 's amendments recognize that and certainly construct a system which would ensure that .
I would also echo the concern of the rapporteur on the issue of comitology .
This is a rather bizarre proposal from the point of view of comitology - two different annexes controlled by two different management systems .
It is thus something which we are not accustomed to , which we do not like and which we are very uncomfortable about .
We recognize that the Commission will be coming forward soon with a new proposal with regard to comitology and the development of the modus vivendi .
We would hope that a more rational approach would be taken by the Commission and that the issues which currently present themselves in this proposal can be resolved in that way .
Finally , I would also draw attention to the question of the legal base .
This proposal is currently under the cooperation procedure .
We do not find that satisfactory .
We would have been delighted to continue the debate with the Council , with the Commission acting as facilitator , through the procedure of conciliation .
We regret that cannot be done . Consequently we would wish to support the rapporteur 's view that the legal base should be 100a .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank the rapporteur for the work he has done .
There is no doubt that great dangers are associated with genetic engineering and biotechnology .
We have often discussed these dangers here , for example in relation to the cloning of human beings .
As a further example , I am concerned that the application of prenatal diagnosis will lead to the selection of disabled persons .
This is a danger which we must recognize .
The current proposal for a regulation concerns an application of genetic engineering which , in my view , is associated with great opportunities and regarding which , after twenty years of use , the dangers perhaps envisaged some years ago have not in fact materialized .
So far there have not been any unforeseen incidents .
For this reason , I believe it makes sense to remove this directive from the realm of bureaucracy .
Europe must not fall any further behind in the production of medicines using genetically modified micro-organisms .
We must catch up , and for this we need fewer bureaucratic rules .
This does not mean any less security as we have a differentiated approach here .
The micro-organisms which are potentially dangerous , as Mr Bowe said , continue to be treated with extreme caution .
Harmless micro-organisms , however , must be treated with less caution as the danger does not lie in the fact that we are dealing with genetic engineering but in the microorganisms themselves .
That is why I have spoken out emphatically against some of the amendments to the report , which did not come from Mr Trakatellis but were voted into the report , that is Amendments Nos 2 , 4 , 9 and 14 .
As far as liability is concerned , I also do not believe we need a particularly strict regulation for biotechnology .
We need a comprehensive regulation , which the Commission is currently preparing .
But we cannot always apply restrictions in the area of biotechnology or we will never be able to catch up in this area .
Mr President , this is becoming monotonous , but I am also very grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , for this excellent report .
Biotechnology is a very young sector and has had hardly any practical experience .
Unexpected scientific results will be published over the coming years which will affect the risk assessment of these technologies .
It is therefore best to be very careful .
There must be clear legislation in which the risks are adequately contained .
That is why the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party thinks that Mr Trakatellis has , as I have said , produced an excellent report .
After the Council 's common position a number of amendments are needed to contain the risks as much as possible .
The various explanations , such as the definition of contained use , are very important in this regard .
The liability of the user of genetically modified organisms has now been clearly provided for in a number of amendments , as long as they are adopted by this Parliament .
The competent authorities will rightly be allowed to intervene when they have indications that the risk assessment is no longer adequate .
The amendments also mean that the European Parliament is involved in the drawing up and amending of the criteria by which certain GMMs will be excluded from the directive .
Precisely because all risks have to be avoided , it seems right to me that the European Parliament should keep a distant but sharp eye on these criteria .
I understand that the European Commission supports Parliament in this involvement .
I would like to see this reiterated by the Commissioner .
To conclude , our group is clear about the legal basis , that this must be Article 100a . The directive covers industrial laboratories , after all , and therefore competition in the field of biotechnology .
Moreover , after the BSE crisis it was agreed that the codecision procedure had to apply in these kinds of matters .
I hope that this Parliament will also support Article 100a .
Mr President , I find it disgraceful that , as Mr Liese says , we in the House are saying that genetic engineering offers huge opportunities and would pose no danger in contained use , as in the report we are discussing today , yet at the same time we are avoiding liability like the plague !
If we deregulate , and state authorizations are therefore limited , then it is not acceptable that industry need not undertake liability for this .
If it supposedly poses no danger , then it is more than suspicious that liability is so vehemently rejected .
I know there has been massive lobbying of Members of this House in recent weeks and , as we can see , this has already had an effect on Mr Liese .
The result of this is that no-one wants to deal with the issue of liability .
This is completely irresponsible as in fact it should be a case of industry showing more responsibility .
The German Federal Government , in particular , never tires of telling us that industry and science must take more responsibility .
If we want individual responsibility we absolutely have to have liability ; it is not acceptable that every driver has to have liability insurance before he drives a car but this is not required of companies which work with pathogenic organisms and research laboratories which work with viruses which could escape into the atmosphere .
The report does not meet with our approval because it deregulates many areas ; authorization simply because a time limit has elapsed no longer has anything to do with the precautionary principle .
In conclusion , I would like to emphasize once again that the question of liability will be extremely important for us .
It is not for nothing that a recent referendum in Austria showed that a liability regulation is required .
There are also Member States who want it .
So if we want industry to take responsibility itself we must not wait until the damage is done ; instead , we must take industry at its word ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the Trakatellis report deals with one of those subjects which make you wonder to what extent the European Parliament should be discussing it .
It is such a technical matter that you almost have to have worked in a biotechnology laboratory in order to know anything about it . Also , you have not even said whether the regulations from this directive are better as they were or as they are evolving via the common position .
It is all about the question of whether a laboratory must comply with strict safety regulations when it is working with genetic modification techniques .
According to the Commission proposal , laboratories must determine for themselves , by means of risk assessment , what the level of safety measures should be .
This is a curious construction , because what the standards are for a major risk has not been laid down anywhere .
When , as a company , with strict safety standards in force , you have furthermore to follow a heavier administrative procedure for notification than when you reach weaker safety measures via the risk assessment , then that comprises an element of contradiction .
If , as a company , you want to be extremely cautious , you are punished administratively , as it were , and if you asses the risk to be a little less high , you do not have to comply with the heavy notification procedure .
According to my assessment , this leads to a downward pressure on the containment level .
What we need above all , I think , is a more standardized risk assessment .
The text of Annex III deals with this , but in far too general terms .
I am not sure whether in practice the European Parliament amendments will lead to an improved notification procedure .
To be on the safe side , I will support them , but without much conviction .
As far as the legal basis is concerned , I cannot make more out of it than 130s . Whether the Member States will reach a high level of protection with this , I venture to doubt .
Thankfully companies are allowed to exceed the prescribed level of protection , insofar as this is clear .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the rapporteur so rightly observed , biotechnology and in particular genetic engineering are expanding greatly .
Within the framework of fair and regulated competition in the European Union it is therefore necessary to form an appropriate legal basis .
This is a very important point and one which is imperative , partly because all regulations in the area of biotechnology in the European Union are based on Article 100a .
This includes the issue of comitology .
It is obvious that the 3b regulatory committee procedure , which the European Parliament completely excludes from the consultations on changing the criteria which allow certain genetically modified micro-organisms to be exempted from the field of application of the directive , is completely unacceptable for us as the European Parliament .
We recently had to abandon a directive on this issue because the Council could not be moved on it .
This is not acceptable to us , however .
If we have cooperation or codecision , the appropriate rights must also be guaranteed for the European Parliament in the committees .
My second point deals with information for the public .
It is stated in the common position that the Member States can stipulate that the public be allowed to give their opinion on specific issues .
What are specific issues ?
Who defines these specific issues ?
What can it possibly mean ?
It is inexplicable that the European Council insists that such an unclear definition , or nondefinition , should remain .
It is also necessary to clarify the situation , within the context of fair competition , as is intended in the amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to mention briefly why we are dealing with this directive .
According to the Commission 's explanation , on the one hand genetic modification procedures must be applied responsibly , and on the other hand the increase in scientific knowledge and findings in the last 10 years must be taken into account .
Findings have progressed greatly worldwide .
Europe has set a very strict standard and this directive actually aims to reduce this strict standard and the high degree of bureaucracy associated with it , as experience has shown that what was considered to be high-risk has not turned out that way , thus enabling procedures to be simplified .
I am of the opinion that the points made in the common position are responsible , and I would like this directive also to take effect if possible .
I can support what is proposed in the common position .
Mr President , I welcome this report and the work of the rapporteur , Mr Trakatellis , and the Committee in ensuring that the European Parliament will have a role in supervising developments in this very technical and difficult field .
Recommending that the legal basis be changed to 100a ensures that the codecision procedure will be followed in full .
It is essential that we learn from past experience and insist on openness and transparency .
It is also necessary to provide the mechanism to guarantee the safety not only of those working in the field of biotechnology but also of the general public .
There is a great need to build public trust and confidence .
This is a new technology and one that offers huge potential in the medical field for the treatment of many diseases for which as yet there are no cures , and for the relief of suffering and pain for millions of people .
We must push out the frontiers of research but in an open and transparent way .
Within the highest safety standards , we must encourage and support research and ensure that the industry is not bogged down with so many restrictions that laboratories will move their research out of Europe altogether and cause a brain drain and loss of highly trained people and highly skilled jobs .
The message to the public with regard to biotechnology must be balanced and devoid of emotion , unlike much of what has happened so far in the area of biotechnological research .
We have seen many wonderful success stories in the biotech field , the development of genetic insulin for example .
There are many more untapped possibilities .
In the interests of mankind we have a responsibility to keep searching for the right answers .
I hope the outdated mind-set of the past will not stand in the way of the relief of so many in the future .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur and the committee for their report and thorough work on the common position adopted by the Council on this matter .
The directive was proposed and adopted to ensure that the precautionary principle could be followed with regard to human health and the environment so that the benefits of this technology could develop safely .
What it seeks to do in a single piece of specific horizontal legislation is to cover a highly technical and rapidly evolving area of work that obviously is of enormous importance .
A number of problems are identified with the directive in relation to classification of genetically modified microorganisms , such as insufficient guidance on risk-assessment and containment measures , the absence of a linkage of the notification and administrative measures to the degree of risk of the activities , and so on .
The common position strengthens and clarifies the original Commission proposal designed to deal with this matter .
The main areas concerned include increased administrative control for Class 3 and 4 work : in cases of doubt in classification of an activity the more stringent safety measures have to be applied ; the extension of the requirement for safety plans to all cases where the failure of containment could lead to serious danger ; and the strengthening of the containment and control measures by incorporation of the requirement to apply the principles of good occupational safety and hygiene in all cases .
The Commission was not , however , able to support the common position where it sought to exclude the European Parliament from the procedure to establish and modify Annex II Part B , which affects the scope of the directive , nor Article 21 , where the Council would still wish to stick to a 3b regulatory committee procedure instead of the 2a procedure proposed by the Commission following the first opinion of Parliament .
Of the 36 amendments tabled , including supplementary amendments , the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 17 , 19 , 25 , 32 and 36 , and can partially accept 8 , 12 , 13 and 14 , and accept in principle 2 , 18 , 20 , 21 , 28 , 33 , 34 and 35 , which may need some rewording .
With respect to Amendment No 13 , the Commission can accept a 2a comitology procedure which gives flexibility to the Council to adopt different measures from those proposed by the Commission instead of the 3b procedure contained in the Commission proposal .
Concerning the requirement in the amendment to present a report on experience with the directive , the Commission considers that the aim of the amendment could be achieved by making available to Parliament the report it is required to produce under Article 18 ( 3 ) .
But the proposal in the amendment that the decisions and minutes of the regulatory committee should be made publicly available is not acceptable since that is not in line with the recent agreement between the Commission and Parliament applicable since December 1996 on transparency and the publicity of committee meetings .
Then there are 17 amendments which the Commission cannot accept .
Amendment No 1 proposes to change the legal base from Article 130s ( 1 ) to Article 100a . The scope of the directive is not being significantly altered and it does not impact directly on the functioning of the single market .
That is why the Commission considers that there is no legal justification for changing the legal basis of the directive , and that opinion is in line with that given by the Legal Affairs Committee of Parliament .
An additional consideration is that the change of legal base would restrict Member States from having the flexibility to take containment and control measures going beyond those in the directives which at present they can do , because currently Member States can go beyond the standards set out in the directive in their national legislation .
The issue of liability insurance and the provision of financial security in Amendments Nos 4 and 9 are under consideration by the Commission which , as has been said , intends to produce a White Paper on environmental liability , and the Commission would prefer to deal with this matter in a horizontal manner to avoid different liability requirements in different directives .
Amendment No 11 is not acceptable because the requirement to utilize the full legislative procedure for modifications to the risk-assessment procedure set out in Annex III would prevent the rapid modification of the annex which is purely technical in nature , and it could be that such a restriction would lead to safety problems , for instance , where , as a result of additional scientific information , a rapid change to the annex would be needed .
The Commission considers that the proposed procedure utilizing a committee of representatives to the Member States will give the required flexibility and appropriate rigour for the examination of any proposals to modify the annex .
Amendments Nos 3 , 7 , 10 , 16 , 24 and 31 are not acceptable because they duplicate provisions present in other articles and the technical Amendments Nos 15 , 26 and 30 would operate to increase the burden of control measures , seeking to introduce more stringent measures than those of Directive 90 / 679 / EEC , which regulates the protection of workers from risks from exposure to biological agents at work .
This directive also covers work with genetically modified micro-organisms and the Commission wishes to maintain comparable containment requirements for similar work under the two directives .
Amendments Nos 22 , 23 , 24 and 27 proposed increased burdens , but we do not think that they make a commensurate contribution to safety .
Amendment No 29 is technically invalid since the genetically modified micro-organisms are not required to be in a closed system .
I wish to finish by stressing the added value of the amendments which have been accepted , wholly or partially , which are a considerable number .
An example of this is Amendment No 5 by Mr Trakatellis , which would allow applicants to request a reply from a competent authority within a defined time period and thus clarify the applicant 's position and obligations under the directive .
I believe that the amendments clarify and reinforce the common position and , together with that text , will provide a sound and enforceable framework providing the high level of safety that we are all seeking to achieve .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commission a question because Parliament is continually put off with promises of a White Paper on liability , that is , with a horizontal solution .
We , the European Parliament , have taken an initiative and have been waiting for a regulation of this kind for years .
I would like to ask the Commissioner - he sits in the Commission after all and must know how difficult it is there - when , in his opinion , there will be a regulation .
My second question is also based on this : Commissioner , do you believe that the fact that the taxpayer - that is , the general public - must now take responsibility for possible damage is compatible with the responsibility of industry and science ?
Mr President , we are consulting at the moment with interested parties and hope to put something forward this year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Humane trapping
The next item is the report ( A4-0197 / 98 ) by Mr Pimenta , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the proposal for a Council Decision concerning the signing and conclusion of an International Agreement in the form of Agreed Minute between the European Community and the United States of America on humane trapping standards ( COM ( 97 ) 0726 - C4-0014 / 98-97 / 0360 ( CNS ) ) .
Regrettably , Mr Pimenta cannot be here .
Mrs Banotti is speaking in his place .
Mr President , you might be interested to know why Mr Pimenta invited me to present his report this evening .
I have the doubtful honour of being the original rapporteur on the prohibition of the importation of furs caught with leghold traps .
I have kept a watching brief on the issue ever since .
And very nasty things they are , too .
I received several of them through my mailbox when I was rapporteur .
I hope Mr Pimenta did not have the same problem when he took over the report .
We have already discussed at length the arrangements between the Canadian and Russian Governments in relation to this .
Mr Pimenta believes that the American authorities are attempting to get round the leghold trap Regulation 3254 / 91 on the grounds that they have legislation on humane trapping already in existence .
He does not believe this is correct .
The central focus of the regulation is the prohibition of leghold traps .
The Canadian and Russian commitment to ban so-called conventional leghold traps is at least unconditional .
But the same cannot be said for the US which has only offered a six-year phase-in period that is subject to some substantial derogations .
These derogations are specified in sections 423 and 424 of the standards .
Although this text is similar to the text incorporated in the agreement with Canada and Russia , the US commitment on leghold traps is pursuant to the standards , that is , it is conditional .
That is in addition to the fact that it has demanded a longer phase-in period .
In October the US undertook to phase out the use of conventional leghold traps within four years subject to the existence of ' viable replacement traps ' .
This proviso was removed from the December text .
The whole episode has immediate consequences for animal welfare where many millions of animals will continue to be subjected to the indiscriminate cruelty of leghold traps for many years to come , perhaps even resulting in some forms of these traps being inappropriately classified as humane .
It also reveals much of the inadequacy of the present EU strategy on matters relating to the WTO .
In a choice between fulfilling their legal obligation to implement Community legislation and responding to a possible breach of WTO rules , the Commission and Council opted to ignore their statutory EU obligations in favour of WTO considerations .
The Commission and Council repeatedly chose to ignore the opinion of the European Parliament , including its many constructive proposals to balance the various interests : for example , to ensure the proportionality of trade measures and to take account of the interests of native people .
At the same time , and despite a range of related problems also including cosmetic testing and farm animal husbandry , the Commission has failed to present any formal analysis or proposals on how to approach or resolve the complex issue of trade and animal welfare : for example , with respect to utilization or modification of the existing Article XX exceptions within the WTO rules .
The Commission has similarly failed to raise these concerns in Geneva or to support the development of a high-level dialogue on the subject , an idea first proposed at the Globe Symposium held in 1996 .
Regrettably the Commission has also shown no willingness to engage in a debate to enable appropriate and legitimate distinctions to be made between products on the basis of their method of production - an issue which is of central importance both to animal welfare and to the progress of the trade and environmental debate .
That is why Mr Pimenta , as rapporteur , is asking Parliament to reject the proposed agreement .
Mr President , you can beat your head against the wall in many different ways .
This has been evident on a number of occasions when Parliament has expressed its opinion on agreements dealing with painless animal traps .
On the basis of Mr Pimenta 's report , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has now recommended the rejection of the agreement , initially drawn up with Canada and Russia , and now with the USA .
This is the way Parliament has gone , then .
The Commission has thus listened to Parliament , but has implemented - and may now , on the Council 's recommendation , implement - the agreement they negotiated .
A good thing is not always the best thing .
This old Finnish saying is obviously unknown to Mr Pimenta , the Committee responsible or Parliament generally .
We set our sights on traps inflicting absolutely no pain .
However , no-one has come up with a system that does not cause at least some pain .
The agreements have been a clear step forward .
Their rejection logically signifies the continuation of the present pain-inflicting system of trapping animals .
The REX Committee has unanimously taken a positive stand on the agreement that is to be discussed .
When , furthermore , the USA is involved , as the latest party to the agreement , this view is well justified .
I hope , ladies and gentlemen , that we will not be beating our heads against the wall yet again .
I hope that Parliament will take a step forward in this matter .
It will not be perfect , but striving for perfection is a good way of achieving nothing at all .
The agreement should thus be approved , contrary to the opinion of the responsible Committee .
Mr President , this is hopefully the last sad episode in the sorry saga of the leghold trap , where we have seen the strongly held view of the Parliament , elected by the people of Europe , overruled by the Commission in the interests of international trade deals .
The victims are the fur-bearing animals of North America , Canada and Russia who are cruelly killed so that rich women in the West can wear their skins .
There is no justification for this .
The Socialist Group fully endorses , as before , Mr Pimenta 's excellent report calling for a rejection of the agreement on the grounds clearly set out in his report .
The agreements were wrong before , they are still wrong and we see no reason to change our mind .
This agreement with the USA suffers from the same deficiencies as those we previously rejected with Canada and Russia , and it is even weaker as Mr Pimenta shows in his report .
It is also unlikely that it can be monitored and properly implemented because the powers vested in the state governments in the United States , who are not signatory to the agreements , mean that they will not properly implement it .
We believe that the Commission has taken the wrong path since it refused to implement the regulation of 1991 at its due date of 1996 .
We intend to stick to our guns because we believe that we are right and we can only hope that this unsatisfactory situation does not occur again .
We also hope that it will underline the need to strengthen Article 20 of the GATT .
It is outrageous that European legislation is being corrupted in this way .
I do not believe that these weak agreements will prevent one single bit of cruelty to fur-bearing animals , and therefore they defeat the very purpose of their existence .
Mr President , the entire leghold trap affair is becoming increasingly ridiculous .
I might just as well have repeated what I said here two years ago .
It looks like a never-ending story , because this agreement between the Union and the United States is even worse than the agreement we also rejected between the Union and Canada and Russia .
Whilst Canada and Russia had at least promised to implement the ban on so-called conventional leghold traps , the same can in no way be said of the United States .
They have merely offered to phase out gradually the leghold trap over a period of six years , and in addition have stipulated quite a number of derogations .
This agreement is decidedly insufficient , and must therefore be rejected .
The entire affair is a serious demonstration of the fact that present EU strategy on issues relating to the WTO is totally unsuitable .
It is a real scandal that the Council and the Commission have laid aside the positions they had taken earlier , and agreed to an even weaker proposal in order to escape a possible conflict with the WTO .
It is extremely alarming to see how easily the Council and the Commission lay aside EU legislation .
The European Parliament has repeatedly pointed out that the 1991 regulation , which totally prohibits the use of the leghold trap , must be implemented .
Unfortunately , the Council and the Commission have completely ignored this Parliament 's positions .
The entire affair is a serious undermining of EU legislation , and also undermines European democracy .
But even more serious are the consequences for the well-being of animals , because millions of animals will continue to die a cruel death in these leghold traps .
Mr President , when discussing humane trapping it is important to note first that the whole course of events is a drama in several scandalous acts .
First I would like to remind you of Regulation 3254 / 91 , which goes back to 1991 , and which states that from 1 January 1996 the furs of animals caught using leghold traps should no longer be imported into the EU .
The Commission , together with the Council , simply did not enact any implementing rule and thus sacrificed an EU law which now simply does not exist .
If we look more closely , we find that it was sacrificed on the altar of the WTO .
Secondly , the title : " Humane trapping ' .
There is no such thing as humane trapping using any kind of traps ! We are simply deceiving ourselves if we say such a thing .
To the animals which die a wretched death it is completely irrelevant which type of trap is used .
We must finally learn that animals are living creatures and not commodities .
This way of thinking is positively mediaeval .
Yet we are now approaching the year 2000 and still think in this way .
Thirdly , the critical point : this agreement with the USA .
The agreements with Canada and Russia were very rough , in the true sense of the word .
But this overshadows everything else .
There are long transitional phases , there are no legal norms whatsoever and it is not at all clear when it will no longer be permitted to trap animals with this kind of trap .
In addition , it is contempt of Parliament , since we were elected by millions of citizens and are their representatives .
And the people do not want any more leghold traps .
For this simple reason we will of course approve Mr Pimenta 's report , and completely reject all existing agreements and the Commission 's entire course of action .
Mr President , most of us on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection agree with Mr Pimenta 's report , which again criticizes this proposal because of the lack of participation not just of NGO but also of some of the countries involved in this matter .
So we completely agree with Mr Pimenta 's proposal to reject the proposed agreement as totally inadequate , to ban fur imports without further delay , and above all to encourage the participation of native peoples .
At no time during the debate on this matter in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection did we forget the rights of native peoples , who have been hunting for many years and do not kill animals in a cruel manner , unlike other countries which tend towards that sort of behaviour .
I am particularly interested in this subject because I live in Asturias , a region in northern Spain which has perhaps the most important surviving population of brown bears - 80 individuals .
During the last 20 days , three brown bears have died .
The investigation has not yet been completed , but the suspicion is that an adult animal - especially important for the conservation of the species - died because poachers had set a trap for other animals .
And that is what tends to happen when traps are set which can affect animals threatened with extinction .
So , Mr President , we are going to support Mr Pimenta 's report .
We think it is time to make a final decision and pay no more attention to commercial interests .
And we hope it is approved by a large majority in the House , as it was in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , will the European Union be able to ensure that the ban on importing fur from animals captured in leghold traps is respected throughout its territory ?
Our debate is just one in a long series of debates , and I hope Parliament will be able to show itself to be logical and consistent with the previous positions it has taken .
I am one of those people who , up until now , have preferred to show understanding and moderation with respect to the Commission 's positions , which were in fact often adopted unilaterally .
I accepted , although certainly with some reluctance , that the need to reach an agreement meant prolonging negotiations for a year .
I believed too that the agreements with Canada and Russia were undoubtedly a stopgap measure , but at least they had the advantage of bringing the negotiations out of the deadlock they had reached .
Having said that , goodwill has its limits and the agreement with the United States which you are proposing to us today , Commissioner , is entirely unacceptable .
I thus share the opinion of our rapporteur , and I congratulate him on the quality of his work .
In fact , this agreement lags far behind in relation to the agreement between the European Union , Canada and Russia , which is itself limited .
The number of derogations and the six-year application period do not augur well .
Moreover , it is not unreasonable to doubt the will and the ability of the American authorities to impose this agreement on its own states .
These are some of the many questions to which we have no answer .
We must therefore ask , along with Mr Pimenta , that this agreement with the United States be rejected .
Furthermore , the debate must be put into context and we must take account of the fact that as well as the problem of leghold traps , this is a question of the European Union 's ability to stand up to pressure from the WTO .
The Commission should be aware of the consequences of the agreements it plans to approve .
And we must regret once more that it is presenting Parliament with a fait accompli .
In addition , it is forcing Parliament to renounce fundamental principles .
Today , it is the protection of the environment which is at issue ; tomorrow , it will be social clauses or our culture which will be harmed .
Mr President , by way of introduction I would like to say that safeguarding animal welfare is indeed paramount .
And that is precisely why I cannot support Mr Pimenta 's rejection of the proposal for an agreement with the USA .
I believe we should recommend the agreement and the REX Committee .
Firstly , before the agreement can be rejected , the alternative to the agreement must be assessed realistically .
Secondly , the consequences of the agreement in the USA and , of course , in the EU must be considered .
And thirdly , the ongoing prospects of developing better , more humane traps need to be considered .
The alternative to the agreement with the USA is not some other agreement with better standards .
So it is not a good idea to revert to the Council decision concerning the banning of leghold traps .
Mrs Pollack used the word ' insulting ' , and this is the crux of the matter .
The European Parliament is insulted because it wanted the 1991 resolution to be upheld , even though - as far as I can see - the agreements with Russia , Canada and the USA would serve to improve animal welfare .
Why ?
The resolution on banning leghold traps is very limited .
It applies only to 13 species , as opposed to the 19 covered by the new agreement .
It does not ban the use of leghold traps , but only the import of pelts , and in the main , this resolution only covers this one method of trapping .
As I have stated before , it is hypocritical to focus on this one - albeit barbaric - trapping method , while traps that are no less cruel are used within the EU .
That - not more stringent requirements for traps - is the alternative to the agreements with Russia , Canada and now also the USA .
EU fur exports to the USA are currently twice as much as imports from the USA .
This is an important point , because it shows that we should be focusing more on the standards applicable to trapping in Europe .
The agreement that has just been established will actually raise standards in several EU countries .
Perhaps we should begin there instead of scoring cheap animal welfare points at the expense of hunters in the USA .
Finally - and perhaps most significantly - the agreement makes financial provision for research into better traps .
In other words , what we have is an agreement bringing in concrete standards for traps and a programme for improving the existing traps .
That has to be better than an import ban , a case with the WTO and European hunters failing to live up to the standards .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as regards this draft agreement between the United States and the European Union , we all fully share the rapporteur 's opinion that it should be rejected .
In fact , in terms of this question of leghold traps which has already gone on for a long time , the agreements reached with Canada and the United States have never really received the approval of the European Parliament .
They were , however , superior to this one .
Three elements demonstrate the extent to which it is difficult to conduct truly fair diplomatic negotiations with the United States .
Firstly , the Americans have become accustomed - and it is once again the case in this agreement - to evoking their internal constitutional provisions in accordance with which , in many fields including this one , it is actually the federal states , and not the federal government , which are responsible .
This allows them , at the time of the application of the agreement , to challenge to some extent the signature appended at the federal level .
They have already done the same for other unrelated issues , such as the international market in electrical engineering , and this shows that there really is inequality in the agreements we sign with the United States .
Secondly , the US rejects the dispute settlement procedure and confines itself to a simple consultation mechanism , which is obviously insufficient .
Finally , the periods of time agreed with the United States for the elimination of leghold traps are becoming longer and longer , which means that the very content of the agreement is called into question .
Therefore , as far as the substance is concerned , we would like to see the disappearance of all of these traps ; however , further to the matter under debate here , there is a problem of principle in relation to the agreements approved between the United States and the European Union .
We talked in the past about " unequal ' agreements concluded between China and the European powers .
We often have the feeling that it is also a matter of unequal agreements when the United States and the European Union come into conflict .
Mr President , naturally no-one can sympathize with the idea or practice of barbarous methods , of cruel methods of torture , in the hunting of fur-bearing animals .
But I see that several of my colleagues show such excessive sensitivity that , if they continue in this direction , looking for the ideal solution , in other words the abolition of hunting fur-bearing animals , we will arrive at an unacceptable impasse .
From this viewpoint , we feel that the agreements with Russia and Canada , while they do not provide the ideal solution , nevertheless give a positive thrust to the matter by prohibiting leghold traps and any other methods of hunting which are unnecessarily cruel .
As a result , we think that these agreements offer scope and that they can be improved and extended by means of steadfast negotiations with the United States .
On the other hand , we believe that the more stringent these measures are , the more likely it is that they will be violated .
Past experience shows that no very stringent law has remained inviolate ; on the contrary , such laws have invariably given birth to a variety of other ways , some of them criminal , of being violated .
However , there is another aspect that I wish to talk about : sensitivity towards animals is justified but there must also be sensitivity towards native peoples . Thousands of people earn a living from treating and trading in fur .
As an example I shall take north-eastern Greece , around Kastoria . Hundreds of small businesses exist thanks to the treatment , trade and sale of fur , and thousands of people have satisfactory employment .
As a result , we cannot ignore such vital aspects of the matter .
Finally , in order to ensure that such species do not disappear , I think that as well as restricting their cruel hunting , it is possible at both a Community and a national level to promote reserves , by means of subsidies and other measures . There could be reserves at a Community level and national parks , which would make it easy to propagate those species which are fur-bearing and , indeed , exceedingly fur-bearing .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Pimenta for this excellent new report on this matter .
It has turned into a novel , a thriller , a thriller about leghold traps and 13 animal species .
Let me remind you what this is all about . Animals are trapped , their bones broken , their tendons torn .
They try to break free .
With their own jaws they break their own bones .
They tear their own flesh .
They eat their own paws to try to get free . They drag themselves through the snow , leaving a trail behind them , which if I may say so , makes them easy to track .
For years , since the 1991 regulation , we have been trying to ban this monstrosity .
Every year , the European Commission tells us : " another short delay , Mr Torturer , just a little more time ' .
We have been told that we should not disturb the Inuit people , as if traditional Inuit fishermen , since the beginning of time , used steel leghold traps .
We are now being told that we should not disturb the World Trade Organization and that a panel is to be consulted , as for bananas and as for hormone derived meat .
The Geneva panel is now becoming the divine help .
We concluded an agreement with the United States in December 1997 , just as we had concluded an agreement with Canada and Russia in July 1997 .
Obviously , no funds are being made available ; it is simply a matter of an agreed minute , like with the Blair House agreement , which the Commission representative is very familiar with .
We are in fact reliving the whole Blair House situation and we are being told that the legal scope of the agreement is very limited , due to the federal structure of the United States which means that the states involved disregard what takes place in Washington .
As regards the substance , the Commission is happy ; it obtains a further delay of three to five additional years , with the United States simply proposing to us that they go even further in this unacceptable situation , in this monstrosity .
The most important thing about this matter is that it is symbolic .
As with bananas , cheese manufactured from raw milk , and hormone derived meat and milk , we are giving in , as we have done every time , to the United States .
I repeat , Mr President , and I will finish with this , that as regards the Helms-Burton or d 'Amato acts , the United States did not pay as much attention to our concerns as we are paying to theirs .
As far as we are concerned , we agree with Mr Pimenta 's position , which if I may say so , is the only possible position when discussing animals , humanity and dignity .
Mr President , I would like to say that I agree with the report .
The thinking behind this report is quite clear because , as everyone knows who has constituents who have written to them and informed them about this barbarous practice and as previous speakers have mentioned , the barbarism which can occur so randomly and leave animals to suffer for so many days is quite clearly unacceptable in a civilized world .
Many people in the UK put their name down to questionnaires sent to me and it is quite clear from deputations of others in the UK that they feel extremely strongly on this issue as with other issues of animal welfare .
Europe is one of the major consumers of the fur pelt trade - something like 70 % of which ends up within the European Union .
It is quite clear that as consumers we have a very strong and authoritative voice on this issue .
I believe the Commission has been wrong not to challenge the WTO more strongly on the grounds of the ethicality of the environmental , welfare and social issues .
I think that there can be a stronger voice .
I know that Sir Leon in particular has made strenuous efforts to bring a balance to world trade from the Commission 's point of view .
There are some lines which we cannot step over : not just in this instance but also with regard to aspects of asbestos , for example , which threatens hormones in beef .
It is quite clear to my mind and to others in this Parliament that when we choose to reject what is occurring in terms of the deals which are being struck in Europe 's name , when we are speaking for the people , our views should be respected and people should be brought to understand that in that respect , and that respect alone , we cannot renege on the issues which Parliament discusses and puts before you , Sir Leon .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Agreement with Guinea on fishing
The next item is the report ( A4-0178 / 98 ) by Mr Girão Pereira , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing possibilities and the financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of Guinea on fishing off the Guinean coast for the period 1 January 1998 to 31 December 1999 ( COM ( 98 ) 0129 - C4-0245 / 98-98 / 0086 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over the last few years the Commission has brought proposals to the Council and Parliament to enter into fishing agreements with non-EU countries , opening up the possibility of keeping Member States ' fleets active in the face of a growing shortage of fish stocks in the waters of the Union .
The agreement with Guinea is thus in line with that policy , which we consider appropriate and obviously support in the light of the importance of fishing to some of our coastal regions , to industry and to the market itself .
Our relations with Guinea in that sector already go back to 1986 .
This , therefore , is a matter of renewing a pre-existing agreement for the period from 1 January 1998 to 31 December 1999 .
It is important to highlight some of its most significant aspects .
The financial compensation has been substantially increased , but there is also an increase in fishing opportunities as a result of the greater number of vessels that can operate in those areas .
Another aspect it is important to emphasize , and an innovative one , is that approximately 50 % of the overall financial compensation is allocated to specific aid to the Guinean fishing industry , particularly in terms of scientific programmes , technical and professional training schemes , support schemes for the bodies responsible for the surveillance and supervision of fishing activities and artisanal fishermen 's support schemes .
Furthermore , these financial aid schemes have been extended to include some devices for proper resource management , inasmuch as it is stipulated that any vessel operating in the area must have an observer aboard to keep an eye on her fishing activities and gather statistical information on catches .
In addition - and this is a major innovation - I have to inform you that the Guinean Ministry of Fisheries is under an obligation to send the Commission an annual report on the scientific and technical actions it is taking to increase its knowledge of fish stocks .
An even more important aspect is that payment of the financial compensation is dependent on the effective implementation of those actions in connection with the development of local fisheries and the conservation of resources . This is explicitly stipulated in the final part of Article 4 of the protocol .
This is why I am presenting Amendment No 5 , which seems more allembracing to me than the one from the Committee on Fisheries , because it invokes that clause of the protocol and the European Parliament 's right to inspect the reports referred to in it .
For these reasons , it can be seen that the contents of this report conform to the guidelines laid down by the Council at its meeting of 30 October 1997 , according to which approximately half the Community finance ought to be dedicated to objectives specifically aimed at improving the fisheries situation .
Furthermore , it incorporates and puts into practice many of the Commission 's recommendations for development and cooperation . The Commission has always insisted that a development aspect should be included in agreements of this type .
Because of the importance of this agreement to the European Union 's fishing industry , and because of its innovative measures , we believe it will receive this House 's unanimous support .
Mr President , as far as I am concerned , there are some difficulties with this agreement .
First of all , there is the problem with the number of fishing boats : 74 compared with the 43 allowed in the previous agreement .
Furthermore , the agreement was initialled by the Commission without first consulting Parliament for an opinion , which is why I agree with the rapporteur who maintains that Parliament must be informed and that the protocol must be observed .
In addition to these aspects , there are problems especially with monitoring fishing activities within 10 miles .
This fishing would conflict greatly with the interests of the 100 000 or so artisanal fishermen who operate in this country and who have repeatedly protested to the European Union and to the local authorities about this .
Also , the financial compensation proposed for artisanal fishermen has been greatly reduced in relation to the overall amount of ECU 6.5 million : only ECU 320 000 in assistance for artisanal fishing compared with the ECU 800 000 for the ministry and the ECU 800 000 for monitoring and surveillance .
The fishing vessels , of which there are exactly 74 - and 33 of these have seine nets which are very harmful and also create a lot of difficulties - only pay ECU 20 per tonne , which is practically 40 000 lira per 10 quintal tonnes : a truly insignificant figure .
However , having said that we realize that this agreement has been initialled , we realize that it has to be submitted for verification , but we undoubtedly hope that in future international agreements will grant at least equal treatment to third country resources .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Girão Pereira on his report .
It follows the European Parliament 's traditional line on fishing agreements .
It is a very clear report and I should like to support everything it says , on behalf of my group .
In essence I think it is an agreement which contains some innovations , because we are basically trying to put into practice an old principle we always follow in this House , according to which money and financial compensation paid by the European Union should benefit the fishing industry in the countries with which we enter into agreements , and I therefore think our argument that at least half the Community financial compensation should benefit local fisheries is correct .
At least , I think , this is a start .
Obviously , it would be nice if the principle were applied to the whole of the compensation , but we are in a delicate area where there is a danger of interfering with the sovereignty of each of the countries in question .
In the case of the Guinean agreement , there is in fact an increase in cost , but also a corresponding increase in fish , so there is an objective balancing factor .
There are also some other interesting points which deserve our commendation , such as for example an increase in the funds dedicated partly to research and partly to the actual administrative organization of that country 's Ministry of Fisheries .
We support this report and congratulate the rapporteur once again on his work .
Mr President , as we have seen from the tone of the previous speeches , in general both the rapporteur and the two speakers stress the positive aspects of this agreement , which is in line with the new Community fisheries policy .
It is not a question of pillaging existing fisheries resources .
It is a question , firstly , of helping these developing countries to conserve their own resources . The European Community contributes the financial means for that , helping them , for example , to monitor fishing .
Secondly , by means of financial compensation to these countries , we contribute to their actual economic development . In other words , on the one hand the European Community facilitates the action of Community fishermen who , as we know , have problems in a great many sites , and on the other hand it promotes fishing , but conserving resources rather than compromising their continued existence .
I believe the budgetary increase which has been made is justified within this new Community policy , and will prove to be to the advantage both of the people of the African countries and the people of the EU itself , and of the preservation of fisheries resources in general .
So from my point of view , like the previous speakers , I think Parliament should approve the text as it stands , with the amendments approved by the Committee on Fisheries , and also Mr Girão Pereira 's Amendment No 5 .
On the other hand , I am completely opposed to Amendment No 6 tabled by Mr Teverson .
This would introduce an excessively negative limitation , which would prove too much of a burden for subsequent fishing agreements .
Mr President , Mr Girão Pereira 's report on the fishing agreement with Guinea , on which I congratulate him , very clearly shows that people are wrong to say that fishing agreements are a means for the Community fleet to exploit the resources of third countries in an uncontrolled manner , without contributing any benefit .
As if the agreements with Argentina , Morocco or Mauritania were not enough to show how Community fishing activities have contributed to the development of this sector in third countries , the new protocol with Guinea clearly shows the benefits a coastal country can gain from a fishing agreement with the Community . These benefits are at least comparable to , if not greater than , the contributions from the specific development policy , despite the fact that , in this case , we are talking about simple trade agreements .
As has been said , the increase of more than 50 % in the financial compensation is extraordinarily significant , but the way it is to be distributed is even more important .
In fact , practically half of the ECU 6.5 million which will be paid to Guinea is directed towards improving training and stimulating Guinean fishing .
Of particular note are the increases to improve surveillance , which have doubled in relation to the previous protocol , and ECU 320 000 to support artisanal fisheries , representing an increase of a third with respect to the previous protocol .
Thanks to this sort of help , Guinea has managed to sign fishing agreements with China and Korea , guaranteeing resources in a way which would have been unthinkable without the knowledge of fishing grounds and international conservation regulations to which Guinean society has gained access thanks to the Community 's financial compensation .

Also , as Mr Girão Pereira rightly notes , we need to stress that , as a new feature , the Guinean authorities will have to report to the European Union to show that the funds have been allocated to actions related to the development of local fishing grounds and the conservation of resources . Compliance is strictly linked to the payment of the financial compensation .
Therefore , like the rest of my group , I shall be supporting Mr Girão Pereira 's report .
Mr President , it is rather strange that everybody is emphasizing what good developmental aspects these reports have for the fishing industry of Guinea , in this case , and for other countries as well .
I like that : I have always argued that they should have .
There has been a great improvement in these reports , particularly perhaps since the actions of the Dutch presidency and the taking on board by the Commissioner responsible of my report last year .
So things are getting better , but still there is a problem with regard to consultation with the European Parliament .
The Commission does not consult us early enough .
The Council has some responsibility in this too .
This is pointed out by the Committee on Budgets in no uncertain terms in its opinion on this report .
However , we have had to say it over and over again .
There have been advances : a lot more resources are devoted to the artisanal fisheries , to improving the fisheries of Guinea and so on , in all sorts of ways that have been mentioned before .
I hope the Guineans have the resources to monitor what is happening when the EU fleet is there .
I also like the proposal - though perhaps it is not enough - that some of the catch should compulsorily be landed in Guinea for the food supply of the Guinean population .
This is very important .
But it is sad that a 10-mile limit was agreed upon when neighbouring states have 12 miles , which seems to be fairly standard .
Finally , I support the Committee on Development and Cooperation 's opinion that it would be useful if the European Commission could negotiate regional agreements to cover areas like Guinea , Guinea-Bissau , and so on .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the honourable gentleman for his excellent report on the new terms and conditions for fishing by the Community fleet in the waters off Guinea .
We consider that these new terms are likely to ensure a more effective implementation of the agreement in line with the basic principles of the conservation of resources .
With this protocol , the Commission recognizes the action taken since 1996 by the Guinean Government to ensure overall control of access stocks and to develop the battle against illegal fishing and marine research .
This new and positive climate , which is recognized by Community shipowners , has led to fishery resources in the area having improved and a renewed interest in Community fishermen in Guinean waters , which provide an important potential for the Community fleet .
The Commission also considers that this new protocol with Guinea contains major innovations aimed in particular at promoting sustainable fishing , while being compatible with both the development policy and the Union 's regional approach to fisheries agreements .
The protocol marks significant progress in our regional approach and that is reflected in a harmonization of the financial terms offered by the Community to the various countries in the subregion .
In addition , the technical provisions on fishing activities have been brought into line with the rules in force in the countries belonging to the Subregional Commission for Fishing in the Gulf of Guinea .
The protocol allocates 50 % of the overall financial provision - that is to say ECU 3.25 million - over two years to schemes designed to promote marine research , the monitoring of fisheries to support small-scale fishing and training facilities and to contribute to international fisheries organizations .
The scale of this support will give Guinea the means of taking part in the subregional programmes for managing resources .
Guinea attaches great importance to that because this year it holds the chairmanship of two regional fisheries commissions : the Subregional Commission for Fishing off the Gulf of Guinea and the Ministerial Conference of Atlantic Coastal States .
The protocol provides for close cooperation between the two parties in managing the schemes and gives us the possibility of reviewing payments involved in the light of how it is implemented .
Turning to the amendments proposed , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 4 since that goes against established doctrines regarding the nature of our international fisheries agreements and would adversely affect the powers of the Commission to conduct negotiations .
The Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 5 in principle , if not in their present form .
I should stress , however , that the Commission already gives regular information to Parliament as to the use made of fisheries agreements in its statements and reports to the Committee on Fisheries .
The Commission cannot accept Amendment No 6 , given that fisheries agreements are concluded on a Community level and therefore it is the Commission that pays the financial compensation and the vessels fishing in these waters that pay the licence fees .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 7.50 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , on the question of Sellafield and the contamination of the Irish Sea , I did not say that the article was edited , but completely excised , at the request , I believe of the nuclear industry , specifically British Nuclear Fuels Limited .
I want to draw Members ' attention to the fact that I will be distributing that article today for their information .
Mr President , my point of order relates to the trunks that are provided by Parliament for Members ' use .
They enable Members to move their papers between Brussels and Strasbourg .
In approximately two hours ' time , I am due to present the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy regarding the Cunha report . But the trunk containing all my papers has been left behind in Brussels , in the corridors of D3 .
I do not wish to bore you with endless complaints about the incompetence of the removal services . I have however noticed that there are a number of other recurring problems at the Brussels offices , relating to the lifts and cloakrooms , etcetera .
And this is the last straw .
What I should like to know , Mr President , is how Members are expected to fulfil their obligations , without files , papers , or the bare essentials they need in order to carry out their duties ?
This is a consequence of having three separate places of work .
I suggest you write to the President raising this matter .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
Mr President , the overwhelming majority of the Socialist Group will vote for this request to apply the urgent procedure .
It was on 17 February 1997 that the Commission 's document of options to reform the olive oil sector was presented , and the compromise resolution named after Mr Jové Peres was adopted in December .
The European Parliament has therefore certainly had ample opportunity to give its opinion on this matter !
Moreover , the Commission 's current proposal , Mr President , does no more than take on board most of the points of the resolution by Mr Jové Peres , demonstrating that the Parliament 's pressure has served to condition the Commission 's basic guidelines .
I should not be the one to say it , considering that I voted against this resolution . Rather , it should be the rapporteur , and it is absurd , in my view , that he did not do it in committee .
The point is that , despite what has been written , there is a country , the leading producer , that does not want to hear about any reform , that has chosen the road of protest from which there is no way out and unconditional and unlimited postponement .
The beginning of the next marketing year has been set at 1 November .
Therefore decisions have to be made quickly , and I believe that there are a few absurdities that have to be quickly corrected .
One of these absurdities is a guaranteed maximum quota for the Community as a whole , which results in the absurd situation of a substantial cut in aid for producers of those countries that have not increased production , only because another country has produced excess quantities .
In no organization of the market is there a mechanism this unfair .
If we do not find a remedy for this , Mr President , I think that we will all be overwhelmed with protests from producers and that we will very quickly be asked to account for our short-sightedness .
In committee , the rapporteur refused to commit himself to any deadline for his report , even when our group made very reasonable proposals .
Urgency is also the only way to enable the President-in-Office , Mr Cunningham , to conclude the commendable inquiry that has been conducted in a difficult climate and to give producers a positive and definite answer .
I think the President is mistaken .
I asked to speak first because I wished to inform the House , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , that on 19 May the Committee approved the treatment of this issue as an urgency by 27 votes to 17 .
That is what I wanted to say at the outset , before other Members are invited to speak for or against the motion .
Mr President , I have been a Member of this House for 13 years and this is the first time I have come across an urgency of this nature .
A request was made in April for urgent procedure to take place in June on the reform of the olive oil sector due to come into force on 1 November 1998 .
In other words , from the procedural point of view , there is no need for us to debate the question of the olive oil sector reform now , in this urgent manner .
Secondly , the reform being proposed is not just a simple adjustment of a few problematic details , but an extremely farreaching reform of the olive oil sector .
It is not just a question of the maximum guaranteed quantity and how it is shared out between countries - which is undoubtedly debatable - but very important elements are being introduced , without having been debated in Parliament .
For example , the intervention is disappearing , and this is the first sector of the CAP to be affected by that change .
That is not happening with cereals , milk or meat , but it is happening in the case of olive oil .
Aid to consumption is also disappearing , without being debated in this Parliament .
The ban on mixing olive oils is going to disappear , and also the lack of regulation for table olives .
So we do not think the matter can be dealt with quickly , without discussion in committee , without a rapporteur and without a report .
I think the dignity of this House is at stake , quite apart from any problems a certain country might have with this sector .
What is at stake is a serious , in-depth debate of something that must affect Agenda 2000 and which should therefore be discussed fully in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
( Parliament approved urgent procedure )
Mr President , I am speaking because it is my dubious privilege to be the oldest member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , since the committee chairman , Mr Rocard , and the vice-chairmen cannot be with us at the moment , for various reasons .
And I can inform you that the Committee on Development and Cooperation has studied this request for urgent procedure and has agreed almost unanimously in its favour , with the exception of just one political group .
So , if the request is approved , the Committee on Development and Cooperation will meet this evening at 5.30 p.m. to vote on Mr Liese 's report and the amendments to the Commission text .

( Parliament approved urgent procedure )
Mr President , the reason we requested agreement to approve urgent procedure in this matter , and the Committee adopted it , is that we have to debate agricultural prices in this part-session , and we have always demanded that that debate should include the set-aside requirement .
( Parliament approved urgent procedure )
Agricultural prices - common organization of the market in raw tobacco
The next item is the joint debate on two reports on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development :
A4-0216 / 98 by Mr des Places , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposals for 18 Council Regulations on the prices for agricultural products and on related measures ( 1998-1999 ) ( COM ( 98 ) 0051 - C4-0084 to C4-0101 / 98-98 / 0034 ( CNS ) to 98 / 0049 / CNS , 98 / 0805 ( CNS ) and 98 / 0806 ( CNS ) -A4-0218 / 98 by Mr Rosado Fernandes , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 2075 / 92 on the common organization of the market in raw tobacco ( COM ( 98 ) 0019 - C4-0185 / 98-98 / 0027 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I should like to thank all the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their proposals and contributions during our various discussions , and for their amendments .
They have in general supported me , and I should therefore like to thank them for this .
As far as the prices package for the 1998-1999 agricultural year is concerned , the roll-over of prices and compensatory aids will come as a surprise to no one . They are the same , with a few exceptions , as in preceding years , the same as presented by Mr Sturdy , not to mention the same as in 1993 , ever since the reform of the common agricultural policy .
The prices package clearly has no great claim to imagination , Commissioner .
But this is perhaps due to the important dates which lie ahead : the reform of the common agricultural policy , with a view to the WTO negotiations in 2003 ; the reform of the Structural Funds in 1999 envisaged by Agenda 2000 ; enlargement to include certain Eastern European countries in the year 2000 ; the changeover by some countries to the euro , and even the exchange rate of the euro against the ECU , which also raises the problem of the " green ' ECU ; and finally , the euro / dollar parity because , as I would like to point out , world market prices for the large agricultural product areas are set in dollars , on the basis of the Chicago futures market .
Unless of course , Commissioner , it would be possible to set up a European futures market for agricultural products , based near the European Central Bank , that is , in Frankfurt .
All this , as you know , ladies and gentlemen , will take place within a rigorous budgetary framework set until 2006 , in which the financial resources of the European Union will never exceed a ceiling of 1.27 % of its GNP . The financial resources available for the common agricultural policy are therefore limited .
Now I should like to say a few words about the budget situation in 1999 .
The provisional estimate for the 1999 agricultural guideline is about ECU 45.2 billion , that is an increase of approximately 1.9 billion , or 4.5 % in comparison with 1998 .
The budgetary authority adopted the principle of limiting expenditure , during the 1997 and 1998 budget procedures , by voting budgets significantly lower than the preliminary draft budgets drawn up by its departments .
The Commission considers that this climate of budgetary restraint in the Member States should continue in 1999 , the year of the introduction of the euro .
Within this specific budgetary context , the Commission is proposing a prices package which increases agricultural spending by ECU 9 million under the 1998 budget and ECU 29 million under the 1999 budget .
It should be noted here that this increase at current rates amounts , in real terms and at constant prices , to a reduction of about 2 % in prices and compensatory aids .
On this particular point , I have tabled a series of amendments , which aim to update agricultural prices and compensatory aids in order to redress the effect of monetary erosion .
With regard to the budget , I understand from the memorandum of 10 June 1998 on the early warning system , that there is a difference of almost ECU 1.1 billion between the implementation of the EAGGF Guarantee appropriations and the indicator of consumption .
This reduction , caused by monetary erosion , will be accompanied by another reduction in prices and compensatory aids of about 2 % , according to estimates , which will be caused by the disappearance of the green ECU with the introduction of the euro .
The Committee on Agriculture has adopted my amendments regarding the creation of an adjustment coefficient with a view to maintaining equitable levels of income between farmers in all European Union Member States in order to compensate for the possible disappearance of the green rate on 1 January 1999 for the Member States participating in the single currency .
I should like to point out here that some applications show that a 1 % difference in the values of the green ECU and the euro is equivalent to ECU 400 million .
The Commission 's proposal on the prices package has a number of deficiencies .
First of all , the set-aside rate .
Earlier this morning , we voted on a request for urgent procedure with regard to the Commission 's proposal on the set-aside requirement .
I am delighted that the Commission has responded to our request to establish a set-aside rate by the end of June 1998 , in compliance with an amendment adopted by the Committee on Agriculture .
The proposal , which consists of implementing the principle of an extraordinary set-aside and raising the set-aside rate to 10 % , is totally unacceptable .
Farmers should not have to bear the cost of errors made by the Commission in its management of the markets , which will lead to a 20-25 % increase in stocks carried over .
Since July 1997 the Commission seems to have been adopting a rather risky approach to its management of cereals exports , with the tax on wheat exports when the European price was below the world market price , abandonment to the competitors of the Saudi market for barley and prolonged delays at the start of the agricultural year , all of which has now led to the risk of a very sharp increase in European stocks .
If the current delay in export commitments , 4.5 million tonnes less than in 1997 at the same period - 8 million tonnes less than the normal pattern - , is not reabsorbed , the European Union could find itself in the position , on 30 June 1998 , of having about 30 million tonnes of cereals as opposed to 28 million tonnes on 30 June 1997 .
And yet , Commissioner , the volume of our exports is less than 25 million tonnes , although the WTO ceiling allows exports of 30 tonnes , plus the carry-over from previous years .
Furthermore , producers do not understand why it should be necessary to impose more set-asides , when they are being asked to accept further proposed price reductions for next year , to enable them to sell and produce more .
I should like to reiterate that the set-aside rate affects the budget as well as farmers ' incomes . And under these circumstances , I am delighted that we may be able to adopt both the prices package and the set-aside rate , during the same part-session .
Now I would like to say something on the subject of wine .
Unlike other major agricultural product areas , the common organization of the market in wine has not been reformed for 15 years .
The reform is in progress and should be presented to us this week .
In any case , it will not be applicable to the marketing year 1998 / 99 .
In its price proposals the Commission provides for an extension of the quota for permanent grubbing up of vines , while failing to create a quota for new plantings .
This provision on new plantings allows the most dynamic wine growing regions to adapt supply to demand and to improve the quality of the vineyards .
I therefore tabled a number of amendments on this point , which were furthermore adopted by the Committee on Agriculture .
I will now turn to the subject of hemp . At the Council meeting in January 1997 the Commission undertook to propose stronger contractual arrangements with regard to hemp .
In June 1997 the Council asked the Commission to study the possibility of establishing compulsory contracts between hemp producers and processors .
Instead of putting forward such contractual arrangements as part of the prices package the Commission has merely lowered hemp prices by 25 % . The aim is to discourage producers , as the area given over to hemp production has increased from about 10 000 hectares in 1996 to 40 000 hectares in 1998 .
I would like to stress that hemp is an agricultural crop , which requires specific investments by both farmers and processors .
The fibre produced from hemp is used in the industrial sector , for insulation and so on . It is therefore an agricultural product for non-food use .
The Commission 's main proposals on beef and veal are as follows : extension of the reduction of national ceilings for premiums for male bovine animals . At Community level ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I am going to speak on a hot topic , smoke , or kapnos , as the Greeks say .
Tobacco , we call it .
It is a hot topic , because it has provoked passionate reactions .
It is a hot topic , because it has provoked near-irrational reactions .
On the one hand false rationalism aimed at the expense it involves , and on the other pious words about the harm it does .
Health considerations and budgetary considerations have whipped this subject up into a cocktail of passions which the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has tried to modulate , maintaining an attitude in which its first concern is for the people who make their living by growing tobacco .
Obviously all those of us who have children are concerned that young people should not smoke .
We are all concerned that young people should not drink , but wine has to be produced ...
We are all concerned that young people should not eat too much fat , or too much sugar , because all these things can affect our health , but there are pigmeat producers and sugar producers ...
We all agree on that aspect of the matter .
With regard to the financial cost , the funds invested in tobacco growing , we know that around 600 000 people are involved in the industry , not to mention retailers , and we have of course seen the Committee on Budgets adopt a position which I jokingly referred to as ' Pope-like ' , condemning the spending of money on tobacco growing as anathema .
Yet I know that same Committee voted against the purchase of scanners that could control the smuggling of tobacco products throughout the territory of Europe , in lorries and containers .
And I have no doubt , from the information I receive , that if those budgetary measures and controls were put into practice the money we would recover from fraud and organized crime would comfortably outweigh the money we spend on maintaining tobacco producers .
Then again , there is the Committee on the Environment .
That Committee is entitled to adopt whatever position it sees fit with regard to tobacco and other plants .
Yet in my judgment it often exceeds its powers , inasmuch as it tries to issue diktats on the ways in which agriculture should be reformed , the money that should be spent , the way people ought to behave .
The truth , let me say without wishing to offend anyone , is that at the beginning of the Iranian revolution - and you need only read an article published some time ago in the Economist , ' The Ayatollahs ' - one of the first measures taken was to ban smoking throughout Iran .
I do not have to think about anyone else 's options , I support individual responsibility and people 's ability to choose for themselves , provided they do not inconvenience anyone else and are not a burden on society .
I think we all have that choice to do right or wrong .
And I cannot prevent my neighbour from doing wrong .
In my report I have tried to prevent , and have proposed that we should prevent , the Committee from intervening by purchasing fixed quotas .
I have tried to defend the argument that tobacco growing , which costs between a thousand and two thousand hours per hectare and is therefore one of the lowest-paid in Europe , should continue in the Greek mountains or the Mediterranean areas .
I have also tried to support the provision of openings for young growers and to prevent modulation from being too heavy a penalty on growers under the pretext of quality control .
These are the aspects I have defended and on this point I will finish , Mr President , so as not to overload this speech .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that it is both an honour and a privilege for me , on behalf of the presidency and the Agriculture Council , which I represent here today , to have the opportunity of addressing you all in Parliament .
Just over a year ago a new Labour Government in Britain embarked upon a sea change in relations between the United Kingdom and the European Parliament and , for that matter , the other institutions of the European Union too .
We were determined to work constructively and cooperatively with our European partners and with the European Parliament , and we have done so .
Speaking about my own contribution to that development , this is my fourth appearance in Parliament as President of the Agriculture Council and my sixth visit in 12 months in my role as United Kingdom Minister of Agriculture .
The UK presidency has been an active one and , as for the brief remaining part , June also looks very busy .
Apart from the topics we are here to address today at the June Council , we aim to reach conclusions on other items of business , for example on quotas for the production of potato starch , updating the rules on controlling tuberculosis , brucellosis and EBL in cattle and determining the 1990 set-aside rate for arable crops .
We hope , too , that it will be possible for the June Council to agree a measure which will effectively set general standards on farm-animal welfare , right across the Union .
Moreover , we were grateful for Parliament 's rapid consideration of the ornamental plants dossier , where there is now a wide measure of agreement in the Council , and we expect adoption of that dossier shortly .
Let me deal first with the question of price-fixing .
In view of the proposals for reform of the CAP and many of the major common market organization regimes - about which I will be saying more later - the Commission 's proposals for the 1998 price-fixing round are centred on those price decisions which are required for legal or technical reasons .
In most cases the Commission has simply recommended a roll-over of existing provision .
There is broad agreement in the Council in support of this approach .
However , not unexpectedly in the course of the Council discussion of this dossier , Member States have suggested a number of additional elements to the 1998 prices package .
The presidency and the Commission are working closely together to accommodate as many of these as can be realistically adopted .
I intend to negotiate a compromise on this package at next week 's Agriculture Council , having first taken careful note of the views of Parliament .
Tobacco is an example of a sector where the Union 's agriculture needs to be more competitive and open to the market as we prepare for enlargement and the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
With this in mind , the Commission has come forward with some constructive workable ideas which I hope will provide a sound basis for a much improved regime .
All Member States accept the need for reform and the aim of improving tobacco quality but there is a divergence of views between producer states and non-producer states over the ways and means of proceeding .
Most producer states accept the need for premium modulation as an important tool in improving quality and helping their growers to get closer to the market .
They do , however , favour less modulation , phased in over a longer period .
The main producer states also oppose quota buyback as over time it would result in a progressive reduction in the amount of subsidized production .
They argue it would cause rural depopulation and unemployment unless surrendered quotas are redistributed to existing producers or new entrants .
The Commission takes the line that surrendered quotas must be withdrawn permanently .
Non-producer Member States continue to draw attention to the high cost of the regime and the disparity between the budget for the Commission 's anti-smoking programme and the annual spend on subsidies for tobacco producers .
Indeed , some argue for gradual withdrawal of support from this sector altogether .
In discussions so far , general agreement has been reached on many issues but some outstanding differences remain to be resolved .
The presidency has been trying to make headway with this dossier , as with all dossiers we have been responsible for dealing with during our presidency , in a fair , open , constructive and impartial manner .
We are making every effort to reach a final agreement later this month and , to that end , will place particular value on the opinion that will be forthcoming from Parliament .
I wish to pay a warm personal tribute to Commissioner Franz Fischler , on behalf of the United Kingdom presidency , for his excellent help and cooperation and constructive working with us throughout the months of that presidency , and , once again , Mr President , thank you for inviting me to open your first debate .
I now look forward with interest to hearing the views of your colleagues on these important questions .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to look at the context of the price proposals for the marketing year 1998 / 99 .
The proposals continue the policy of stability of the previous prices packages , providing for existing institutional prices to be maintained in almost all sectors .
That does not , however , in any way imply that there is no need for a fundamental revision of the common agricultural policy .
On the contrary !
Using Agenda 2000 , the Commission wants to introduce a reform that will go far beyond the fragmentary annual adjustments made in the context of the prices package , in order to prepare European agriculture for the future and to provide security for the European agricultural model .
Therefore , for the 1998 / 99 prices , we should restrict ourselves to those measures which are absolutely necessary and not deal prematurely with imminent fundamental reforms .
I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their excellent work of examining the proposals and formulating the amendments .
My thanks also go to the Members of the other Committees that were actively involved in this work : the Committee on Budgets , the Committee on External Economic Relations , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and the Committee on Development and Cooperation .
I would like to begin by discussing those amendments which deal with the introduction of the euro .
These propose an adjustment coefficient for prices and subsidies in order to offset the abolition of conversion rates on 1 January 1999 in those countries participating in the single currency .
In the past week the Commission has adopted a proposal addressing this very matter of the effect of the introduction of the euro on the common agricultural policy .
The Commission is of the opinion that possible loss of income due to the introduction of the euro can best be offset by payment of compensatory allowances .
A system of adjustment coefficients would serve only to introduce yet another new type of agricultural conversion rate .
Thus , the amendments based on this cannot be accepted but , like Parliament , the Commission is aware of the underlying economic problem .
A whole series of amendments are aimed at increasing prices and direct payments by a blanket 1.7 % .
I cannot accept this for three reasons . Firstly , this is diametrically opposed to the need to improve the competitiveness of Community produce , indeed both in the internal market and in the global market .
Secondly , it would result in considerable budget costs - approximately ECU 260 million , which is unacceptable in times of strict budgetary discipline .
Thirdly , it could jeopardize the international obligations of the Union , affecting in particular the level of internal support .
In addition , I would like to note that the minor effects of inflation are more than offset by technological progress and improvements in agricultural structuring .
In Amendment No 11 the Commission is called upon to submit , as soon as possible , a proposal concerning the rate of setaside for the marketing year 1999 / 2000 .
As you know , this proposal is already in existence and was even accorded urgency .
In two sectors , those of hemp and beef , the majority of amendments are intended to change fundamentally the Commission proposal .
Firstly , Amendments Nos 18 to 22 concern the hemp sector , and their primary aim is to delete the proposal concerning reduction of subsidies .
The Commission is really concerned about the considerable and constant expansion of arable land , and also about the problem of control in this sector .
On 6 May , the Commission proposed to the Council a clear increase in control , to be linked notably to the introduction of obligatory contracts between producers and processors .
This point is incidentally also contained in Amendment No 77 , the content of which I will split in two .
In the beef sector , Amendments Nos 48 to 53 aim to reverse the Commission 's proposal .
These provide for a return to the high levels of 1996 for the maximum premiums for bulls - that is , 20 % more than in the last two years .
In view of the remaining difficulties concerning market situation and in order not to rush the revision of the organization of the single market within the context of Agenda 2000 , the status quo must , in the Commission 's opinion , be maintained .
However , in the case of Spain and Portugal , an increase in maximum rates can be directly attributed to an obligation of the Council of November 1996 , and we therefore made a corresponding proposal .
Several amendments also provide for considerable changes to market organization which the Commission cannot , however , accept in the context of these price proposals , which are to be kept as simple as possible .
Thus , Amendment No 7 provides for a higher compensatory payment for areas set aside to be used for purposes other than food production .
On this subject , I would like to say that of course we all want to promote the cultivation of renewable primary products with the various instruments available , but to my mind , a specific new subsidy would seem to be far from desirable .
A set-aside rate of 10 % would also comply in principle with this request .
Now on to Amendment No 25 . Breeders of silkworms have already recently profited from currency devaluations in the relevant Member States .
I therefore consider a subsidy increase to be inappropriate .
Approval of renewed planting , premature replanting , the period of validity of planting rights for wine and a subsidy for grape must , as provided for by Amendments Nos 29 to 35 and by Amendment No 37 , cannot be dealt with in the context of this prices package .
The Commission recognizes that these are important issues ; it will therefore deal with these in its proposal concerning the reform .
This proposal will be submitted to the Commission for a decision tomorrow .
Amendments Nos 41 , 85 and 87 aim to increase the premiums for certain higher quality types of tobacco .
There is no economic reason to favour one kind over another .
On the other hand , one of the main aims of the tobacco reform , which is also being discussed , is to improve the overall quality of tobacco .
Amendments Nos 55 and 94 aim to neutralize the stabilizing effect in sheepmeat by increasing the basic premium by 7 % .
This would mean having to abandon the premium for rural areas and would reopen the debate on the budget made available for this sector .
Potential supplementary costs would be ECU 85 million .
I will now look at the amendments which aim to extend or introduce derogations .
These cannot be approved in their current form .
Some of them , however , merit thorough examination .
These are Amendments Nos 2 and 3 .
They refer to the moisture content of cereals .
This decision falls within the jurisdiction of the Commission .
The exemption was granted traditionally but this year the higher intervention stocks are also to be considered in global terms .
Amendments Nos 5 and 9 refer to the suspension of special set-aside .
They should be judged in the context of the proposal concerning the set-aside rate .
Amendments Nos 6 , 10 , 49 and 54 refer to the new German Länder .
The derogations in question were granted for a limited period in the new Länder because of specific structural problems .
As far as the base area for arable crops is concerned , I would point out that the proposals of the current prices package provide for a certain flexibility in that the deadline for the choice of partial base area regulation is postponed to 15 September .
According to Amendment No 8 , in certain cases it should still be permissible for the area set aside to be greater than its arable acreage .
The Commission is aware of this problem but prefers to deal with it within the framework of Agenda 2000 .
Amendment No 36 provides for the derogation on the minimum acid content of wine to be extended .
Whatever solution is chosen , it must not under any circumstances anticipate the pending reform .
Amendments Nos 38 to 40 allow suspension of wine growing on small plots of land .
We could , in effect , consider taking this problem into account .
In any case , I am pleased to see in the result that the proposals of the Commission largely did justice to its suggestions , as appropriate suggestions have already been submitted for too many amendments - I am thinking here of the euro , the set-aside rate , the tobacco reform , the hemp agreements and others .
Many of these are considered in Agenda 2000 and we agree that some of these amendments must be examined urgently .
I would ask for your indulgence if I speak a bit longer today because I have another important topic to discuss : the organization of the tobacco market .
I will come to this now .
Firstly , I would like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the rapporteur for having dealt so swiftly with the proposal on the reform of the common market organization for raw tobacco , so that we could discuss it today .
After the vote on the report which the Commission submitted to Parliament last year , the Council and the Commission agreed to continue to support tobacco growers .
As you know , the Commission basically proposes to create effective incentives to improve product quality and at the same time to support those who wish to give up tobacco production .
By shifting the emphasis from quantity to quality , the reform takes into account the business of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection and the Committee on Budgets without taking away the possibility of other sources of income from farmers particularly in disadvantaged areas .
For this reason , the Commission rejects Amendments Nos 29 , 30 , 33 , 37 , 42 , 53 and 59 , and Nos 66 , 67 and 76 which aim for a compulsory withdrawal of the Community from tobacco production .
Community production represents only about one-third of Community consumption and could easily be replaced by imports .
I am very much in favour of encouraging voluntary withdrawal from production , however .
I welcome in principle the definition of quality criteria in the marketing of tobacco , as contained in Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 15 and 16 .
These criteria should nonetheless be incorporated into cultivation contracts and the individual provisions relating to this should be laid down in the Commission 's implementing regulation .
Please rest assured that the Commission will take the European Parliament 's amendments into account in this procedure .
The Commission would like to offer farmers the most effective incentives possible to improve quality .
As regards the variable part amounts of the premium in accordance with Amendments Nos 14 , 17 , 18 , 39 , 69 , 75 and 77 , the Commission is of the opinion that at least 35 % of the premium should be graduated accordingly in order to fulfil the aims of quality differentiation and avoidance of social problems to a satisfactory extent .
By means of the possibility of quota buy-back - the basis for Amendments Nos 8 , 9 , 27 and 28 - the Commission wishes to provide a safety net for economically weak producers who are not in a position to participate in the campaign for improved quality .
I am prepared to examine additional safety measures which should prevent this system from leading to a complete cessation of production .
But I cannot accept any amendments that would render this system ineffective .
I would also like to note that within the framework of the Structural Funds , Member States already have the opportunity to submit projects which would facilitate the transition to other economic activities for tobacco growers .
For this reason , I cannot approve Amendments Nos 6 , 26 , 58 or 63 .
With regard to Amendment No 44 , I share these aims but it is neither necessary nor obvious for bought-back quotas to be withdrawn from the guarantee fund .
With reference to Amendment No 51 I would like to remind you that quota buy-back should be on a voluntary basis , so minimum targets cannot be accepted .
The Commission welcomes Amendments Nos 24 and 81 and that part of Amendment No 36 which deals with the expansion of the area of application of the tobacco fund .
However , in my opinion conversion schemes and research into new uses for tobacco should be financed by this fund .
Therefore , it is my view that we should persist in our proposal to increase the amount to be made available to this fund in order to be able to finance these new initiatives as well .
Thus , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 11 , 23 , 25 , 48 , 49 , 50 or that part of Amendment No 36 which refers to this .
I share the concerns expressed in Amendment No 10 .
The Commission cannot , however , allow research and investigation to take priority over such measures aimed at improving quality .
With regard to Amendments Nos 52 and 86 , I can readily agree to make the report available to the European Parliament .
However , I cannot accept Amendments Nos 13 , 34 or 38 , as the additional amount offered to the northern producer states is in accordance with the situation of their producers and thus should also be maintained .
Amendment No 20 proposes quota compensation at a national level .
However , quotas belong to individual producers , which is why the existing carry-over possibilities are the correct solution to this problem .
I cannot , therefore , accept this amendment any more than I can Amendment No 22 , as we must respect the stability of annual expenditure .
Amendments Nos 41 , 45 , 47 , 51 , 78 , 79 , 82 and 85 are directed towards a change in the commitology procedure .
I , however , am of the opinion that the common market organization regime for tobacco should be subject to the same rules as all other market organization regimes .
I cannot accept Amendments Nos 35 , 60 , 61 or 68 , as it is important to retain structural improvements and freedom of quota transfer .
The evaluation of the new regulation in the year 2000 or 2001 , proposed in Amendments Nos 52 and 65 , seems somewhat premature but , of course , an evaluation is necessary .
With regard to Amendments Nos 70 , 73 and 74 , it is my opinion that the agreements on sale by auction would give the producer better opportunities in terms of market prices .
I would therefore like to keep this option open .
Amendments Nos 1 , 5 , 12 , 19 , 32 , 40 , 43 , 62 and 64 would entail enormous changes to the underlying equilibrium in the respective areas that is intrinsic to our proposal , and this is why I am not in a position to accept them .
Nevertheless , I can accept Amendments Nos 71 and 72 , which allow the Member States a transitional period for the transition to direct premium payments to producers .
With regard to Amendments Nos 31 and 86 , to accept these would not be to increase the quality of tobacco but to reduce it .
The Commission is prepared , however , to use the national supply of quotas for allocation to young farmers , as provided for by Amendment No 21 .
However , this should take place in conjunction with the usual administrative authorities .
I would like to thank you for dealing with the reform of this sector so swiftly , and I hope this will also be the case with upcoming Agenda 2000 proposals .
Mr President , I am surprised that Commissioner Fischler did not wait to hear the opinions of the committees to which the proposal was referred before giving his response , but I shall nevertheless deliver the opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
The 1998-1999 agricultural year is unusual because it will be the last year to fall within the scope of the present agricultural policy . I am therefore tempted to ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to endorse these price proposals because they will be the last .
In fact , the raison d 'être of the real debate on the forthcoming reform of the CAP can be found in Agenda 2000 .
That is why the Committee on Budgets has emphasized , by adopting the opinion I proposed , that the budgetary consequences of the present price proposals with regard to the forthcoming agricultural year are limited .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has paid special attention to the introduction of the euro , as the Committee on Budgets asked , and rightly so .
It is important for the budgetary effect of the introduction of the euro on the agricultural sector to be evaluated as accurately as possible , and appropriate measures proposed as soon as possible .
From 1 January 1999 the euro will replace the ECU and therefore also the green ECU , whose value is up to 1.5 % higher than the normal - financial - ECU .
The Commission has not yet made proposals for the transition of the present agri-monetary system to the euro , but intends to forward proposals to Council and Parliament before September this year . It has not been able to do so yet as there has to be certainty about which countries will definitively participate in European monetary union .
The Committee on Budgets will naturally prepare another opinion on the financial consequences of the proposals .
With regard to the sectoral amendments , I am delighted that the Committee on Agriculture has taken up my proposal with regard to the authorization of " new plantations ' for high-quality wines produced in specific regions .
The Committee on Budgets also protested against the European Commission 's proposed approach to the question of aid for hemp producers .
The Commission now wants to discourage the production of hemp as it is of the opinion that hemp is sometimes produced for ' illegal ' reasons . But Indian hemp is not the only type of hemp , and not all types can be smoked .
The Commission has chosen the easiest solution : reduction of the premium to discourage a further rise in production .
The agricultural sector has invested in this , and is now being unfairly punished by a savage 25 % reduction in the subsidy .
It is very encouraging to see that the Committee on Agriculture is aware of this problem and has even proposed an increase in the aid per hectare .
I should like to add a last remark about olive oil and draw to the Commission 's attention the tensions and distortions that exist between the amounts of olive oil produced , the amount of financial aid provided , and the uncertainty of current methods of inspection .
Mr President , I will just be referring to the tobacco report .
Firstly , I will be ignoring the comments of Mr Rosado Fernandes on the Committee on Budgets .
Like his report they are flawed .
I am a realist in these matters and I can assume that the Wynn amendments , the Hardstaff amendments and the Environment Committee amendments will not be carried later in the day and therefore I can imagine that the report will be adopted .
As you may well imagine , I will not be voting for it except probably for the first amendment from Mr Rosado Fernandes which says ' whereas the Commission has taken no account whatsoever of the European Parliament 's opinion of 17 July 1997 ' .
I would change that to say ' welcomes the fact the Commission has taken no notice of our opinion last year because once again it was a flawed opinion ' .
There is this ostrich attitude , with its head in the sand : look at the second amendment from the committee , which talks about the raw tobacco market being very competitive .
Where do they get this fiction from ?
It beggars understanding .
The truth is , that without European Union subsidies there would be no tobacco industry in Europe .
Not one gramme can sell on a competitive market without EU subsidies .
There is no reason to give money to farmers in France , Belgium , Germany and Austria .
It is a black hole that we pour money into .
Having said that , the Commission has come forward with a report that is a good deal better than the system that we have at present .
However , the Budgets Committee opinion is that it is flawed .
Why not go back , Commissioner , and start again ?
The consequences are far from perfect .
As you have said yourself , we are not even saving money .
It will actually cost more money than the present system when we take into consideration the monies from the Structural Funds .
This is not a situation that we in the Budgets Committee want to see continuing and quite frankly the best result for everyone would be to take the report back and come forward with something far more bold and dramatic .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we do not wish to play Ayatollah , as Mr Rosado Fernandes is insinuating .
When we drafted our opinion on the common organization of the market in raw tobacco , we , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , made two basic assumptions .
Firstly , the massive production aid for tobacco , and we are talking about no less than ECU 1 billion , is completely at odds with the EU 's policy on the prevention of cancer .
We are supporting a product which is responsible for the deaths of half a million EU citizens a year .
Secondly , the subsidies are , in principle , temporary .
We have been supporting tobacco farmers for more than a generation without any prospect of improvement .
That is why we do not agree with the Commission proposal .
We are therefore calling for a complete abolition of subsidized production by the year 2006 .
In countries where there are adequate alternative forms of cultivation , such as Belgium and Austria , the subsidies must be abolished sooner .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection realizes that the abolition should happen gradually , and has therefore developed a transition scenario with the following main features .
Firstly , half of the premium must depend on the quality of the production .
Those who produce better quality will therefore be able to manage without subsidies at a later date .
Secondly , quotas must be gradually reduced .
Thirdly , the transfer of quotas between producers will no longer be permitted .
Fourthly , 5 % of the premium must go the Tobacco Research and Information Fund .
The Fund must look into possibilities for the cultivation of other crops and into other profitable economic activities .
Finally , we are asking the Commission to again conduct a thorough study into the option which was handed to us by the Court of Auditors in 1994 , namely direct income support .
Ladies and gentlemen , my proposals are incorporated in Amendments Nos 29 to 53 .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection adopted these unanimously .
It was co-signed by thirty Members from all groups .
I therefore hope that a majority in this House will opt for a responsible and healthy use of public funds .
Mr President , Commissioner , what more can be said about the prices package ?
That it would perhaps be reasonable to no longer present it in these terms and to switch to a different system that involves our House in deciding basic directions , to offer multiannual guidelines to our farmers who have to make production choices .
Our group believes that now is the time to do this , because the contrast has become so great between this procedure , which before involved long marathons , and the Agenda 2000 reforms which are the real package of farm prices on the table .
The only thing to be said is to agree with the rapporteur , Mr des Places , on the urgency of giving a little more impetus to the wine sector .
We cannot just sit around twiddling our thumbs when there is a policy of new large-scale plantings of vines in countries competing with the European Union : since there are no longer surpluses , the market for quality wines is witnessing renewed vigour and the money in the Community budget for this sector is being reduced to virtually nothing .
We must avoid the gradual paralysis of a sector that can continue to be an object of pride for Europeans , anticipating with the prices package certain aspects of the reform of the COM that the Commission should adopt tomorrow .
As for tobacco , I would like to say to my fellow Members : let us try to have a progressive vision of the sector and not always remain confined to a Manichean and ideological debate - tobacco yes , tobacco no - , let us stop criminalizing a sector of production that can continue to play an economic , social and occupational role , worthy of the utmost importance .
Were people to no longer die from smoking if all aid was cut off , I would be the first to observe this moral command .
But we know that it does not work that way , that it is an illusion : we would just import more products from outside the Community , the amount being already greatly insufficient , as Commissioner Fischler recalled .
What is more , we already discussed the matter at length a few months ago .
We also know that with the billion ECUs of the COM , it is quite difficult to guarantee for other sectors an opening for jobs like the one created by tobacco production , which is the most labour-intensive agricultural product grown in what are usually disadvantaged regions .
We therefore agree with the strategy proposed by the Commission - significant innovation , emphasis on quality - to make the sector more and more market-oriented and to grant aid also to anyone wanting to leave the sector because of lack of prospects .
We believe that the rapporteur , although he honourably wants to defend producers , in some passages introduces too much resistance to these innovations .
But it is only right that tobacco producers also begin to see clearly what the future of the entire common agricultural policy is : less situation rents , more targeted aid , policies of quality and more international competition ; on the other hand , new developments in policies for rural development and agricultural structures .
This is the picture , and it is in the interest of all that it be very clear .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur , Mr des Places , established in his report that average income from agricultural activities , measured in terms of real net product , has fallen by 3.1 % .
I fully concur with him in this .
In fact , prices for products from livestock farming have fallen ; in particular , pig prices have reached their lowest in years .
The profits from cereals have also been very much affected by downward pressure on prices .
This is why monthly surcharges must be retained .
In this agricultural debate , which differs from previous agricultural debates , I would ask you , Commissioner , to intervene in these two areas of cereals and pigmeat and , as you did in the case of beef , to use all possible means to relieve the market .
In the context of the reports on Agenda 2000 , the decisions on agricultural prices are , as you said , of a temporary nature and consist mainly of an assessment .
I have a positive suggestion for you in terms of the Agenda .
Should you accept our proposals , the Agenda will be able to proceed far faster than hitherto envisaged ; otherwise , we must prepare to go through a long rigmarole .
However , we have drawn up excellent proposals which we will be submitting to you in due course .
I would urge you not to take the path of least resistance in the area of hemp , but to support this environmentally friendly plant so that its introduction to the market can be successful .
With plants , there is no point in beginning with subsidies , then investing in the market , then immediately starting to reduce subsidies before the plants have been fully introduced to the market .
The existence of national hemp processing plants is thus jeopardized as well .
I welcome the extension of the derogation for the five new German Länder .
In principle , a lasting solution to this problem must be found in agricultural reform , in the beef and veal market organization regime .
I thank you expressly , Commissioner , for having responded so promptly in the area of set-aside .
I would like to commend you very highly on this .
I would like to encourage you to see this 10 % set-aside through to the end .
Otherwise we will never put an end to this desperate state of affairs and the Agenda 2000 negotiations will once again be crippled before the event by heavy investment ; this is not good because once again we would be unable to determine how things really ought to be .
This path is not practicable as it would lead to a new set of problems .
New beef and milk surpluses are being produced and for this reason I think set-aside should be implemented in the same way in which it has already proved its merit .
I would also point to the early marketing premium for calves .
Mr President , please allow me to make one last comment . I would like to praise the Commissioner for making a sensible proposal regarding how to introduce the euro - not through some complicated mechanism ; instead , he wants to even out any losses which individual countries may incur by means of transparent measures .
Mr President , I would like to start by thanking the President-in-Office for the warm interest he has shown in the activities of this Parliament over the last six months , and we hope that future Presidents-in-Office will use this as a model .
First of all , the des Places report is not taking place under the most favourable circumstances , as far as prices for farmers are concerned .
I believe it would be a delusion to think that , both in the light of the budget difficulties and in the light of Agenda 2000 proposals , we might promise farmers higher prices .
My group will therefore support the general terms of the Commission proposals .
A few aspects need to be emphasized , however , and the Commission has already been forthcoming with us about this prior to our vote on the amendments in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The transition from the green ECU to the euro must happen gradually .
At the moment it appears likely that we will be continuing this discussion .
Secondly , the Commission must do as much as it can to develop new markets . We will therefore support the amendments proposed by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on agrification , the use of agricultural products for nonfood purposes , especially those amendments which refer to the production of hemp for industrial purposes .
As far as the Rosado Fernandes report is concerned , I must say that my group is very divided on this issue .
We will vote in two ways .
The general line is that we support the position of the Commission that the tobacco which is being produced must meet market requirements and therefore must be of high quality .
In areas with low-quality tobacco we will have to try to find alternatives so that the farmers living in these areas can also earn their income from products other than tobacco .
In conclusion , we would like to point to the need to continue the informational campaigns about the dangers of smoking and the like .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , listening to my colleague from the Socialist Group , Mr Wynn , I have to tell you that I too am a member of the Committee on Budgetary Control of the European Parliament and , naturally , not all the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control share the views that were expressed by Mr Wynn .
Mr Wynn belongs to a group of colleagues within the Committee on Budgetary Control and , whenever the debate turns to matters of European agriculture in general and the products of the south of the European Union in particular , something happens to them and they start to say " no ' to everything , as , for example , our very dear Commissioner today .
In your twenty-five minute speech , Commissioner , although you started off by saying that you would give very serious consideration to the recommendations of the European Parliament , when you referred to the amendments , I counted that you rejected 90 % of the European Parliament amendments .
I ask you this : is that what you meant when you said that you would give very serious consideration to the recommendations of the European Parliament ?
I wonder whether , if you had rejected them all , that would have been a mark of respect or derision for the European Parliament .
You also said that you yourself are not against the complete abolition of tobacco production .
You do not wish to throw thousands of European farmers on the dole .
You say you are for improvement in tobacco quality , but with all these " nos ' you are not moving towards improvement in quality .
Secondly , could you tell us whether the tobacco that is imported into Europe is of better quality than the tobacco that is produced in Europe ?
Have you , the Commission , checked this ?
And to what extent is it better quality ?
Thirdly and most importantly , I am a doctor and I know very well whether tobacco is harmful or not .
But what I have not heard from the Commission today is how much money you will give to teach our children in school that they must not smoke .
I have not heard you say that , Commissioner .
Mr President , firstly with regard to tobacco : the campaign against tobacco is a sham , a fraud .
If the Community really wanted to reduce or to put an end to smoking , it should not implement an anti-smoking policy but should , within the context of an anti-smoking policy , reduce and even ban tobacco imports .
It should take measures against the tobacco industry , which produces the final product , cigarettes .
It does not do this and that is why it is a sham .
Secondly , with regard to the prices package : it is the same as it was before and is getting worse and it will have worse consequences .
The previous regime brought about a significant reduction in real average prices for the producer and a corresponding reduction in his income .
Are those measures for the benefit of producers ?
And where is your concern about quality , Commissioner ?
You rejected an amendment which said " special subsidies for special varieties of tobacco of special quality ' .
Why are you rejecting it ?
Are you concerned about quality or are you not ?
As a result , your model , in essence , Commissioner , is the large agricultural enterprise . You are hitting small and medium-sized producers , you are hitting especially those in the south and the products of the Mediterranean region to which my country belongs .
Tobacco growing has been reduced by 30 % and along with it the number of those employed has fallen by 33 % . Where will these people go ?
What will they do ?
Neither you nor national governments tell them .
Mr President , I will limit myself to only a few basic comments .
Commissioner , in the case of prices - whether we fix them now in this prices package or reduce them drastically in Agenda 2000 - the problem remains that an intervention system still exists .
Already , prices are insufficient for 80 % of small and medium-sized farms .
However , it is also a fact that the fixing of intervention prices and the intervention system itself create surpluses in these areas and that the prices - in any case long-term - never rise above the intervention system .
This leads to a situation where most farms cannot live with these prices .
As a result , it is a matter of readjusting the market so that farms can obtain higher prices on the market .
I hope that this is given greater emphasis in Agenda 2000 .
I would like to make a point regarding hemp : Commissioner , please give your support to European money being spent on hemp !
Then you will not need to reduce the 25 % because we will then have a huge market .
In addition , the money rustles so nicely and we would have reasonable ongoing support for a very interesting product .
With regard to tobacco , it is my view that the true scandal lies not in the fact that we are promoting a product which endangers our health , but in the fact that , although only a low level of our production is destined for the world market - premiums are also a form of indirect support - billions are spent here to put pressure on the price in the world market overall .
Thus , we are in fact supporting the tobacco industry .
We should see that our tobacco is also being sold here in Europe and that the industry is accepting it .
Here , too , we need a positive strategy - not so much a strategy of prevention .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his very good report .
Since the reform of agriculture a number of years ago , to a large extent the price review process we go through has become an unreal exercise and does not recognize the problems that face farmers on the ground .
This exercise is largely irrelevant and will not solve the many difficult problems that face the industry .
The agriculture industry , certainly in my own part of the United Kingdom in particular , has never faced as many difficulties as it does at this moment in time .
In the past one sector could perhaps have faced difficulty .
Now we have been racked by BSE in the beef sector and are trying to recover from that .
If you look at agriculture in the United Kingdom at the moment - the pig industry , the poultry industry , the dairy industry , those producing cereals - all these sectors are facing financial difficulties , with farmers wondering which way to go .
Young farmers are just not coming into the industry .
Yes , I know that there has always got to be change ; yes , I know that agriculture has to evolve with the times .
Farmers will evolve , but they have to be given the chance to do so .
As things stand at the moment they do not have that chance .
And I have to say to the Minister responsible , who is here in his capacity as President-in-Office , that he cannot stand back and idly watch the agriculture industry disappear and take the hammering it has been taking because of the strong pound and issues over which the farmer has no control .
That is a great difficulty .
Mr President , I want to concentrate on the Commission proposals for raw tobacco and welcome those sections concerning diversification and withdrawal of quotas as growers move out of this sector .
My reservation is that the Commission , whilst encouraging growing for the market rather than for subsidies , does not propose the final logical step , namely the complete phasing-out of tobacco subsidies .
I have tabled amendments accordingly .
Interestingly , yesterday 's Süddeutsche Zeitung carried an article about proposals for the abolition of tobacco subsidies in the United States .
The EU should be doing the same .
Subsidizing production of food and useful non-food agricultural products is justifiable . Subsidizing - to the tune of ECU 1 billion a year of taxpayers ' money - the growing of tobacco , which kills 500 , 000 of its consumers every year , usually after years of ill-health , is completely indefensible .
The Commission has partly conceded this case with its proposals to buy back quota , give support to producers to change to other crops and other activities and its encouragement of production of tobacco types which can command a reasonable market price .
Currently much of Community production is either destroyed or offloaded on poor countries at below production cost , to add to their health problems .
The Commission should take the logical next step , moving toward a situation where tobacco competes in the market with no subsidy , if it is grown at all .
Rich countries like Germany , France , Belgium and Austria cannot possibly claim they are financially dependent on such subsidies .
Those Mediterranean countries where real hardship would be caused must be given ongoing support to enable growers to diversify and assist local and national government to establish alternative job opportunities in the regions currently heavily dependent on tobacco .
With political will this could be achieved over the next ten years - I offer two years more than the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
By the year 2008 we could do away with the scandal of spending ECU 1 billion of EU taxpayers ' money annually supporting a crop which kills our citizens .
I urge support for the amendment setting out this programme .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one of the advantages of speaking when most people have already done so is that practically everything has already been said , which means you can add the odd finishing touch to aspects you want to emphasize .
I want to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr des Places and Mr Rosado Fernandes , on the effort they have put in , and on their clear and positive approach to their subjects .
I also want to congratulate the Commissioner on his rational proposals regarding prices , tobacco , adapting to the euro and efforts in the area of controls .
I think this is important , and I would be grateful if the Commissioner would take note of what I am saying at the moment , because it seems he is busy with other things .
Compulsory contracts have been proposed for hemp , and I agree with the Commissioner .
I also agree with premiums to cattle , with the increase of 7.7 % and 7.5 % for Spain and Portugal respectively , which is quite right , since it was approved back in 1996 .
It is a bit late , but at least it has arrived .
On the tobacco question , having listened to the honourable Members , this is opening up the debate again between the people who are wrongly labelled as environmentalists or agri-environmentalists .
But what really worries me , and what I would like to stress to the Commissioner , is that Commissioner Flynn said in this House not long ago , during the last part-session , that he would spare no effort until subsidies to tobacco producers had been suspended .
It really worries me , Commissioner , that a Commissioner said that on behalf of the European Commission .
I do not know if it was said in a personal capacity , but he cannot say that , or at least it is not acceptable for him to say that in this House on behalf of the European Commission , when the subsidies to European tobacco producers are legal and provided for by the rules of the European Union , as part of the aid given to EU farmers .
So , Commissioner Flynn should be reminded of his obligation to put things right on that score .
If we want to create jobs at the moment , here we have 400 000 jobs and 130 000 direct producers .
So notwithstanding any comments we may be able to make about improving quality , agri-environmental measures and so on , if we want to improve this crop we cannot be directly opposed to it , when it represents only 5 % of EU tobacco consumption .
Mr President , Chairman of the Council of Ministers , Commissioner , I congratulate Mr des Places on a clear report that depicts excellently the effects of the EU 's agricultural pricing and aid policy on farmers ' income .
The Commission 's pricing package proposal will cut farmers ' compensatory prices and aid by 2 % .
The introduction of the euro at the beginning of next year will bring with it a further 2 % cut for agriculture .
Last year income from agriculture fell by 3.1 % .
I agree with the rapporteur 's insistence on maintaining a pricing package to be made yearly under the terms of Agenda 2000 .
It must not be taken away under any pretext .
By means of this package we can moderate the losses to farmers in aid and compensatory payments stemming from changes in currency values or other factors .
As we do not yet know how strong the euro will be , there must be systems for reducing the damage it may do .
The rapporteur proposes keeping pricing and compensatory payments in line with inflation .
I support this proposal .
EU agricultural policy presents a sad picture form the point of view of the farmer .
Income from agriculture has declined continuously , and it is still falling with the reforms in the Agenda programme .
How much longer will the farming community tolerate the immense inequalities among population groups which the CAP is increasingly leading to ?
While other people are getting income increases , the farmers are losing money .
There are elements of a serious crisis in this policy , and I cannot therefore support it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be brief . We must support the report by Mr Rosado Fernandes , and in particular , the 28 amendments adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
As I have said many times before in this Chamber , the European Union is a net importer of nearly 70 % of the tobacco it consumes .
That is why we support the principle of production subsidies . May I remind you that tobacco-producing areas are mainly situated in less-favoured regions , and tobacco growing is extremely labour-intensive .
However , our group has tabled five amendments , as we are opposed to the principles of the cultivation contract auction scheme tying the producer to the first processor and the creation of a quota buy-back system .
Mr President , the COM in tobacco must continue and must enable the European Union gradually to become self-sufficient .
Tobacco consumption must regularly decrease and production must continue to be limited to a constant tonnage of 351 000 gross tonnes of European tobacco , between the proposed new COM and the present COM .
Mr President , the COM in tobacco should be treated using the same general criteria as govern the rest of CAP production . There is no basis for extremism , or different or unfair treatment compared with the other CAP products .
Also , at a time when the EU 's main priority is employment , it would be very inconsistent to fail to take account of a crop like this , which is very labour intensive and provides jobs for women .
We cannot on the one hand state that we are giving priority to jobs and then , when it comes to making concrete policies , ignore that principle .
So I think it would be a very good thing if all the proposals relating to this COM had to take account of the impact on jobs .
This reform has to favour young farmers in the most depressed areas of the EU .
I agree that we have to be able to reconcile protection of public health and the environment , but we also have to reconcile the social burden and the social consequences of this product .
Commissioner , we must also improve the management of the research fund , because it has been doing very badly so far .
Reduced tobacco production in Europe does not result in less consumption , by any means .
The result is simply that the European Union will have to buy this product abroad .
I also think it is right to make the reform more flexible and progressive , to the benefit of the producers . And I think it is good to be bold when it comes to investigating new uses and varieties of tobacco .
Guarantees of work and income have to take account of the producers . We must prevent their income from falling , otherwise we would be forcing them - not giving them the choice , Commissioner - to abandon the sector .
I also think it is right that quality should not just be interpreted on the basis of commercial prices .
Mr President , I agree with the persons who have said that this procedure is now a bit meaningless .
In the MacSharry reform we were offered maintenance of incomes from agriculture and , at the same time , stabilization of the rural population .
As we can see today this has not materialized .
In this decade we have already lost 25 % of people engaged in agriculture and incomes have dropped by around 20 % .
Therefore any improvement in the position of individual farmers has come at the expense of employment in the sector .
The situation in Ireland is even worse because of our high dependence on beef and sheep meat .
As Jim Nicholson stated , the situation is exaggerated in Northern Ireland and the UK because of the strength of sterling and there is a new and very obvious reluctance by young people to embark on agriculture as a career .
This procedure is fairly meaningless because , taking into consideration the budget constraints together with the GATT decisions , we have very little capacity to influence the price that farmers can obtain for their produce .
This annual procedure should be looking at the state of the agriculture industry , its long-term viability , recognizing that our share in world production is becoming ever reduced .
While the market is becoming bigger , Agenda 2000 does not give us any more of a strategy than we had in the MacSharry reform to exploit these expanding markets and maintain the long-term viability of European agriculture .
Mr President , the Commission proposal concerning the tobacco market is governed by the idea of quota buy-back and , naturally , there are no proposals for improving quality , as Mr Fischler has said .
Moreover , that is why he has rejected all our amendments which make provision for and promote improvement in the quality of European tobacco .
The logic of wiping out tobacco growing in less favoured regions will have enormously negative economic , social and political consequences in those regions .
Mr Fischler , you know as well as I do and as well as all of us here , that in those regions it is not possible to grow alternative crops .
That is why , traditionally , inhabitants have been cultivating tobacco there for hundreds of years .
There is the argument that tobacco is associated with damage to health .
Indeed , but we still do not know just to what extent smoking plays a part in health issues and , secondly , there are other products that can cause health problems , such as dairy products .
I have not heard you put an end to the buying of dairy products because they raise cholesterol levels .
Do you know how many heart attacks are due to dairy products ?
Above all we must understand that even if we put a stop to European tobacco production , smoking will continue in Europe .
And I believe that behind this anti-smoking campaign is hidden the attempt of large companies to import cheap tobacco which is of lower quality than European tobacco .
I would like to say to you that the latest statistics from the United States show that the way in which the campaign is being conducted - this American hysteria which has now inundated Europe - , instead of reducing smoking , is increasing smoking among young people .
Let us not create conditions like the prohibition in America .
Let us remain Europeans , in other words let us act in moderation .
I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Fernandes , because I believe that his report is along the right lines .
Mr President , overall I agree with the direction given by the two rapporteurs , whom I thank for the job that they did , and would like to make two brief comments on the two reports - one on wine and the other on tobacco .
As far as wine is concerned , and specifically regarding the amendments that have been presented - which Commissioner Fischler says will be difficult to accept because tomorrow there will be the organic reform of the wine sector - I would just like to stress the importance of the problem .
In the prices package these past two years , I myself presented a proposal aimed to renew the regulation on replanting and grubbing up .
Generally speaking , a certain balance has been found on the market ; now it is time to fine-tune the mechanism .
In my view , management has to be regionalized in such a way that this market balance is found in all the major producing areas .
On tobacco I only want to say one thing : since I have seen that there are amendments - probably based on good intentions - aimed to cope even with any restructuring and reconversion of production , let us try not to be demagogic in our statements .
There are areas that earn a living by growing tobacco .
Myself , for example , I live in an area , lower Veneto , where people earn their living growing tobacco , and this is the case also of the region of Venezia and the province of Verona .
So , before we start talking about restructuring , let us see what the alternatives are , otherwise we will be acting like demagogues .
Mr President , I must say I find the results of Mr Rosado Fernandes ' work on this report rather disappointing .
Instead of a progressive report innovatively probing how to improve the reform of the tobacco sector , what we have is a report reflecting old-fashioned thinking , proposing massive support for tobacco cultivation and sustaining farmers in utterly untenable production .
As if that were not bad enough , the rapporteur also strongly emphasizes the need to support young farmers to enable them to take over production .
That is simply laying the groundwork for bringing a whole new generation into the trade so that for many years to come , the EU can continue producing poor-quality tobacco that can only be peddled with the backing of hefty EU subsidies .
I searched the report in vain for any support of the Commission 's excellent initiative of buying up quotas from farmers wishing to leave the sector .
I searched in vain for new thinking on how to support and educate farmers in these vulnerable areas in how to switch production to non-hazardous products .
Further , I find it most regrettable that the rapporteur did not wish to give more financial support to the research fund .
How else is the research fund supposed to function effectively ?
Or is it being muzzled intentionally ?
Mr President , I must say I am most disappointed with this report .
Mr President , this is the third proposed modification to the COM in raw tobacco in a very short time .
Three reforms in five years are enough to define this situation as an unresolved crisis .
The measures implemented , especially the subsidies regime , have allowed the maintenance of crops and the survival of the sector , but have not resolved any of the structural problems .
Europe 's tobacco-producing regions are among the least developed in the EU , and no new job opportunities have been found as an alternative to the work provided by tobacco growing .
The only alternative to growing raw tobacco is unemployment , in regions which are already suffering the highest unemployment levels in the EU .
In this context , Commissioner , I think your proposal is the best one possible , although it may not tackle some of the basic problems affecting the sector , as is clear from Mr Rosado Fernandes ' report .
Because of all this , Commissioner , we are going to vote in favour of your proposal .
Mr President , the report on tobacco is an opinion on the Council 's proposal for certain changes to the market for raw tobacco .
These changes are aimed , among other things , at certain quality issues .
However , the overriding question of the justification of subsidies is not taken up .
This is quite remarkable considering the debate about the harmful effects of tobacco and the ban on tobacco advertising which Parliament decided on a month ago .
In fact a majority of Parliament 's Members considered the problem to be so great that it justified disregarding the requirements of the EU 's system of rules .
The opinion from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection proposes , among other things , that subsidies from the EU budget for tobacco production within the European Union should end no later than the 2006 harvest .
This objective has also been expressed in Amendments Nos 37 , 55 , 65 , 66 and 67 . These proposals deserve full support .
There is no doubt that it is irresponsible to spend public money , European taxpayers ' money , in order to subsidize the growing of a product which does so much harm .
After all , tobacco is responsible for the deaths of half a million people in the EU every year .
The amount of subsidy has been around ECU 1 billion per year , or ECU 7 500 per grower .
This casts a dark shadow over all other support systems in the EU , a shadow which could be lifted by a decision on abolition - an abolition which must of course take place in a socially acceptable way .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I agree with the proposal for greater integration between production and processing in farm prices in the case of the hemp sector .
In the case of tobacco , I would like to point out the difference in style between Commissioner Fischler and Commissioner Flynn .
Commissioner Flynn definitely had less style in this House when he became very agitated , even gesticulating - it was not very clear what he wanted to emphasize - , and was extremely wrong in his opposition to the reform of tobacco .
I do not believe it befitting for a Commissioner to behave in this way when the decision has been made by all the Members of the Commission .
As for tobacco , a lot has already been said on quality and employment .
I would like to raise a few points .
I believe that it is important , Commissioner , that the Commission prepare a specific communication for the Parliament regarding the annual 5 % quota set for research .
We consider it important that the Parliament be informed how the research fund is being used : that means having not only the figures but also an analytical presentation of the results of this fund .
I agree with the idea of modulating the premium and consider it a useful proposal .
It seems to me that the modulation of the premium should be linked to employment , quality , but I would like more information about environmental constraints .
I consider it a good idea , for example , to increase aid to associations from 2 % to 5 % . They could use it especially to improve quality and particularly to develop environmental themes which are very , very important in this production .
I believe that modulation should also take into account new production techniques , but not to the detriment of the important obligation of keeping people employed , given that if the European Union spends so much on tobacco , it does so especially because it has a major obligation to maintain jobs in the many regions that have very serious problems of employment .
I am referring to the Mediterranean regions and also to some of the regions in Italy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I rise to justify the position of the Committee on Budgetary Control on the reform of the raw tobacco sector described in the Rosado Fernandes report .
Our committee thinks the proposed reform presented by the Commission is acceptable , although we want to introduce a series of amendments , mainly aimed at strengthening Parliament 's role in the reform procedure for this sector .
We think the right way to achieve that stronger role is through a procedural change , from Article 23 to Article 43 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
This question of comitology , which the Commissioner has said he will not support , would guarantee that the Commission had to listen to and take account of the political positions defended by this Parliament in all aspects of this reform , particularly regarding the maintenance of a quality Community tobacco production .
We also regret that the Commissioner does not want to accept this procedural change in other reforms either .
In any case , we think the position adopted by ourselves and the rapporteur , Mr Rosado Fernandes , is rather more realistic and appropriate to the general problem of Community production than the position expressed , for example , by the draftsman of opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
In any case , the road to reform is open .
I think we should involve the European Parliament in the defence of farmers and tobacco producers .
Mr President , Parliament has made a decision to ban tobacco advertising .
We have also made a decision to ban indirect tobacco advertising .
We give support to campaigns to encourage people to give up smoking .
We also give support to research to combat the harmful effects of tobacco on health .
However , the biggest support we give is to the growing of tobacco , a crop which claims hundreds of thousands of lives every year in the Union .
Throughout the world , many more people die from tobacco than from Aids .
That does not make sense .
I know I speak on behalf of all Swedish Members and with the agreement of all the Swedish people when I say that this policy must come to an end .
The subsidies cannot be justified on the grounds of employment or on the grounds that someone else would have produced the tobacco .
By the same logic we could just as easily subsidize the production of nuclear weapons , or of biological and chemical weapons .
The fundamental issue is not an economic , but a moral one .
The Union 's citizens do not want to finance the growing of this harmful crop .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Agenda 2000 : Economic and social cohesion
The next item is the report ( A4-0219 / 98 ) by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the reform of the common agricultural policy ( Agenda 2000 - Part One , Chapter III ) ( COM ( 97 ) 2000 - C4-0522 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the object of this report is to provide the European Parliament with a set of general principles which can be used as a reference framework for the sectorial reports to be approved later on .
In that respect , as rapporteur I should like to underline a few fundamental points :
Firstly , the real world of European agriculture is not limited to the small number of farmers who can export without receiving refunds .
We must be more careful over price reductions and continue our interventions regarding beef and olive oil , notwithstanding the Commission 's proposals .
Secondly , the reform of the CAP cannot be limited to reducing guaranteed prices and offsetting them against productivitylinked direct aid .
The Commission 's proposals must be amended in that respect , because they represent a fundamental analytical error .
That error consists of starting from the principle that all farmers are on an equal footing in the face of the external threats arising from the GATT , which is not the true situation .
Now we all know that the less specialized , more peripheral , more extensive , less productive agricultural systems , and in general those in the less favoured mountain , arid or Arctic areas , start at a major disadvantage and will be the first victims of the globalization of agricultural markets if the CAP does not grant them the minimal response they need to survive .
Thirdly , this justifies our reinforcing our horizontal measures and the aid we base on territorial areas , the environment , forests , the diversification of the productive fabric of the most highly-dependent agricultural regions , animal and vegetable health , and aid related to employment and the less favoured areas .
Now , the proposal on rural development is clear enough but it should nevertheless ensure the achievement of that object and it is , in fact , a long way from doing so , in view of the sparseness of the financial resources provided .
The Commission quite rightly calls that rural development policy a ' second pillar ' .
But we shall not have a pillar if we keep quiet ; it will be no more than a stem or a cane , unless the Commission substantially alters this aid scheme .
Fourthly , I think the Commission 's proposal for the direct financing of the rural development policy is the right one , because this will make it possible to improve the internal consistency of the CAP and prevent double standards and different responses to different kinds of farmers .
For that reason direct financing should also apply to rural development in the regions mentioned in Objective 1 .
Fifthly , although the question of extension is not in dispute , we must realize that farmers have real fears and apprehensions , in view of the enormous number of reforms and changes they have gone through and the wide present and future implications of GATT .
For that reason , and also for the sake of clarity and openness , I think finance for all pre-accession measures , whether agricultural or not , should appear under a separate heading , distinct from all our common policies , and should only be integrated as each country becomes integrated .
Sixthly , although every productive sector of agriculture has its own peculiar characteristics , the fact that direct production aid only goes to those sectors which enjoyed high levels of protection in the past is causing more and more problems for social and political cohesion .
The truth is that some cultures , such as Mediterranean culture , for example , have never been protected by the price system in the past and are therefore not getting the benefit of income assistance now .
In the long term this is an untenable situation which will force the European Union to think about systems based on other factors than just set-off for price reductions in the future .
If this is not put right we shall in future be creating a kind of agricultural apartheid with some cultures entitled to direct aid and others excluded from it .
Seventhly , it is becoming a fundamental requirement that , in the spirit of the Amsterdam Treaty , the CAP should contribute to the economic and social cohesion of the European Union by creating a basic balance between forms of production , territories and farmers , as indeed has been declared by the Ministers of Agriculture and at the December summit itself .
Finally , and as my eighth point , it is important to emphasize that the Commission must take the coming negotiations on the future of the GATT very seriously .
It has now been proved that Europe is in a unique situation based on multi-functional agriculture and the family-sized nature of its operations .
Its average farm size of 18 hectares is not in the same league as that of its competitors in the world markets , whose average size runs into hundreds of hectares .
We must not compare two things that are totally disparate , nor must we fall into the trap of following other people 's interests .
Apart from that , the rules of fair trading must cover such important matters as consumer sensitivity , environment-friendly practices and respect for human rights and basic freedoms .
Finally , I would encourage the Commission to take into consideration these guiding principles which I have suggested and which I hope Parliament will approve .
If it does , we shall at last have a balanced common agricultural policy that is capable of treating farmers fairly in the future .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , CAP reform is a key element of Agenda 2000 .
On that subject , may I underline at the outset the essential need to build an open , constructive dialogue between the Council and Parliament on these issues .
Such a dialogue , taking place within the requirements of the Treaties , can only benefit everyone involved .
It can only help the common good .
It will allow each institution to collaborate with the other so as encourage both to play their part fully in the decisions .
On CAP reform , the Agriculture Council has already made a successful start , with the Commission 's proposals having been put to a special Agriculture Council on 31 March .
The Council has acknowledged the need for reform in order to establish a clear direction for the development of European agriculture .
We need this not least in order to take on board the forthcoming enlargement of the Union .
There are also the challenges posed to us by the forthcoming World Trade Organization negotiations .
Let me be quite clear about this .
We have no alternative but to plan ahead now to meet these challenges which we know will face us .
We have already begun this important process .
The Council has identified several key issues which will need to be addressed in the next phase of the negotiations on the Commission 's proposals .
These include the need for and appropriate extent of cuts in support prices and the timescale over which any such cuts should be achieved , the appropriate nature of compensation for such cuts , the conditions under which Member States may exercise discretion with regard to agricultural support , the future role of production constraints such as milk quotas in a reformed CAP and the appropriate balance of support between production sectors , producers and regions within the Union .
Finally , there is the question of development of the rural economy and protection of the rural environment including multifunctional agriculture .
As well as addressing the need to reform individual commodities , the Council has welcomed the Commission 's proposals to address the wider problems experienced in rural areas throughout the Union .
Agriculture is , indeed , an important part of rural Europe but it is only one part and we need to look at what can be done on a European level for rural communities and areas as a whole .
The Council has , therefore , established a clear framework for the next phase of the negotiations on the Commission proposals .
These key issues are currently being put to Heads of Government in Cardiff as we meet to discuss them here in Parliament .
Detailed work will continue in the remaining weeks of the UK presidency and then continue under the presidency of our Austrian colleagues .
The key to success will be to balance effectively the interests of the Union 's consumers and producers and the needs of the environment in promoting a sustainable versatile structure for European agriculture .
That structure needs to be robust enough to meet the challenges I have illustrated and to compete effectively on the world stage .
Madam President , I should like to state straight away that , in general terms , the Committee on Budgets agrees with the report presented by Mr Cunha .
Obviously , we would have preferred our amendments to have been definitely accepted but , in fact , there are not too many contradictions .
Indeed , I think there is more agreement than anything else .
However , as far as the Committee on Budgets is concerned , there is a basic question mark over all Mr Cunha 's proposals : is there money or not ?
Paragraph 36 asks for increased funding and , frankly , in the Committee on Budgets we have to say we think that request is premature . And when I say premature , I mean what I say .
We are not saying it is not justified .
We are just saying that at the moment it seems premature .
That is why we asked at the time , in the December resolution , that a clause about the revision of the financial perspectives be included , in order to deal with this additional need should it arise .
We believe , as Mr Cunha rightly said , that the main aim of the CAP reform - or CARP , including rural policy - is not to make savings , but to improve the policy .
The fact is that since 1988 there has always been a systematic saving - between the ceiling of the first category and the agricultural budget - of the order of ECU 1000 million to ECU 1500 million per annum .
Furthermore , the budget has always exceeded the implemented spending .
That is why we are cautious .
But I can assure you , were we to see problems approaching , we would support the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development in seeking to obtain that extra funding .
In paragraph 57 , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development considers that enlargement costs should remain outside the guideline but , in our opinion , that contradicts what we said in December : that the agricultural costs of preaccession and enlargement should be covered by the guideline .
In that way , we think EAGGF and the agricultural policy should really form a fund which is part of cohesion policy and not , as people have started saying , an anti-structural fund .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wonder whether there is any point in having draftsmen of the Committees ' opinions , if the Council speaks before hearing them .
I shall however report to you on the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy .
The reform of the common agricultural policy which is proposed in Agenda 2000 raises a large number of questions and some concerns .
There is a fear that rural regions will suffer under this reform .
There is more at stake than just agriculture , important though it is .
The challenge is to achieve a balanced development of the countryside , which manages to avoid large-scale emigration from rural areas , and all its attendant problems : depopulation of whole regions and the growth of already overpopulated conurbations , which are more and more insatiable where Community funds are concerned .
However , the importance of rural development for balanced management of the countryside and the preservation of both the natural and cultural heritage and the specific characteristics of the fisheries sector and the financing needs of the Common Fisheries Policy require the creation of an independent sub-objective specifically dedicated to ' rural areas ' and ' maritime and coastal areas ' , within the new Objective 2 .
The fact that the new EAGGF regulation brings together all the measures for the development of rural areas is useful , provided that the EAGGF continues to finance only actions directly connected with agriculture , together with coastal and maritime areas , which must not be forgotten .
It is also necessary for the Commission to put forward firm proposals to link agriculture with its local region : local products , labelling , etcetera .
As well as improving quality , this would help us to safeguard against unfair competition from countries with low wages and without welfare protection .
Our ambition should be to enable the harmonious development of agriculture and craft industries , and to promote complementary activities such as rural tourism and direct sales of produce .
We can thereby provide ourselves with the means to bring the countryside , which is threatened with depopulation , back to life , and to maintain a dynamic rural environment throughout the fifteen Member States of the Union , in accordance with the intention expressed at the recent Luxembourg Summit .
This means that we must continue the actions undertaken under the current Objective 5a , in order to encourage young farmers and fishermen to invest and to set up , and also to facilitate the processing and marketing of agricultural and forestry products , and to facilitate the development of mountain regions .
These are some of the concerns expressed by the Committee on Regional Policy , which Mr Cunha and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development were kind enough to incorporate into the body of the report .
I should therefore like to thank them .
Thank you , Mr Pinel .
You are asking about the point of the debate . If the Presidency of the Council ...
Are you listening ?
You are not listening !
Then I do not really need to say it , but I wanted to point out that the Commission , Mr Pinel , will speak at the end of the debate .
Madam President , the Committee on Fisheries unanimously adopted the conclusions I proposed in the opinion intended for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
The latter also confirmed these conclusions .
However , on behalf of my group , I have tabled two amendments which revise the conclusions of the opinion on the basis of the Commission 's latest proposals .
A horizontal regulation specific to the fisheries and aquaculture sector incorporating all the measures of the former Objective 5a seems indispensable , as in the case of the proposals relating to rural development .
What is the point of the Common Fisheries Policy if it is no longer applicable throughout all the Member States , and does not include the areas which are not eligible under the new Objectives 1 and 2 ?
If we implemented the Commission 's present proposals , the CFP would amount to no more than a number of technical constraints upon our fishermen and a policy of destruction of fishing vessels .
This would mean moving in the direction of those who see the CFP as a transitional system , a mere prelude to the complete liberalization of the sector , whereas the aim and the justification of the CFP was to support the fishing industry in all the Member States with coastal areas .
The Committee on Fisheries therefore asks the Commission urgently to propose a horizontal regulation for fisheries which , like rural development , should be financed by the EAGGF and entered in the budget under the agriculture guideline .
The fisheries sector requires a limited volume of credits , but they are of great importance , whether they are required in coastal or maritime areas , which are vulnerable , or in rural areas engaged in mainland aquaculture .
We were all deeply shocked by the total absence of the word " fisheries ' in the initial version of the Commission 's communication Agenda 2000 , as if the European Union had no coastline .
Realizing its mistake , the Commission presented to us a draft incorporating the coastal and maritime areas in the new Objective 2 .
This is a step in the right direction . It is nevertheless inadequate because all the fishermen in the European Union operate within common areas , and it would be particularly inappropriate if the rates of aid implementing the Common Fisheries Policy were to vary from 0 to 75 % depending on the home port of each vessel .
Madam President , I would like to acknowledge the fine work that Mr Cunha did and say how useful it is for the next stages .
However , greater conviction could have perhaps gone into seeking a clearer and more effective compromise , because this resolution has too many points .
This also recalls the need to have stricter rules in Parliament 's work so that we do not always end up with interminable documents in which a few good things of substance get lost in a sea of repetition and obviousness .
I cannot see how this gives us a better picture .
If the aim of this own-initiative report is to condition relations on the sectoral aspects of Agenda 2000 , its success will not , however , depend only on the excellent rapporteur , Mr Cunha , but I believe to a great extent on our future work .
We will therefore have to see whether all together we can use this text as a starting point and advance with a coherent plan to reform the CAP .
The first signs of discussion in the Council of Ministers , Mr Cunningham , do not augur well .
At a time when all talk is about the World Cup , we are still passing the ball back and forth and not scoring any goals .
There is agreement on the laudable definitions , like the European agriculture model , multifunctionality , competitiveness , rural development , but as soon as the focus shifts from statements in principle to concrete facts major differences emerge and everything is engulfed in the sea of special interests , with the risk of seeing a very long shopping list .
We Socialists see two risks .
The first is that the entire debate will be conditioned by the price guarantees of market policy and by their exclusive nature .
In this case , rural policy would still remain the weak pillar of the common agricultural policy , despite the Cork Conference and the commitment of the Commissioners .
Instead , as we stated at a conference in November , structural policy must increasingly become the key policy in agriculture , with emphasis on investments in various sectors , quality and the regions .
If the market is to grow in importance and traditional protections are to decrease in importance , the real market policy sustainable in the future is structural and rural policy .
The second risk is that all the problems with the horizontal regulation of the CAP - modulation , the definition of a maximum amount , cross compliance - will end up being a lost opportunity .
At a time when subsidiarity is all the rage , we believe that it is a mistake to confer total responsibility for such important matters on the Member States , a choice that some would think too courageous but that in reality shows , I think , the little courage on the part of the Commission to take on decisions at European level that are in keeping with what has been said repeatedly and what public opinion is calling for , a public opinion increasingly attentive to what is happening inside the black box of the common agricultural policy .
Madam President , I have only two comments on the Cunha report .
Firstly , it is a good report .
Why ?
Because Mr Cunha has succeeded in achieving a sensible , mutually beneficial co-existence between current position papers by the parliamentary groups and future reports on the production sectors within the framework of Agenda 2000 .
Furthermore , the rapporteur has kept to the recommendation by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development not to go into detail in his report , which did not , however , prevent him from - rightly - making the opinion of the Committee quite clear on the focal points of the future Agenda 2000 .
Secondly , the protagonist in the Agenda 2000 discussion is price reductions in exchange for more or less sufficient compensation , Commissioner .
We can debate it as we wish but there has to be some guarantee that farmers do not derive their incomes solely or substantially from compensation but that they can participate in the market more than before .
This is exactly the point that affects our voters , the people who put us in this House and who , not being farmers , increasingly fail to understand this system of financing .
But have our voters ever asked why production price reductions - undertaken , for example , in the MacSharry reform in 1992 - never filtered through to the consumer ?
What will be the effect of the future Fischler reform , to give another name to the agriculture part of the Agenda ?
Commissioner , will bread prices fall ?
Cereal prices are to be reduced by 20 % , after all .
Will beer become cheaper ?
A delight to all aficionados of this drink , as the percentage of cereal in this lovely product is by no means insignificant , and the price of cereals is being reduced !
Will meat become cheaper , given the planned 30 % price reduction ?
What about the price of butter ?
Last but not least , the price of compound feedingstuff in animal feeds should become cheaper .
Will we be able to expect this ?
If this were the case , our voters , who are not only concerned with agriculture , would certainly have greater understanding for European agriculture .
But they will have to be able to see it in their wallets when they go shopping .
Then European agriculture would be a great deal more credible !
Madam President , firstly , I would like to offer my congratulations to Mr Cunha , who has worked with a great deal of enthusiasm on this report .
To use a Dutch idiom : we had the impression that you ' felt like a fish in water ' .
The Commission is putting three arguments forward for the Agenda 2000 proposals .
Firstly , if we do nothing we will have overproduction once more .
Secondly , we must prepare for the coming WTO negotiations .
Thirdly , we must prepare for the accession of the central and eastern European countries .
As far as I am concerned , and as far as my group is concerned , we think the third point is by far the most convincing .
Maintaining peace and security in Europe is worth paying for , and the agricultural sector will also have to pay for this , just like other sectors in the European economies .
My group therefore supports the Agenda 2000 proposals in principle .
The prices in Eastern and Western Europe should gradually start to converge , and this means that in our part of Europe the prices will have to fall .
We believe that compensation should be awarded for this price reduction . In contrast to the Cunha report , we believe this compensation should also apply to specific products , such as milk .
In addition , and this concerns a different policy , an active rural policy will have to be pursued .
I believe this policy is not controversial , and we also support it .
There is another aspect besides compensation for price reduction . In our opinion , the development of new markets is decidedly missing .
Much more could be done about the quality of agricultural products .
How can consumers easily recognize this quality ?
I hope to make concrete proposals to Parliament about this later in the year .
Another omission from the Agenda 2000 proposals concerns proposals in the sphere of agrification .
This can only be effective if the Commission pursues an effective policy by making the use of certain products compulsory .
This does not concern subsidies or excessive subsidies , but simply saying that a certain product originates from agriculture , that it is good for the environment , and that is why we should be required to use it in a major way .
This can be an effective new market for agricultural products .
I should like to recommend this .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , I would like to congratulate Arlindo Cunha on his excellent work , resulting from his experience as the Portuguese Minister of Agriculture and also as the erstwhile President of the Council of Ministers of Agriculture , at the time of the MacSharry reforms .
We are obviously at the stage where , after its initial pride in the child it has brought up , called the CAP , the European Union has become ashamed of that child and now treats it as though it were illegitimate .
The truth is that attacks on it in the world market , by American criticism , by Fortress Europe , by the Keynes group and by all the groups whose historical situations are very different from ours , including the United Kingdom itself , have naturally made Europe ashamed of the CAP it created and which it now considers to be an illegitimate brainchild .
That is the situation we are in and it is that situation which my honourable friend Mr Cunha is at least trying to improve .
It attributes importance to young farmers , to territories and territorial differences in fertility and climate throughout Europe , it attributes importance to something no-one has previously thought important ; on the other hand , it places great emphasis on the expression ' rural development ' , which I would rate less highly , because I know it is almost a utopian vision to aim at rural development based on agriculture .
Rural development has to be effected in competition with services and industry - that is my experience in Portugal - and I , of course , have never seen agriculture bring about any development in any region whatsoever .
Let us be honest about that !
I also appreciate the fact that Mr Cunha has drawn up the report with one eye on the GATT .
But I would have liked the Commission at least to have thought a little .
When the price reductions come , apart from the green box and the blue box , which black box will the redundant farmers of Europe be put in ?
I would like to know the number .
Madam President , first of all I should like to thank Mr Cunha for his excellent report .
This report can be no more than a first approach to the reforms contained within Agenda 2000 .
Nevertheless , it has a very important added value because it has done work that the Commission should have done , given that the job of proposing legislative initiatives wrongly belongs to the Commission .
Before addressing the principles of Agenda 2000 , Mr Cunha 's report presents an analysis of the defects of the 1992 CAP reform .
In attempting to tackle a new CAP reform , we first need to analyse the faults of the earlier one .
However , the Commission has not done this .
To my mind , that is one of the great merits of the Cunha report .
In trying to perform an in-depth study of the principles of the 1992 reform , none of the institutions can allow themselves to ignore its effects , which were negative in many cases .
We cannot ignore the huge number of farms which have disappeared , or the effects on the social fabric of the rural environment and land use .
We cannot ignore the enormous destruction of agricultural jobs , especially when our policy formulations make job creation one of the political objectives of the European Union .
Nor can we ignore the fact that the 1992 reform exacerbated all the imbalances already present in the CAP .
There has been an increase in the extent to which aid is concentrated on a few farmers . The budget has become even more concentrated on a small number of common organizations of the market , while Mediterranean products receive less funding , and are subject to proposals which entail their virtual dismantling .
If the Cunha report had gone no further than this , that would still have been quite a lot .
It gives a political signal that with Agenda 2000 we are playing with fire .
The European Union must understand that it is on the point of taking a wrong turning .
If we were to add the collateral structural policy proposals , with the new role for the EAGGF Guarantee section in the rich regions , we would be faced with a loss of geographical concentration and a loss of cohesion in the rural zones .
So we need to thank Mr Cunha once again for all his efforts , and other institutions need to understand that European construction cannot be carried out by means of abstract formulations or experiments .
The European Union also needs to demonstrate its true weight in settings such as the World Trade Organization , where its stance has most often been one of passivity and renouncing its own position .
Madam President , Mr Cunha has presented a very good report .
My group will support him .
He has made it clear that in the past this intervention system led to great disparities and injustices among producers , countries and regions , and that it had a destructive effect on jobs and the quality of food .
As I said before , Mr Fischler , a policy of price reduction within the intervention system leads to farms being excluded , and is fatal for farms and regions which are sensitive in their production and do not belong to the favoured sectors .
Here we must make a radical change .
We must move away from the intervention system and instead move towards an integrated development of rural areas , as is intended in the second pillar of Agenda 2000 .
It is essential here that we offer a structural policy on a horizontal basis as in many areas we cannot sustain a policy of price reduction or a departure from the intervention system without regional markets being strengthened .
This would lead to the destruction of further jobs .
For this reason , we must be able to compete in terms of quality as a matter of urgency , Mr Fischler , and this should also apply to production in the world market .
Those who wish to produce for the world market may do so , but they should do so without state aid !
This would lead to an increase in prices on the world market , giving many farmers in Third World countries a chance once again to secure their livelihood by producing food for their countries and regions .
If we continue to dump to the tune of millions , this development will constantly be destroyed and it will result in social and ecological dumping .
I would like to mention external protection briefly .
This is , on the whole , confirmed by the parliamentary groups and I hope that the Commission will keep to its plan of also protecting regional development within the EU by protecting against external social and ecological dumping .
This would also help to stabilize the situation in the world market , which in turn would benefit those countries that are weakest in terms of agricultural production .
Madam President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree that our agricultural sector must be capable of contributing towards the expansion of the world market , whilst preparing for enlargement and the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
We all agree that the distribution of subsidies must be improved , taking into account the multifunctional characteristics of agriculture .
We applaud the Commission 's stated intentions , but tremble at the proposed solutions , based mainly on the so-called inevitable trend to liberalize trade , resulting in a general decrease in prices , and with the development of raw materials on the world market as our only aim .
The competitiveness of European agriculture must not depend upon a single parameter .
The quality of products , their processing , their suitability in terms of international demand and dynamic commercial policies , as well as low prices , are capable of increasing our export potential .
We do not need a smaller budget , we need a better budget .
We need a redirected budget to support the European agricultural model which Mr Cunha described so well in his report , a model which reconciles the necessary economic aims of agriculture with the requirements of public health , product quality , the environment , land use , rural development and aid to young people .
That is the model on which the strengthened CAP should be based , without opening the door to its renationalization . Community preference must be incorporated , and we must not forget that we have a production deficit in some product areas , such as oilseed proteins , citrus fruits , fish and wood .
We should not put the cart before the horse , and we must not give up before we begin .
We shall be in a much stronger position to negotiate the CAP in the face of the WTO 's demands if we reform the CAP beforehand in accordance with our objectives .
Let us not underestimate what is at stake .
The CAP reform and Agenda 2000 represent a choice we have to make for society .
It is we politicians who must take responsibility for this .
I should like to thank Mr Cunha for reminding us of this .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur on the Commission 's communication Agenda 2000 , I asked the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to draft an own-initiative report on the common agricultural policy reform , and I am delighted that the task was entrusted to Mr Cunha .
Indeed , within the framework of a very limited budget , Agenda 2000 proposes the reform of two of our most important policies : the common agricultural policy and the structural policy .
At the time , I was struck by the Commission 's purely budgetary approach in its proposed reforms of the COM for arable crops , cattle and diary products .
The specific features of European agriculture were not taken into consideration , and in its determination to get into line with the international agricultural model , the Commission failed to define a true European agriculture model which took into consideration the specific nature of our rural development and land use .
The report originally submitted to us by Mr Cunha was a good report .
The many amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture have made it much less coherent , and in places it even has a slight bias towards the sort of ideology which disregards the fact that above all else agriculture is an economic activity .
To conclude , Madam President , let me give an example : if we want European agriculture to continue , young people must enter agriculture .
The only real policy which will encourage young people to become farmers is to offer them an economically profitable activity based on an agricultural policy which is visible in the medium term .
What attitude will the European Commission have when the forthcoming WTO negotiations start in June 1999 ?
A strategy of attack has yet to be defined , and the agricultural policy reform proposed by the Commission does not take that important international deadline into consideration .
On the contrary , it wants to give farmers partial compensatory aid to compensate for price reductions , in the knowledge that such aid is limited within the current framework of GATT regulations and that our fellow citizens do not understand what it is for .
Madam President , this morning we discussed olive oil , agricultural prices , tobacco ? this afternoon , we will discuss bananas .
Thanks to Mr Cunha 's excellent report , we can respond to this third reform of the CAP proposed by Mr Fischler .
We have had Sicco Mansholt 's CAP , based on prices and incomes .
As a result , we have lost 12 million farmers , which makes Sicco Mansholt the Pol Pot of agriculture .
We have had the 1984-1992 CAP , with stabilisers , quotas , maximum guaranteed quantities ? which was a failure .
Only yesterday evening , we were informed that stocks of cereals had increased to 14 million tonnes .
And now , we have a third reform , which rather reminds me of " The Leopard ' by the Italian novelist Lampedusa : everything must change in order to stay the same .
The reasons are the same : in 1992 , we had to prepare for GATT , in 1998 , we have to prepare for WTO .
It is estimated that 21 % of the complaints addressed to the WTO are about Europe , and more than one third of the complaints come from the United States .
The system is also the same : it is still Malthusian and budgetarist .
It is Malthusian because of its price decreases , set-asides , sale of foods on the international market and savage cuts ( of vines , for example ) , and budgetarist , with its petty accounting and rationing , even more stringent now that we have the magic amount of 1.25 % of GDP to finance both pre-accession and accession .
In reality , the technical questions raised by Mr Cunha , relating to non-food use , the decoupling of production aid , product quality , ceilings on aid and safety , and so on , mask a real choice between two models , American or European , as Mr des Places , Mrs Barthet-Mayer and many others have said .
The keyword in the American model is " intensive ' .
In the United States , agriculture is a combination of chemistry with the added mystique of genetically modified organisms : nitrates , herbicides , pesticides , fungicides , and now GMMs .
The keyword in the European model is harmony .
Harmony between producers and family export businesses . Harmony in production areas , in the south - tobacco , wine , fruits , vegetables , olives - and in the north , resulting in a range of products which gives the consumer harmony in health , thanks to the quality of products , harmony between the mountains and the plains , aesthetic harmony , ecological harmony and mental harmony .
Minister , harmony in agriculture would mean fewer British hooligans in Marseilles .
Obviously , the consequences of the American model are well known in comparison with our own : soil destruction , ground water pollution , contamination , mad cow disease and alienation . Monsanto and Pioneer , in the name of patent rights , even want to transform American farmers into workers who no longer have the right to re-use seeds .
So we must first of all protect the European model , if we wish to defend it against the archaic American model .
We must use Community preference , the essential heart of Europe , to protect it .
Without Community preference , there is no Europe .
We must protect it by keeping prices high , which will help to maintain high income levels .
We must protect it by improving the quality of our products and by increasing their added value , which justifies high prices and the exportation of our model .
Exporting our model does not mean aligning ourselves with world prices , by decoupling production aid ; it means providing export aid as the United States does within the scope of FAIR legislation , which maintains export credits , particularly for the benefit of the Ukraine , Egypt , Russia or South Africa .
Finally , Commissioner Fischler , we must defend the European model during international negotiations .
You are European Commissioner for Agriculture , not Under Secretary of State for Agriculture of the United States .
Madam President , I too should like to congratulate Mr Cunha on the work he has done and , especially , on the arguments put forward in his report .
I think his work shows that the Agenda 2000 document is tremendously unbalanced .
It is very clear and very radical in certain approaches , specifically as regards prices . Nevertheless , it is very unclear as regards additional measures .
Specifically , it is very radical on price reductions , which are compensated partially rather than fully , as before .
It is also very radical in giving equal aid to all crops without taking their differences into account , which could mean the end of sunflowers .
On those subjects , the Commission document is tremendously clear and radical .
However , in other aspects the proposals do not display the same decisiveness .
As has already been said , it gives the impression that the only reason for this new reform is the demands of future WTO negotiations .
But the document says nothing about the future of European agriculture .
As has also been said several times , we want this agriculture to fill Europe 's land and continue to play an environmental and social role .
There is no mention of the need for the CAP to respond to criteria of economic and social cohesion , or the need to guarantee a balance between crops , farmers and land . To give a negative example , we need only remind ourselves that the budgetary imbalance means that southern crops and continental crops receive different protection .
In the same sense , what role do we really want the aid to have ?
From this point of view , the horizontal regulation does not clarify things much .
As regards rural development , I do not think the approach taken in Agenda 2000 comes anywhere near meeting the hopes raised by the Cork Conference .
It seems that in the future we shall not be able to count on a real , properly integrated , truly multisectoral , adequately funded rural policy , which is capable of alleviating the problems presented by Agenda 2000 's lack of balance .
Madam President , my colleague Mr Cunha had the task of writing a report concerning a number of horizontal problems in the agricultural proposals of Agenda 2000 , and of providing a long-term view of these problems .
He succeeded in this , and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also added important insights on a number of points .
At the same time , this vision of the European agriculture model offers the framework for future policy on the agricultural integration of Eastern Europe .
For the citizens in their capacity as consumers and tax payers , it also justifies why such agricultural and rural policy must be pursued .
But the report is , of course , global .
It does not analyse , for instance , which measures should qualify for EU funding and which for co-funding .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has yet to work out this horizontal problem together with the Committee on Budgets .
The report tries to create a balance between competitive agriculture and the necessity to support areas and groups which , because they occupy a more or less permanently disadvantaged position , need a larger income .
Yet the notion of profitability for farms has perhaps retreated too much into the background .
If prices are reduced to below the cost price of the most efficient farms , then the compensation for these farms must be in proportion to their productivity .
Otherwise they will also disappear , and this surely cannot be what the common agricultural policy intends .
Therefore , the section of the report on dairy policy has been carelessly formulated , and as such is unacceptable .
On the issue of linking environmental stipulations to direct payments , the report rejects the Commission proposals for national criteria .
Still , we shall find out that it will never be possible to formulate environmental stipulations at the EU level for all EU regions .
The reality will force us into the direction of greater subsidiarity .
Moreover , this offers a better guarantee that EU farmers will not be saddled with more rules and bureaucracy .
Madam President , Commissioner , I think that Mr Cunha has managed to move a number of goal posts , which was much needed .
He has broadened and deepened the debate , and this is something we should continue , because I believe that otherwise we will not be able to cope with the next WTO negotiations .
It is my view that at the next WTO negotiations we should not raise the issue of product amounts with linked price support , but rather issues such as food quality , environmental demands and social criteria .
I am therefore pleased with Mr Cunha 's proposals that we should ultimately aim for decoupling production aid .
In this context I would like draw the Commissioner 's attention , although you are undoubtedly familiar with it , to the Buckwell report , which contains a number of interesting proposals for switching over to decoupled aid .
Perhaps the report requires a little more attention from the Directorate-General of Agriculture than it has been given until now .
Madam President , I believe that the Americans with their FAIR act will most certainly take over a section of the global market , and that we have not progressed as far with our system .
They also give a certain type of aid .
We will therefore have to think a lot more creatively about this aspect .
To conclude , Madam President , I would like draw attention to rural development .
The demographic data show that in large areas of Europe , the rural population is continuing to move into the city .
We will not be able to stop this migration with agricultural policy alone ; it requires a broader rural policy , as well as the resources to develop this policy .
For this reason I look forward to the actual implementation of the proposals which were developed in Cork .
Madam President , I should like to congratulate Mr Cunha .
He has produced a very objective report .
All of us in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development very much appreciate his work .
The recent proposals issued by the European Commission to reform the common agricultural policy must indeed be substantially changed , from an Irish perspective .
Unless the proposals are extensively amended many marginalized Irish farms will come under pressure and some may not survive .
Such a development would have serious consequences for the socioeconomic infrastructure of rural communities .
The Commission proposals as they stand now , if implemented in their entirety , would have the following detrimental effects on Irish agriculture .
Firstly , in relation to the discrimination in the share-out of the milk quota , Ireland has a very legitimate claim in relation to additional quota .
The proposals which do not provide for full compensation would have devastating effects on the Irish beef sector .
In Ireland , as everybody knows , beef and milk represent 71 % of our entire agricultural output .
The proposals , as they stand , would result in income reductions for Irish farmers , destabilize the structure of family farms , dissuade young people from taking up farming as a profession and would lead to continued rural depopulation .
We must remember that , in comparative terms , agriculture is nearly three times as important to the Irish economy as it is to the EU as a whole .
In 1997 the common agriculture policy was worth £ 5.1 billion to the Irish economy .
In the context of the Agenda 2000 proposals price reductions can only be supported if they are accompanied by full payment to farmers so as to offset the effects of the proposed price reductions .
The direct payments being proposed by the Commission are not adequate and must be addressed before we can agree .
In conclusion , the CAP reform proposals are unacceptable to Ireland because they are not balanced , they do not protect the interests of Irish farming and they do not enhance rural development .
Madam President , I hope the European Parliament will adopt Mr Cunha 's excellent report .
In doing so , it will express an opinion on the reform of the CAP , and will also express the reaction within the agricultural sector against the Commission 's proposals .
Commissioner Fischler , the Commission has not learnt any lessons from the 1992 reform , which has increased job losses in agriculture and rural areas , exacerbated inequalities in the distribution of Community funds , kept agricultural incomes down to 60 % of the average wage , and caused imbalances in land use .
Worse still , the Commission continues to confine itself to a doctrine of price decreases and productivity races , which threaten jobs , social , environmental and regional stability , and the independence and quality of food .
As the rapporteur emphasized , what agriculture and European society actually need is a CAP reform which offers a real alternative . It must fundamentally redirect a number of measures , consolidate the European agricultural model and enable agriculture to face the new challenges ahead of society , in the areas of employment , food , energy , the environment and water supply .
How can we do this ?
What tools must we use ?
The rapporteur correctly reminds us that prices and markets policy must be based on the three traditional pillars of CAP , particularly Community preference .
And he makes proposals for the future . One such proposal relates to the basis of agricultural income , which must be derived essentially from the production and sale of agricultural products .
By prices rather than subsidies .
He raises the question of ceilings and the adjustment of subsidies on the basis of criteria which promote employment , and for the same purpose , a readjustment between northern and Mediterranean production areas .
He proposes that the definition of international commercial relations should be based on clauses relating to production costs and environmental , social and employment standards .
He even refers to the question of the principle of rural exception , which must set down the limits to globalization in the sector .
This report provides an excellent basis for discussion and suggests alternatives to the Commission 's proposals .
It will be of benefit to the farmers and people of Europe , and the Council should take inspiration from it .
Madam President , I would like to add my thanks to Mr Cunha and congratulate him on a very excellent report .
It proves beyond any shadow of doubt that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which sometimes comes in for tremendous criticism from Members in the Committee on Budgets and elsewhere can , on occasions , come forward with very constructive reports .
As we are all aware , the report looks towards enlargement of the European Union and the WTO discussions - the whole Agenda 2000 process .
It will have a very long-term effect on agriculture and as we have known it within the European Union .
There are a number of points I wish to make .
It is important that we ensure that the existing family farm structure of the European Union is protected in order for it to survive .
Member States are extremely enthusiastic about enlargement , but at this moment the Council in Cardiff is probably trying to cut back the contributions to the European Union .
On the one hand they want enlargement while , on the other hand , they are not prepared to pay for it .
They cannot have it both ways .
Member States are going to have to face up to that principle no matter what approach they take .
We must have a longer transitional period and extend the time before enlargement .
One other point I want to make very strongly : we must not allow the renationalization of the common agricultural policy as we have known it .
I am very concerned at the proposal for national envelopes because I believe that will bring inequalities between Member States .
Indeed , there is the whole problem of additionality , which we have seen in the past .
Personally , I would like to see Parliament and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development fully involved in the whole Agenda 2000 process .
Madam President , my honourable friends , our colleague , Mr Cunha , has in fact presented a report which we can approve .
However , we will see that problems will arise when it comes to details .
As you all know , it is easy to agree on general issues but we all have different views when it comes to specific details .
With regard to the Commission 's address I would say that the Commission 's proposals in Agenda 2000 are definitely a move in the right direction .
But they are flawed .
The proposals rely too heavily on product-related subsidies .
Anyone who now persists in ignoring the pressure for change in the area of agricultural policy and the opportunities of Agenda 2000 by introducing half-hearted reforms or changes , will receive his just deserts from life , the WTO and the enlargement process .
For this reason I believe we must concentrate .
The so-called second strong , sturdy leg or the second pillar , as the Commission says , in policy for rural areas is a very narrow support to which a heck of a lot of flesh has to be added .
What we need in this reform is help to adapt farms to the markets .
This can only be done by means of quality of products or quality of production , and not by means of quantity .
Those who still place too much importance on going to market with huge quantities will discover that we are putting ourselves under pressure .
In the WTO negotiations we , the EU , must set the conditions and not allow them to be dictated to us by the Americans or the Cairns Group .
We need to promote employment in rural areas .
We need to meet unmet demand in a harmonious and well-balanced system of environmentally sustainable production .
In this area , the Commission 's proposal remains inadequate .
And it is not right for the European farmers ' associations to be telling the same tales of woe as they did two years ago .
At that time the common agricultural policy was supposedly on its way out , but this was not the case .
Nor will it be in future .
But we can lose out - that is , if we only make a few minor changes instead of carrying out real reform .
We will now suspend the debate on agriculture .
The debate will continue at 3.00 p.m.
Votes
We cannot support Mr Pimenta 's motion to reject the proposed accord with the USA .
This is not because the agreement is the best it could be , but because it is better than the alternative .
The alternative to the accord with the USA is not some other agreement with better standards .
The Council 's earlier decision on banning leghold traps implies that an import ban could be introduced , but that is basically all it provides for .
The resolution on banning leghold traps is very limited ; it applies to only 13 of the 19 species covered by the new agreement ; it does not ban the use of leghold traps , only the import of furs ; most significantly , the resolution only covers this one particular trapping method .
In our opinion , it is hypocritical to focus on this one trapping method , however barbaric , while traps in use within the EU are no less cruel .
That - and not more stringent requirements for traps - is the alternative to the agreements with Russia , Canada and now also the United States .
I fully endorse the views of our rapporteur and wish to make it plain that I totally disapprove of the agreement between the European Community and the United States on so-called " humane ' trapping standards . These do absolutely nothing to prevent cruelty to animals .
I believe that it is high time we put an unconditional end , I repeat , an unconditional end , to the use of leghold traps , which inflict terrible suffering on millions of captured animals indiscriminately .
Furthermore , this agreement does not go nearly as far as the agreements with Canada and Russia , which many of us considered inadequate when we were consulted .
Indeed , I consider this to be a step in the wrong direction , both from the legal point of view ( with regard , for example , to the method of settling possible disputes ) and in substance ( I refer in particular to the increase in the time period ) .
It is unfortunate for animals that our competence in this matter is only consultative . We know that in all likelihood the Council will ignore our opinion and approve this proposal .
But this should not prevent us , as a Parliament , from loudly and clearly recommending the rejection of this unacceptable agreement !
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of the Pimenta report urging the Council to reject the proposed accord with the USA .
However , we must admit that we find ourselves in a dilemma .
We do want to find alternatives to leghold traps .
Leghold traps are cruel to animals and must be banned .
The difficulty is that political efforts mainly focus on doing away with leghold traps in areas where wild animals are trapped by people who rely heavily on trapping .
Political efforts are even touching on the enormous number of leghold traps used in the EU to keep ' pests ' at bay .
The logic appears to be that if a woman wants to wear the animal 's pelt as a fur , then it must not be caught using a leghold trap , but if the animal is regarded by humans as not very attractive , then we can do what we like to it .
In the EU , we use thousands of traps to catch animals that are not very highly rated among animal lovers : rats and water voles .
Moreover - to a positively hideous extent - international negotiations on this matter have been so long-drawn-out , have been manipulated so much and have produced such poor results that the whole exercise ought to be done again .
In weighing up the one factor against the other , we have come down on the side of supporting the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection in its rejection of the motion , even though we do not endorse a hypocritical majority in the House who would like to hit the earning potential of native populations while failing to see the beam in their own eyes ( to put it mildly ) .
Council Regulation 3254 / 91 laid down provisions whereby third countries wishing to export the furs or associated products derived from 13 species should either have prohibited the use of leghold traps within their jurisdiction or ensure that trapping methods used meet internationally agreed humane trapping standards .
Although this Regulation was adopted some years ago , it is not always implemented .
There is a simple reason behind this : a threat by Canada and the United States to take the issue to the World Trade Organization , if the ban is enforced .
The Commission has now presented to us a draft bilateral agreement between the European Community and the United States .
Like the rapporteur , our group rejects this agreement .
Once again , it reflects the tropism of the Commission , bending before the United States and Canada 's determination to refuse the introduction of environmental clauses within the framework of the WTO .
If the agreement were enforced , it would furthermore create a situation verging on the grotesque . In fact , the European Union could continue to import furs derived from animals captured using leghold traps , whilst at the same time refusing to use the same type of trap to destroy animal pests in its own territory .
In fact , in wetlands in particular , great damage is done by animal pests with no market value , such as nutria , to dykes and ditches , which have to be repaired at considerable cost by local authorities and marsh associations .
It would be more logical if we adopted exactly the opposite stance instead of the Commission 's proposal : for animals which have a market value , it would be logical to use the most humane traps .
However , in order to eradicate animal pests , which have no market value , it would be preferable to use the cheapest and most effective traps .
I have no option but to vote against the agreement drafted with the USA on humane animal trapping standards .
It is simply not tough enough on the cruel leghold traps which so many of my constituents naturally oppose .
The author of this report has rightly concluded that millions of defenceless animals will suffer the painful death caused by leghold traps for years to come as a result of this agreement not going far enough to ban them .
The view of our citizens in the EU , not only in nations traditionally known for their love of animals like the British , has been set out in the statutory obligation of the European Commission to ban the import of furs caught in these cruel traps wherever practical .
I trust that trade considerations with the USA will not be used as a reason for not continuing the push for better standards in animal traps .
We are the largest trading block in the world 's history and it is time that the EU 's negotiators used our influence to get a better deal for animals in these kind of international agreements .
If the deal is not good enough , then they must go back to the talks table until it is .
Girão Pereira report ( A4-0178 / 98 )
We voted in favour of the Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol establishing the fishing possibilities and the financial compensation provided for in the Agreement between the EC and the Government of the Republic of Guinea on fishing off the Guinean coast for the period from 1 January 1998 to 31 December 1999 , for the following reasons :
1.We think there is a very positive improvement on the previous protocol as regards controls on fish stocks and the corresponding allocation of financial resources to local scientific and technical programmes and to methods of supervision and control of fishing activities.2.We think the renewal of the Protocol - maintaining previous catch levels for practical purposes , but significantly increasing the amounts of financial compensation - will make it possible to reach a compromise between the need for Community fleets ( Spain , Greece , France , Italy and Portugal ) to continue to have access to local resources , supplying their own raw materials , and the obvious need for less developed countries to increase their financial profits .
We only hope Community owners ( and particularly Portuguese owners , who will be entitled to catch 200 grt a year of shrimps and send two surface longliners to Guinean waters ) will make better use of the opportunities created for them.3.We must , however , express our doubts over the fact that the Community fleet will have access to Guinean waters outside a 10-mile limit when its vessels should only have access outside the usual 12-mile limit .
Similarly , we have doubts about the period specified by this Protocol - only two years , and therefore less than in most EC agreements of this type - which will not provide sufficient operational stability for the Community fleet .
Our group is speaking today on this report relating to the fisheries agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Guinea , in order to highlight an essential aspect of Common Fisheries Policy .
At the last Fisheries Council , a ban was adopted on the use of 2.5 km drifting gill nets in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic .
I strongly opposed this decision , which was adopted without any scientific basis . It deprives fishermen and coastal areas of an economic activity essential to their survival .
May I remind you that this decision is even more unacceptable because in order to obtain the Council 's agreement , the Commission maintained the use of 21 km drifting gill nets in the Baltic , although an international regulation established by the UN recommends a limit of 2.5 km .
Let us return to the fisheries agreement with Guinea . What do we have here ?
This agreement provides fishing possibilities for 33 freezer-seiners and 13 pole-and-line tuna vessels .
Pursuant to international law , these vessels may if they wish use drifting gill nets .
What is the logic behind this according to the Commission ?
As a defender of the principle of controlled resources , and supporter of professional fishermen , I cannot fail to very strongly condemn these absolutely scandalous contradictions in the Commission 's attitude .
The Commission should restrict itself to ensuring compliance with international regulations which permit the use of drifting gill nets . It must stop using false excuses in order to enable fishermen from one specific Member State to snatch the market shares of other Member States , by the artificial means of banning a type of fishing gear .
If a drifting gill net of limited length is environmentally acceptable and not detrimental to resources , it must be acceptable for all fishermen , in every sea and every ocean .
All of the fisheries policy which is based on the Community buying fishing rights from the poor countries of Africa is wrong .
Therefore we cannot support it .
In addition , the proposal before us from the Commission entails an increase in aid compared with before .
Apart from the reservations on principle , you should also ask whether the aid which the EC pays to Guinea really benefits the poor population of the country .
It is worth remembering that Guinea is not a proper democracy , which makes you wonder where the money actually ends up .
Trakatellis report ( A4-0192 )
In our opinion , it is of course appropriate to revise the provisions on genetically modified micro-organisms on an ongoing basis as new knowledge is acquired in this relatively new area of research .
We believe it is particularly important to safeguard high safety levels , and this is one of the aims of the report .
However , we have been obliged to abstain from voting on a number of amendments .
This is largely because lay people cannot pretend to comprehend the content and consequences of these proposals .
We feel it is questionable to allow such complicated , technical issues to go to the vote when people have no real hope of understanding them .
The common position adopted with the Council at the end of the first reading provides a framework for the restricted use of genetically modified micro-organisms , and safeguards the interests of Member States .
The 35 amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection broadly take up the amendments presented during the discussion of the proposal at first reading . The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations is unable to support either the amendments which aim to prevent Member States from reinforcing minimum environmental protection regulations , or those which are likely to make the proposal unenforceable , by trying to establish too high a level of precision .
The important amendments include a proposal to change the legal basis from Article 130s to Article 100a . This proposal is unacceptable as it stands , because the directive does not establish rules relating to the harmonization of the internal market ; it establishes minimum environmental and public health protection regulations , which Member States must be able to reinforce if necessary .
The directive does not , in fact , regulate the movement and marketing of genetically modified micro-organisms , but only the conditions of their use in contained facilities .
Another important point ( Amendments Nos 4 and 9 ) makes it compulsory for operators to obtain insurance cover for the contained use of GMMs .
This provision is out of place in this document , because operator liability should be governed by general rules at the European level and by specific rules in the Member States .
This document must not be used as an excuse for an indirect attempt to reform insurance legislation .
The wording of most of the amendments ( Amendments Nos 2 to 14 ) is more accurate and appropriate in the common position than in the initial document .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection seems to have taken great pleasure in amending the document in such a way that it has become too complicated to adapt to technological change and unenforceable as it stands .
On the other hand , our group supports all the containment provisions proposed in Amendments Nos 15 to 35 because , unlike the preceding amendments , they are more appropriate than the common position .
Finally , our group supports Amendment No 36 tabled by the Green Group , which provides for a better description , and therefore better knowledge , of the GMMs used .
des Places report ( A4-0216 )
We think the Commission 's proposal is better than the draft report from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We are voting against the proposal to increase prices and so we cannot vote for this report .
We are particularly opposed to hemp , wine and tobacco .
It is our opinion that there needs to be a proper reform before 1999 .
The Commission proposals for the 1998 / 1999 prices package rely on the availability of limited funds for the common agricultural policy and , according to the rapporteur 's report , will lead to a reduction of approximately 2 % in prices and compensatory payments in real terms .
Also , this reduction will in all probability be accompanied by a further 2 % reduction with the disappearance of the green ECU and the introduction of the euro .
According to the rapporteur , European agricultural income as a whole fell by 16.4 % in real terms during the period 1990 / 96 , and the rural population decreased by more than 2 million people .
The continuation of price-fixing and compensatory aids for the thirteenth successive year can only be expected to lead to a further reduction in the number of farmers , while incomes in European farming will continue to fall .
The proposals for the 18 Council Regulations are simply a roll-over of existing provisions , with some exceptions which are necessary for clearly legal reasons or to fulfil Council obligations .
They do not tackle the problem of farmers ' incomes and their continued employment .
They cannot come about through our vote .
This year 's proposals are basically a roll-over from last year 's prices .
This would superficially imply that the situation in agriculture is fine .
Nothing could be further from the truth in relation to Ireland .
Irish farmers are experiencing major problems , particularly in the beef sector .
The BSE crisis , the reduction in export refunds and licensing and additional problems relating to access to third country markets have all contributed to the problem .
A roll-over indicates a complete absence of a policy direction on the part of the Commission .
Farmers need to know in what direction the Commission intends to take them over the next decade .
They need a clear indication of a well-thought-out Commission strategy .
What is needed is the development of proposals which have as their objective the revitalization of rural economies , including the agriculture sector .
We take a negative view of the Commission 's adoption of an agricultural prices proposal in line with its policy of maintaining some sectors and reducing others , such as arable crops .
In our view , even for those it maintains , this always represents an actual reduction in agricultural prices , because it fails to take inflation into account .
On the contrary , we would like to see agricultural prices updated to allow for at least a 1.7 % rate of inflation , at the EU level , as a way of guaranteeing the farmers ' income .
We also regard as extremely negative the fact that once again there are no changes or revisions for the common organization of the markets in the Mediterranean countries on the grounds that they have not yet been reformed .
In that context we find it unacceptable that no set prices have been fixed for olive oil , with the clear strategy of prioritizing the need for rapid approval of the new draft regulation under discussion .
Although we consider the proposal for the extension of new plantations for special-quality vines to be a positive step , we would reject at the outset a strategy that continues to support the abandonment of viticultural land , because of the importance of viticulture to southern countries , especially Portugal .
In the same way , we reject proposals to allow the blending of different musts and viticultural products , because they will encourage the sale of poor-quality wine and cause consumers to be defrauded .
We voted against the report because , amongst other things , we are opponents of the EU 's agricultural policy in general on the grounds of its high costs and , not least , its unfair distribution which favours big farmers .
This policy area should be returned to the Member States as soon as possible .
In addition we consider it to be particularly inappropriate for Parliament to decide on price levels in a market system for agricultural produce .
However , we voted for the setting up of a vineyard register , which , remarkably enough , there has not been in spite of continuous reports of abuse of Community funds in the wine sector .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations is extremely satisfied with the quality of the report and the amendments proposed by Edouard des Places .
However , we regret that the Commission has shown such a lack of imagination and has presented such a predictable prices package .
We are nevertheless pleased that in response to the amendment we tabled asking for the set-aside rate to be set by the end of this month , that is , for a decision on the set-aside rate to be adopted at the same time as the prices package , the Commission has proposed a new regulation applicable to the forthcoming agricultural year .
However , at this stage , the Commission 's proposals are totally unrealistic .
That is why my group has tabled two amendments , one asking for the withdrawal of the extraordinary set-aside , that is , the application of a penalty depending on the required set-aside rate , and the other asking for an obligatory set-aside rate of 5 % instead of the 10 % proposed by the Commission .
As well as supporting all the amendments proposed by the rapporteur and adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , my group has again tabled amendments in the House proposing a 1.7 % increase in institutional prices , which aim to reduce the effects of monetary erosion on farmers ' incomes .
It is quite unacceptable for anyone to think that production costs in agriculture are not affected by inflation .
We have already criticized the fact that a constant level of prices and aid has been established in the Commission 's proposals on Agenda 2000 for a period of seven years .
Would it be acceptable in any other profession for income to fail to be indexed to price increases ?
I personally do not think so .
Finally , my group was pleased to see that the Committee on Agriculture adopted Mr des Places ' proposed amendments regarding the creation of an adjustment coefficient with a view to maintaining equitable levels of income between farmers in all Member States of the European Union in order to compensate for serious drawbacks resulting from the possible disappearance of the green rate on 1 January 1999 for the Member States participating in the single currency .
Defenders of the euro claim that it will naturally be of benefit to farmers , as it will put an end to competitive devaluation , as well as the budget for agri-monetary measures .
This overlooks the particularly serious consequences for farmers of the disappearance of the green rate entailed in the transition to the euro .
In France , for example , the difference between the green rate and the financial rate is in the region of 2 % : there will therefore in fact be a further 2 % decrease in institutional prices and aid , from 1 January 1999 .
Thanks to the rapporteur 's amendments , a European Parliament document will highlight an important weakness in the euro .
Should farmers , whose opinion was not sought , have to bear the cost of the transition to the euro , which has been introduced for ideological reasons ?
Thanks to the work of Mr des Places , Parliament will be ready to issue an opinion during this part-session . This will enable the Council , during its meetings on 22 and 23 June , to define the general legal and regulatory framework applicable to our farmers , thus allowing them to adopt decisions in full possession of the facts .
Rosado Fernandes report ( A4-0218 / 98 )
Madam President , it is ironic that the European Union heavily subsidizes tobacco while , at the same time , it tries to fight against cancer and also educate people about the danger to health of smoking .
What it should do is get rid of subsidies .
It is an absolute disgrace that the other members of the Commission would not support Commissioner Flynn on this .
It is one of his most positive proposals and it is disgraceful that the Commission will not support his attempts to get rid of tobacco subsidies .
Every year over ECU 1 billion of taxpayers ' money is going to subsidize something which is detrimental to public health and which has a detrimental effect in countries around the world where there is no proper regulation to ensure that smokers are aware of the dangers of smoking .
The European Union is extremely wrong in subsidizing something which shortens the lives of its users .
The tobacco industry and tobacco growers have to realize that they will have to turn to alternative crops .
One ironic aspect of this report is that they are trying to push for alternative types of tobacco .
There is no alternative type of tobacco which is not dangerous to health and it is ridiculous to promote the idea that there is .
The Commission should support Commissioner Flynn on this matter and get rid of tobacco subsidies in the interests of public health and of consumers .
As tobacco consumption has harmful effects on the health of users , it is absurd for public subsidies to be given to tobacco production .
In the vote on this report we are supporting the amendments which will phase out tobacco subsidies .
If these amendments are not adopted , we will vote against the report in its entirety at the final vote .
We have finally started a thorough debate on the vital changes necessary in some specific areas of the COM which face particularly strong competition from other continents .
I therefore share the opinion of the members of Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development who have adopted the Rosado Fernandes report on tobacco .
We have an opportunity today to endorse the need to provide support in this sector according to the quality of the product and to reconsider the problem of subsidies between tobacco-producing countries in the south and north .
We must find a permanent solution to this problem .
Tobacco produced in the north cannot continue indefinitely to be the subject of discrimination in comparison with southern varieties .
Why do we confine ourselves simplistically to defending the interests of our countries of origin , depending on whether or not they produce tobacco ?
Substantial support will be of benefit to the whole of this sector , which has made a consistent effort for many years to improve quality .
We must remember that tobacco , with 135 000 producers and 400 000 seasonal jobs , is a great rural employer .
Even if tobacco were no longer cultivated in Europe , this would not reduce the consumption of cigarettes , as some Utopians would have us believe .
We must therefore insist upon the enhancement of all high-quality tobacco products , including those produced in northern Europe .
We must acknowledge their value because there is a market demand for them and their production costs are higher .
As well as this type of encouragement , the results of research , particularly genetic research , need to be more widely distributed .
New plant improvement programmes must also be implemented which reflect the progress achieved in other areas .
It is now possible to produce tobacco which is less harmful to human health .
Let us work positively in that direction .
By banning tobacco advertising , the European Parliament recently took a balanced decision to protect the health of young people .
We must now continue along the same lines , by approving the provisions of the Rosado Fernandes report .
The Commission plans to create a quota buy-back system , the stated aim of which is to decrease the volume of tobacco produced in Europe gradually .
However , it is wrong to pursue such an aim when tobacco imports from third countries are so large .
May I remind you that the European Union is the largest importer of raw tobacco in the world , with a self-sufficiency level of no more than 30 % .
Moreover , the intended system will not help to modernize production methods or enable young farmers to set up .
This policy is therefore contrary to producers ' interests .
However , within the framework currently imposed on French producers , Mr Rosado Fernandes ' report defends positions which are the lesser of two evils . We therefore have no hesitation whatsoever in voting for this report .
In light of the detrimental effects of tobacco on consumer health , we cannot subscribe to maintaining or increasing EU support for the production of raw tobacco .
We believe all forms of official support for tobacco production should be phased out .
Out of consideration for the tobacco producers , this should be a gradual transition over a short period of time to allow tobacco producers to switch to other crops or trades .
In my opinion no subsidies at all should go towards tobacco growing within the EU .
Since none of the proposals before us are aimed at an immediate decision of that kind , I have voted for Amendment No 66 ( which means a rejection of the report in its entirety ) and against the final adoption of the report .
Otherwise I have voted neither yes nor no .
At the May plenary session we agreed to ban tobacco advertising .
This decision was consistent with EU health policy .
However , the subsidization of tobacco farming is clearly in contradiction of the EU 's Treaty obligation to protect the health of our citizens .
I regret that the Commission rejected the proposal to phase out subsidies in 1996 and instead opted for reform proposals .
The 1994 report from the Court of Auditors on the issue concluded that the abolition of tobacco subsidies would lead to considerable budgetary savings without destroying the livelihoods of tobacco farmers .
For these reasons and to be consistent on health grounds , I have supported the amendments put forward by Mr Collins and others from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
The tobacco producing sector illustrates all the contradictions and hypocrisies of society .
Tobacco is a poison and a drug .
The fight against cancer is dependent upon the prevention of addiction to tobacco .
As medical research has identified one of the causes of one form of cancer , we have a moral obligation to deal with the problem at its source .
We do not have any other alternative .
But the tobacco industry provides jobs and incomes for many families , and experience has shown us that prohibitions are useless as they only lead to fraud and increased criminality .
What we must do is to work in gradual stages :
Europe has without hesitation adopted costly and difficult solutions in order to reduce agricultural surpluses and prevent the depopulation of rural areas .
Europe must also find the courage to solve this problem .
This does not mean we have to choose between protecting jobs or health ; it means we have to protect health and ensure the redeployment of jobs .
We in the Green Group consider the fact that the EU has a system of tobacco subsidies to be quite wrong and that it sends out the wrong signals to the general public about smoking tobacco .
Not very long ago the European Parliament approved the Council 's proposal to ban indirect tobacco advertising .
The European Parliament has also expressed the view that tobacco is a danger to health which must be taken very seriously .
The Green Group shares these points of view and was instrumental in getting the European Parliament to make these decisions .
The risks of smoking are considerable .
We must therefore work to get people either to stop smoking or not to take it up in the first place .
At the same time it is a fact that the EU gives substantial subsidies to the growing of tobacco within the EU , currently around ECU 1 billion per year .
In our view , this double morality is totally absurd .
We are therefore working towards achieving an end to these subsidies as soon as possible .
It would of course be best if these subsidies were phased out over the next few years . It would be best for those who currently grow tobacco and it would send out the right signal that the EU takes the tobacco issue seriously and is working towards a reduction in smoking .
The conversion premiums which exist to enable tobacco growers to grow other crops must be encouraged and given a larger budget .
At the same time the budget for subsidies to tobacco growers should be reduced .
Some people claim that these conversion premiums are of no help because tobacco is the only crop which can be grown where tobacco is currently grown .
That is just political rhetoric and not a serious argument because growers get larger subsidies for tobacco than for other crops .
Conversion to other crops must be intensified and made more attractive .
The Green Group 's objective is a complete end to subsidies for tobacco growing .
When the common organization of the tobacco market is reformed , the emphasis must not be put on the harm tobacco causes to health , because if we do that we shall have to start by prohibiting the importation of tobacco , of which there is a severe shortage for the European curing industry .
Questions of public health should be dealt with elsewhere and in other ways , within the context of education and prevention .
When the sector is reformed , the emphasis should , on the contrary , be placed on the direct and indirect employment which the sector provides , particularly in the most backward areas of the EU , many of which have no alternative crops to produce .
Or , after that , it should be placed on the very important contribution which tobacco growing makes to the struggle against increasing rural desertification .
When the sector is reformed , priority should be given to measures aimed at improving the quality of the product , and there have been and are clear proposals by the European Parliament in that respect .
When the tobacco sector is reformed , we cannot deliberately promote and encourage - as the Commission 's draft regulation does - the total abandonment of tobacco growing without creating credible alternatives , but quite the opposite . We should be creating conditions in which production can be maintained and new generations can follow the present growers , especially with young growers coming in .
We are worried that the Commission is ignoring - on an increasingly systematic basis - all the opinions and strategies relating to this reform that have repeatedly won majority votes in the European Parliament .
I am voting in favour of the report that has just been presented to us for three main reasons .
Firstly , this report makes a clear distinction between the issues of tobacco production and the prevention of smoking , because they are not directly connected with production in the Union , which only covers 30 % of consumption .
Secondly , the report rejects all the amendments relating to the withdrawal of production aid , thereby defending the principle of Community aid for production , jobs and associated activities . It promotes improved quality , greater coherence between supply and demand and , within that framework , proposes to reinforce professional organization and increase the payments for some varieties .
Finally , although this report presents voluntary reconversion measures , it does not support quota reduction measures . On the contrary , it proposes to assist young farmers to enter this sector .
However , I do not support the idea of increasing the amount withheld from the payment allocated to the Community Fund for Tobacco , for the prevention of smoking . It means that tobacco producers would take the blame for , and bear the cost of , an activity for which the whole of society is responsible , despite the fact that the Fund is also used to finance research into cultivation methods .
Finally , I share the concern expressed in the report on the consequences of enlargement of the Union . I call for appropriate measures to defend the interests of producers , inasmuch as the internal market offers great potential for the development of production and jobs in this sector .
Consistent action is imperative in politics .
This is why I cannot accept European provisions on tobacco growing .
Recently the European Parliament approved a directive banning the advertising of tobacco products .
I endorsed this ban with conviction : tobacco advertisements are directed mainly at young people in the knowledge that nicotine addiction mostly takes hold in youth .
The result is 548 000 tobacco-related deaths per year including 654 in Luxembourg .
We cannot ban tobacco advertisements while at the same time subsidizing tobacco growing .
Yet this is exactly what the Union is doing by guaranteeing an annual production of 350 600 tonnes of raw tobacco and spending approximately ECU 1 000 million on it .
Admittedly , the system was improved considerably by reducing the quantity ( by 24 % over just 4 years ) and by means of subsidies for relinquishing arable land .
However , it remains to be seen whether or not control is at an optimum level .
I welcome the relative reduction in subsidies and the reconversion measures which must not , however , lead to abandoned land being taken over .
Yet I am of the view that there is a significant contradiction between health policy ( for which very little EU money is available ) and the promotion of tobacco growing , which , moreover , is of very poor quality in Europe .
For these reasons , I cannot approve the report .
We voted against the proposal because it will not solve the issue of the tobacco growers ' dependence on extensive EU subsidies in either the short or the long term .
The proposal does not contain any reduction in financial support for the tobacco sector . Nor does it take into consideration the serious consequences tobacco growing has for health and environmental protection .
Our group supports all the amendments proposed by the rapporteur and adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , because European tobacco production must be allowed to continue .
The aim of a large number of amendments tabled by our British colleagues is to withdraw all European aid from tobacco production .
We are naturally opposed to this , because the European Union is a net importer of very large quantities of tobacco .
Tobacco is also mainly produced in disadvantaged regions , and it is therefore necessary for tobacco production , which is very labour-intensive , to continue in order to protect jobs .
However , my group has tabled five amendments . Their main aim is to reject the Commission 's proposal to create a quota buyback system .
This system will not only lead to a reduction in the quantities receiving production aid and , therefore , to a decrease in European tobacco production , it will also do nothing to help modernize production and it will prevent young farmers from setting up in this area .
This system will also have the adverse effect , in the medium term , of giving quotas a financial value , which will create a further financial burden on producers .
It could in fact lead to quotas being considered as assets , whose value would be based on the quota buy-back value .
On the other hand , we have proposed the creation of national quota reserves to maintain the production capacity of Member States , and to contribute towards the financial stability of existing or new farms .
This would also prevent the appearance of any additional costs created by quota values .
May I remind you that a national reserve system already exists in other production sectors , such as sheep , cattle and milk .
My group has also tabled other amendments to the Commission 's proposal , with regard to the cultivation contract auction scheme between the producer and the first processor .
We consider that this is a very restrictive measure , which forgets that the tobacco production is a specific , very highly organized sector , in which distribution and processing are carried out by a small number of multinational or national companies .
I cannot back the Commission proposals for the future of the European tobacco sector .
I am amazed and angered that after all the recent progress in getting tobacco giants to admit that their products cause diseases such as cancer , we have a proposal to keep using public money to subsidize tobacco producers !
Is this a crazed method to keep our hospitals busy with new patients ?
What exactly is meant by the idea of subsidizing higher quality tobacco - is this to promote more addictive versions of cigarettes or ones which take longer to kill their smokers ?
Even with the fig leaf of more publicity about the dangers of smoking , the taxpayer is still expected under these plans to stump up millions to pay the cigarette makers to make people ill .
The continued misuse of public money for this kind of tobacco subsidy is no longer acceptable .
Perhaps when it all began it could be excused on grounds of ignorance about the effects of smoking - but not in 1998 .
If we must have tobacco production , let it succeed or fail by its own efforts as any other industry has to , not with people 's hard-earned money as subsidy .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.17 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Reform of the CAP ( Agenda 2000 )
The next item is the continuation of the report ( A4-0219 / 98 ) by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the reform of the common agricultural policy ( Agenda 2000 - Part One , Chapter III ) ( COM ( 97 ) 2000 - C4-0522 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , I congratulate Arlindo Cunha on an excellent report .
It reveals the rapporteur 's expertise in the subject .
The report emphasizes the different circumstances surrounding production in the EU .
It is a totally Utopian gesture to try to apply EU regulations uniformly right across the region , from Finnish Lapland to the Canaries .
The greatest challenge of Agenda 2000 will be the integration of the special needs that exist in northern , southern and mountainous regions into the EU common agricultural policy .
The CAP suits the best agricultural regions in the EU .
Production costs are higher in the northern regions , the mountainous regions and other parts of the EU area .
This fact has to feature far more prominently in Agenda 2000 .
Agenda 2000 weakens competitiveness between the production of crops and that of fodder , to the detriment of the latter .
Maize feed storage aid is improving the competitiveness of milk production in six Member States , and weakening the profitability of fodder-based milk and beef production .
Thus there is a need for fodder storage aid , just as the report explains .
The viability of crop growing also requires equivalent special arrangements in northern EU regions .
Agenda 2000 extends EU aid to forestry .
Forestry has been and must in the future be within the sphere of the free market economy .
In no case must we make the forestry sector as tightly regulated and aided as agriculture .
The acceptance of Agenda 2000 requires larger regional investment as part of EU agricultural policy .
We have the European model of the family farming based unit , which we have to defend .
Mrs Anttila , I am sorry that I had to tell you to hurry up , but I am not to blame . Your Group must give you more time .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his report but concentrate my contribution on rural development .
It is inevitable that within the EU and , to an even greater degree , in the EU applicant states the number of jobs in agriculture will fall as a result of mechanization .
Without alternative jobs in rural areas young people will leave for the cities and many more people will commute daily to towns and cities with all the negative implications for the environment of increased car use on inadequate rural roads .
Food packaging and processing jobs are currently supported by Objective 5a grants .
However , there is an urgent need for additional non-agricultural jobs and small-scale enterprises in rural areas .
LEADER programmes have already demonstrated great success in generating additional finance for investment in such jobs .
If the rural pillar of the CAP is to become a reality we need some continued form of the LEADER programme after 2000 to maintain thriving rural communities , particularly in areas no longer covered either by Objective 1 or Objective 5 ( b ) after 1999 .
Production of wholesome food , protection of the environment and good animal welfare standards must also be key elements of CAP reform .
Mr President , Mr Cunha 's report is characterised by honesty and courage .
It is an impartial demonstration of the anti-agricultural line taken by the common agricultural policy .
It is quite correct when it says that the continued reduction in prices and other related measures have contributed to a reduction , to extremely low levels , in the number of small and medium-sized farms , and to an increase in the number of large agricultural holdings .
This is the model of the agricultural policy of the European Union that Mr Fischler told us about this morning .
Unfortunately , whatever compensation the Commission has introduced to counteract these negative measures has been outweighed by the exorbitant fines and excessive quota reductions which are imposed on small and medium-sized businesses , especially on Mediterranean agricultural production .
Agenda 2000 will only make the situation worse . It will serve the mammon of fat profits and work against SMEs , especially those which operate in the south , in the Mediterranean region .
I have a number of recommendations , which I shall not elaborate on as I do not have the time , as you say .
They are formulated as amendments and many of them have been approved by the Commission .
I just want to say firstly that perhaps Mr Cunha has made an omission : he does not give the reason for this anti-agricultural policy or say what interests it serves .
We must denounce this here .
Secondly , farmers will revolt and take a stand against it , and arbitrary and violent measures , such as those implemented in Greece , with 10 000 farmers taken to court and punished with stringent penalties , will not be enough .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to emphasize the high quality of the work Mr Cunha has produced on a subject as sensitive as the CAP reform proposed by the Commission .
The Commission 's proposal needs , moreover , to be thoroughly reworked in order to provide a real future for all the farms in the European Union .
Various aspects need to be taken into consideration .
First of all , the expectations of our fellow citizens with regard to farmers , in terms of product quality , environmental protection and even the distribution of farming throughout the countryside .
Then there is the international context , particularly the WTO . We have been forced to reduce public export subsidies , and are likely to come under strong pressure to reduce official production aid unless we modify some of our distribution methods .
Finally , the evaluation of the CAP , which has been in force since 1993 , and from which there are lessons to be learnt .
I must be brief , and will simply say this : a decline in raw material prices and a reduction in , perhaps even the withdrawal of , official aid does not add up to an acceptable agricultural policy .
Priority must however be given to two areas : competitiveness and the rational distribution of official aid .
Competitiveness must in fact be increasingly achieved by supplying goods and services which satisfy the expectations of society , which relate to wholesomeness and taste , local know-how which enhances the countryside , the technology of sectors which generate added value , and diversity in increasingly segmented markets .
These are the qualities , within our overall performance , which will enable Europe to show strength and originality by comparison with our competitors .
Official support for agriculture , although still necessary , will not be permanently acceptable to European taxpayers or to our competitors within the WTO , unless it takes on board legitimate social , environmental , and regional concerns . Hence the idea of ceilings of aid per farm and national adjustments , based on the principle of subsidiarity , within a framework of Community rules , to prevent distortions of competition and the renationalization of the CAP .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Cunha , for his report .
I welcome in particular the reaffirmation of the need to be especially careful about severe price cuts in any area of agriculture .
I also welcome the report 's commitment to compensate fully for any cuts in the institutional price .
This is in marked contrast to the Commission 's document , which proposes only a 50 % compensation for one of our major agricultural products .
In the light of already collapsed beef-farmer incomes in Ireland , the Commission proposal is totally unacceptable and must be changed without delay .
The report also confirms the three cornerstones of the common agricultural policy , but calls on the Commission to revise the Agenda 2000 proposals in many respects , recognizing that the continuing exodus of young people from agriculture is causing huge social and economic difficulties in large tracts of rural areas .
For example , in my own country , a shocking statistic : the suicide rate now exceeds the number of people killed in motoring accidents on our roads .
A high number of these totally unnecessary deaths are due to financial despair in rural areas .
Under present policies , with rural depopulation rife , it is not attractive for young people to make a career in farming .
The system of prices for products which are set below production costs and where income depends solely on the payment of decoupled compensation , which itself falls far short of bridging the gap to price reduction , does not provide the long-term security which well-educated young people see as a necessary requirement to their future .
This report strongly suggests that the reform proposals in Agenda 2000 should be radically altered , as it is now very clear that cutting prices has not resolved the problems of market balance , nor has it arrested the continuing decline in farm incomes , which are a vital factor in stemming the haemorrhage of young people from rural areas .
Mr President , I do not wish to sound even more pessimistic than the previous speaker , but I cannot help noticing that the number of farms is continuing to decrease , and that the number of employees in agriculture has fallen dramatically ... so what kind of European agriculture model do we want for the future ?
A model based on enlargement , the WTO model , or a distorted European model ?
This is the most important period in the history of the CAP .
We must understand that a new direction is needed , to enable farmers to live off the land , to produce food for Europe , and also for the world market , and to keep the countryside alive , by protecting the environment and the rural landscape .
Does Agenda 2000 really offer us this ?
Our group is more concerned about safeguarding the livelihoods of farmers and their families than about the international market .
The issue at stake is the continuity of agriculture . Above all , we must enable young people to enter agriculture , by enabling them to purchase land and have the right to cultivate it , and by making them feel confident that in Europe it will always be possible to work on the land .
Mr President , I wonder if Commissioner Fischler has considered the fact that the Cunha report is supported on all sides of the House and by all political groups and that , in contrast , intense criticism has been expressed regarding Agenda 2000 and the regulations for a policy on agriculture .
I think that this is well founded , since , through Agenda 2000 , the Commission is doing what we see throughout the societies of the European Union , that is , it is demolishing the social state and introducing models along the lines of the United States .
We see this happening in agriculture too .
We cannot accept a system of agriculture based on compensatory income subsidies , which are temporary in nature and which will transform farmers from productive forces in society into recipients of the temporary charity of the state , as the European Union at present envisages .
It is necessary that we support the European model of agriculture , whereby the farmer is a producer , a custodian of the environment and of cultural traditions , and the family smallholding is a nucleus of employment .
This is what is important in the Cunha report and my colleague opposite described very vividly , I think , the problems resulting from its disintegration .
In this sense I think that we must support the Cunha report and oppose the Commission proposals for the enlargement 2000 programme .
Mr President , I in turn wish to congratulate Mr Cunha .
Indeed , I believe that the primary objective that we must bear in mind in any attempt to reform the CAP is the support of the European model of agricultural development and the promotion of the economic and social cohesion of the European countryside .
This is described quite rightly in the Cunha report .
I would just like to dwell on a few points .
The first comment I wish to make is that , with the new structure of the objectives that is envisaged in Agenda 2000 , actions belonging to other objectives are being transferred to the EAGGF , which will naturally involve new expenditure .
However , it is not clear where the resources to cover this new expenditure will come from .
There is a danger that we will identify , at a financial level , the policy to develop the countryside with the common agricultural policy , and we are facing the possibility that the CAP will be assimilated and fragmented in the long term within the frameworks of other policies , such as the policy for the regions , for example .
The second is that we must pay particular attention to the danger of the renationalization of the CAP .
This may come about either through granting Member States too much leeway in the management of existing resources , or through a wider interpretation of the principle of subsidiarity .
The possibility of hidden national subsidies will only increase inequality between developed and less developed regions and will cause a chain reaction of problems in the economically weaker Member States .
Thirdly , we must look again at the issue of parity when looking both at the different sectors of European agriculture and the different regions of the European agricultural area .
We must look again at the relationships when subsidizing small and large agricultural holdings , less favoured and developed regions , products from the north and products from the south .
We must look again , for example , Mr Fischler , at the advisability of some common organizations of the market having the year 2006 as their horizon and others the year 2001 .
And those that have the year 2001 as their horizon happen to be the products of the south .
Finally , we must look carefully at the source of financing for the area of enlargement which concerns the modernization of the agricultural sector of the applicant countries .
The possibility of financing such measures from the resources of current agricultural guidelines will cause tremendous problems . It will also transfer a large part of the cost of enlargement onto the shoulders of the less developed regions of the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Fischler , the number of farmers in Europe fell continuously from 8 million in 1990 to 6.9 million in 1995 .
Small family farms are disappearing .
Since 1990 , the number of agricultural employees has decreased by 3.7 % per year .
This is detrimental to the fabric of rural life , and to town and country planning in Europe .
The Commission has proposed to reduce prices and provide compensatory aid by means of direct income support .
Would any other industry agree to sell its products at less than cost price ?
Not to mention the lack of job security for farmers , whose incomes would be even more dependent on direct aid , which we all know would not be everlasting .
What does the Commission intend do with all those acres which will remain unsold ?
It is quite understandable that young people are reluctant to enter agriculture when they hear that Agenda 2000 intends to take 10 % off milk , 20 % off cereals and 30 % off beef and veal .
Farming is an admirable occupation , but you have to really love it to want to become a farmer today , and unfortunately , love does not pay the bills !
What advice can parents responsible for the future of young people interested in agriculture give them ?
Nevertheless , young farmers are our only guarantee of a future for European agriculture .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Arlindo Cunha 's report is much better than the Commission 's draft , although it goes no further than is absolutely necessary .
If I may explain , Commissioner : you are spending half the budget on about 1 % of the richest people in Europe .
As you know , 80 % of that money is distributed among 20 % of the farmers .
That is a profoundly unfair policy .
And the report does not define a firm ceiling or a firm modulation so as to create a fair basis for the distribution of the Community 's funds .
I would remind you that every Community citizen pays around ECU 350 to support this policy , which makes me think the Commission cares little what it does with the taxes citizens pay .
The second point is that the agricultural policy still militates against the environment and quality , inasmuch as it is still geared to the support of production rather than production methods and the defence of quality in the food chain .
Today , Commissioner , you are confronted with the problem of a growing lack of credibility in the food chain itself .
With this policy , Commissioner , you are going to aggravate all the existing problems in the Community , which have not been capably dealt with .
In addition , there is no solidarity between the regions .
It is unacceptable that two farmers producing the same product should not be similarly classified and equally compensated because they live in different areas of the same Community .
Aid has not been regionalized .
There is no absolutely obvious need for family farms to receive aid , to the detriment of large-scale producers .
The whole of this policy benefits a mere half-dozen farmers and the result is plain to see : there is total desertification , at present 5 % of the population are farmers , in 2000 this figure will be around 2.5 % and we shall be distributing half the Community budget among 0.5 % of the richest producers , and the richest people , in the entire Community .
Mr President , I do not believe Agenda 2000 's proposed increase in aid for the forestry sector is in harmony with the principle of market-based forestry , which does not rely on aid .
The present Union aid for afforestation , forest improvements and averting forest fires is enough .
Our money could certainly be invested more productively .
In addition , the proposal would clearly lead to an extension of EU forestry policy , that is , to less authority on the part of Member States in the forestry sector .
This , however , does not mean that the Union does not nor should not have an important role in forestry matters .
For example , the certification of forests , which led to much heated discussion , should hopefully be clarified under some sort of EU umbrella certificate .
I cannot but consider the proposed price cuts for milk and crop produce , coming as I do from a northern Member State , too harsh .
Where is the promise that was made at summit level to preserve the viability of the rural environment by practising agriculture in all regions of the Union ?
One very important question has been completely ignored by the Commission , which is the situation young farmers find themselves in , and their future prospects .
We must do something about supporting young farmers when they inherit farms , and their circumstances in respect of sufficient levels of social security .
On enlargement and Agenda 2000 I finally wish to say that it is not worth prolonging the discussion as long as the institutional problems in the EU today remain unresolved .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Cunha for his report .
I want to repeat some of the concerns I have expressed elsewhere .
One of the problems with the report is that it does not address the issue of falling employment in agriculture .
When we talk about rural areas , it does not necessarily mean that we are talking about agriculture as a form of industry and employment .
We need to ensure that there is more diversification on the farm but we also need to ensure there is more diversification within the local economy .
We need to look at the role of rural areas in providing dormitory accommodation to large conurbations , second ownership , recreation , tourism and so on .
We also need to look at what sort of jobs are being provided .
We need jobs which are based on technology , in particular the use of the Internet and ISDN technology . We also need to look at providing small-scale industrial units for starter firms in our rural areas .
We need to look at a new role for the countryside .
Mr President , I would also like to compliment Mr Cunha on his report .
One of the problems we have had in agriculture - not as a result of Mr Cunha 's report but as a result of BSE - is that we have had to see vast changes in our approach to agriculture .
It is not often that I can agree with the opposite side of the House but on this particular occasion I happen to agree with Mr Hallam 's position .
One of the problems with agriculture is that we are not bringing young people back into it and one of the things we must do is move away from the constrictions of quotas .
This is something we have to look at in the future and part of Mr Cunha 's report talks about it .
We also must look at getting the returns for agriculture from the marketplace .
It is vital that agriculture understands that it cannot continue to have an open bucket of funding available for it permanently .
But the most important issues are , firstly , that we have a single market and that single market for agriculture must remain across Europe .
Otherwise we shall see discrimination against Member States .
That is why I am opposed to modulation , because it attacks the large and efficient farms .
Secondly , I am opposed to the national envelope .
This allows governments to control spending and hold it up .
Mr President , the Cunha report is a key one , since this report will be indicative of the overall position of the European Parliament on the reform of the common agricultural policy .
In my opinion , the report smacks of a compromise of many diverse positions on how to view the reform .
Personally , I think the report is also deficient of vision .
I looked in vain for any strong pronouncements in specific areas such as the environment and animal welfare .
Regarding the section in Mr Cunha 's report on imminent expansion , I am nevertheless pleased to see that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has adopted the amendment I tabled to include the first applicant countries in arrangements for environmentally friendly production methods from 1999 onwards .
After all , we must not forget that environmental improvements are not purely the domain of the 15 current Member States .
Environmental pollution does not respect boundaries .
The nations of central and eastern Europe applying for admittance to the EU also have significant agricultural production .
Thus , through support and collaboration , we must help ensure good , environmentally sound production for these farmers .
We must avoid a situation whereby these farmers resort to sacrificing the environment as they strive to keep up with the competition of the internal market .

Commissioner , Mr Cunha , Mr President - Mr Cunha has been praised so much today that I would like to turn this around slightly with a minor criticism , because , as he knows himself , he did not discuss the role of women in agriculture in his report .
He will certainly reconsider this before the vote and include it in the motion for a resolution , as he is in fact pro-women .
Throughout the EU , approximately 50 % of all those employed in agriculture are women .
They derive a high level of income for farming families by means of field work , shed work , book-keeping , direct marketing and farm holidays , etcetera .
Farms have now got the message of the European Commission and it does not surprise us very much .
On the whole , it is having a very negative impact , particularly among women farmers , and I believe that the Commissioner for agriculture , Mr Fischler , felt this when he joined us at our meeting in Berlin .
Women farmers are refusing to accept Agenda 2000 .
Their criticism is levelled at the increased adjustment of agricultural market policy and price policy to world market levels .
Income policy and price policy are not sufficiently balanced , for example , in the high environmental costs , so that within a short time a considerable number of farming families will find themselves in a situation of extreme hardship .
Farmers - men and women alike - fear the loss of their essential material possessions and their jobs .
We also find the increased pace of gearing European agricultural policy to the world market quite unnecessary .
Mr President , Commissioner , the report by our honourable friend Mr Cunha includes two particular goals : firstly , the comprehensive approach to farming , and secondly , the ability of farms to survive and adapt , and the strengthening of this ability .
However , these very two aims are under threat in the geographically disadvantaged regions of the new German Länder due to the Commission 's proposals on degression and upper limits .
In terms of the ability to survive and adapt , no one in Europe has anything to teach East German farmers .
Between 1945 and 1992 these farmers had to deal with three periods of short-term radical restructuring .
They managed that .
In the last period of restructuring , however , 80 % of the population involved in agriculture were eliminated from agriculture within two years .
This was necessary .
Commissioner , particularly in these regions , there is simply no alternative to the farm structures which have survived - mainly cooperatives - that is , no alternative which could guarantee comprehensive management , which is what we all wish for .
An improved , modern agricultural policy , which we all desire , must not further destabilize this form of management , as this would be contrary to the European Union 's new employment policy .
Mr President , I should like congratulate Mr Cunha on his excellent report , which does not fall into the trap of using the same tactics as the Commission at the Council of Ministers , that is , it does not divide in order to rule .
It effectively addresses the concerns of the agricultural world .
Parliament 's position is therefore of great importance with regard to the survival of the European agriculture model .
The Luxembourg Presidency 's approach , the definition of the identity of European agriculture as a reference point for CAP reform and the position of European agriculture on the world market , was ratified by the European Council of December in Luxembourg .
And the model which is emerging from that approach is that of a multi-functional , long lasting , effective agricultural sector spread right across Europe , including less favoured regions , which respects the natural landscape and open spaces , and is capable of responding to consumers ' concerns regarding the quality and safety of food .
Unfortunately , a number of reform measures tabled by the Commission do not take this approach into consideration .
The proposed price reductions are excessive and unjustified .
The proposed compensatory aid is inadequate , and will make farmers dependent on benefit . It is also likely to affect the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
The future of compensatory aid , on which the survival of most farms depends , particularly in less favoured regions , is uncertain after enlargement , not to mention the fact , Mr President , that the eco-conditionality of the compensatory payments distorts them and is therefore exaggerated .
Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Cunha on his very good and timely report .
I very much welcome the Commission 's proposals as a step in the right direction but no one in this Chamber should really be under any illusions .
This is not a substantive reform of the Common Agricultural Policy .
It is , as the Commission has said at the beginning of its document , an evolution and an extension of the MacSharry proposals .
As long as the basic objectives and mechanisms remain in place with the CAP there will be no significant restructuring of agriculture within the EU .
A significant majority have indicated that a common rural policy rather than a Common Agricultural Policy would bring greater benefits to Europe 's rural communities .
I urge the Commission to re-examine its proposals very closely so as to ensure that Europe 's rural communities are not disadvantaged when they must compete for structural funding under the changes when rural areas are included in the new Objective 2 .
Furthermore , although Agenda 2000 purports to adopt a more market-led approach , the proposed payments to compensate farmers for a reduction in price are not time-limited and will do nothing to break the cycle of dependence of European farmers on European subsidies ; nor will they address the legitimate concerns of the taxpayer .
Compensation for a change in market circumstances should be reduced and eventually stopped after a reasonable period of readjustment .
Given the turmoil of the BSE crisis and the many unresolved issues surrounding food safety and imports from outside the EU , I believe that the Commission should use the opportunity presented by Agenda 2000 to ensure that consumers enjoy the highest level of protection when we enter the next century and that Europe can compete with cheaper non-EU products .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I first want to congratulate the rapporteur on his report , and on having moved on very skilfully to set the guidelines for what our future CAP should look like , in view of Agenda 2000 , eastwards enlargement and future WTO negotiations .
My colleagues have already dealt with questions such as price reductions , farmers ' participation in the market , getting people to stay in the countryside , and involving young people and women in the sector .
We still have to see how price reductions affect consumers .
However , we must prepare ourselves to be on the offensive in the WTO negotiations , in order to defend our agriculture model , reject foreign models , and make the reality of rural life really matter , by protecting our social and environmental situation .
It is important to implement integral action in the rural zones , going beyond agricultural activity , although that is the basic focus - the crux , I would say . Additional financial means should be provided for other , distinct activities .
Account also needs to be taken of everything to do with land use , the environment , rural tourism , job creation and the improvement and conservation of our rural and cultural heritage .
Commissioner , in the spirit of Cork , rural development should be the second pillar of the CAP .
This reform of yours could and should turn into the common agricultural and rural policy - the CARP .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a real reform of the CAP would mean abandoning once and for all the guidelines introduced in the 1992 reform .
This has not been done , and for that reason the Commission 's proposals in Agenda 2000 can be sure of opposition from farmers and their representative organizations all over Europe .
A reform of the CAP would in fact have to be comprehensive and cover all forms of agricultural production .
The Agenda 2000 proposals , however , favour the meat , cereals and dairy sectors , and restrict themselves to a little individual fine tuning of sectors such as olive oil , fruit , vegetables and wine , which are fundamental to the agricultural economies of the southern countries .
Furthermore , to produce a real reform and overturn the 1992 strategy we would have to give unequivocal support to rural development , defend and above all generalize the application of Community priorities , make a special case of rural development in the world context , give decisive support to young farmers and fight rural desertification , maintain and develop market regulation mechanisms and iron out imbalances between regions , forms of production and farmers of different kinds , giving priority to family farms .
We appreciate the introduction of these aspects into the report , to which we have otherwise contributed certain amendments in the direction we suggested years ago .
At the Plenary session we insisted on amendments in favour of the open and universal award of certificates of quality , support for the production and marketing of regional products , the rejection of productivityrelated criteria and most of all the introduction of a clear concept of modulation .
With these guidelines , and if our amendments were accepted , we should have created a policy framework which the Commission ought to take into consideration , and ought to amend the proposals published in connection with Agenda 2000 in accordance with that policy framework .
Mr President , the report is noteworthy for two reasons that might seem contradictory : first of all , it can go into meticulous detail and at the same time it provides a broad overview of the future of European agriculture .
This occurs when the rapporteur combines the economic dimension of agricultural reform with its natural calling , which is related to the sustainable development of the area , the safeguarding of the living conditions of those working there - therefore farmers ' income - but especially to the development of regional productions .
It might again seem paradoxical , but to guarantee the basic principles of the CAP - which today is suffering from a growth crisis , in the sense that it has grown too much - we must go back to the beginning .
We must move away from the large industrial concerns and return to the old family farm where it all began and where in many areas it is still the best guarantee of continuity .
The future of agriculture in Europe - in the Europe of today and in the Europe of tomorrow , with an additional ten or so CEECs to take into account - depends on its ability to become the driving force and vehicle of economic and social cohesion , especially in disadvantaged areas where farming is still a challenge and an act of faith .
I am thinking of mountain areas which are continually threatened by a plague called exodus , especially the exodus of young people attracted by easier incomes in the lowlands ; I am thinking of Arctic areas ; I am thinking of areas threatened with desertification , the last front of those who do not want to give in .
That is why I agree with the rapporteur when he says that support for production can be a double-edged sword that can cut the cord of solidarity with the disadvantaged areas , favouring the growth of two forms of agriculture , one rich and one poor , and create a gap between developed regions and regions lagging behind in development .
In future programming , a series of mechanisms must be guaranteed to regulate interventions and harmonise production in Europe and the Mediterranean .
These mechanisms must be based on guaranteed income and forms of integration between complementary professions , definitely treating farming as the main profession .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us not forget that the common agricultural policy is the fundamental pillar European construction .
It is , in fact , the only really integrated Community policy .
What does the Commission propose , in its communication on Agenda 2000 ?
The Commission proposes a complete reform of the CAP and structural policy limited , for budgetary reasons , to 1.27 % of the GNP of Member States .
With regard to agriculture , its proposals are confined to reducing the prices of arable crops , milk , beef and veal in order to maintain a socalled balance , by providing partial compensation , theoretically enabling farmers to adapt to these price reductions .
However , at the end of December 1999 , the European Union and Member States will meet at the negotiating table of the WTO , and the issues under discussion will , of course , be the reduction of agricultural aid and the almost total withdrawal of Community preference .
So what proposals has the Commission made with regard to those discussions ?
None , or rather an increase in compensatory aid , which as we all know will be unacceptable to our various partners . The GATT agreements set a ceiling for this type of aid , so I do not believe that such a rise would be acceptable .
What strategy is the Commission going to adopt ?
Will the Commission have enough courage to force our American partners to accept social and environmental clauses , or the ability to do so ?
Commissioner , European agriculture dates back more than 2 500 years .
It cannot be compared with agriculture in countries which have existed only two or three hundred years .
We are going to destroy the rural world by copying them and we will destabilize the regional balance of the whole of the territory of the Member States of the European Union .
I wish to conclude simply by thanking Mr Cunha , and congratulating him on the excellent draft report he submitted to us , but which unfortunately was amended extensively by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , so that it became slightly less coherent .
Mr President , my honourable friends , it would of course be a very attractive prospect now to go into detail on the observations made by my honourable friend Mr Cunha , and on his report .
In view of the late hour , however , I will speak only briefly .
I will therefore distribute to you the statement I had prepared and at this juncture I will restrict myself to a few points which I feel to be important .
First of all , I would like to take the opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Cunha , and the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for this report .
It was with great interest that I read it and I also agreed with many points in the report .
However , I would have placed emphasis on quite different areas .
Allow me to illustrate .
One of the main aims of the Commission is of course to consolidate the European agriculture model , but in a changing world consolidation cannot mean limiting oneself to consolidating what already exists .
To do so would be to serve agriculture and our farmers badly .
The common agricultural policy must be adapted and reformed because in the coming decades our agriculture will be faced with more and more new realities , new conditions and new challenges .
Only thus can we guarantee the continued existence of the European agriculture model .
This is exactly what the Commission is aiming to achieve by means of these proposals .
Let us speak openly : I have not yet seen an alternative to the Commission 's proposals which is consistent , credible and capable of consensus , at least not where longer-term prospects are concerned .
A distinguishing feature , if not the distinguishing feature , of European agriculture , is its multi-functionality , as stated in the report .
This involves firstly the economic dimension .
Today we basically have the choice between two different paths : we could return down the path of production using strict volume limits , but the question is whether this is really an attractive programme for the future , especially in view of a comprehensive agricultural system , enlargement towards the East and the new world trade round .
The strategy which the Commission proposes goes in another direction .
It is based on improving the competitiveness of domestic agricultural products , both internal and external , a task entrusted to the Commission at the Luxembourg Summit .
This brings me to a point in the report , regarding which I must warn against any false impressions .
The price reductions proposed by the Commission are not an end in themselves .
They are the means to improve the competitiveness of our products and thus to create new sales potential .
Reduction of institutional prices must take place in such a way that , even in the case of fluctuating market prices , there is enough scope to maintain a market presence .
From this point of view , I do not believe that the price reductions proposed by the Commission can be regarded as excessive .
In future , intervention should serve only as a safety net in case of significant price collapses .
In relation to the arrangement of direct payments , I cannot confirm , on the basis of the available analyses , that the proposal for a single form of aid for cereal and oilseed would make the production of oilseed crops uneconomic in most of the EU .
In addition , the relationship between the beef and veal sectors is in our experience not nearly as direct as the report seems to assume .
What surprised me is that there would be a deviation from the general rule in the milk sector .
It states that the level of compensatory payments should be allocated in accordance with regional or individual productivity .
It must be obvious that such an approach would have not insignificant redistribution effects .
At a later point the report seems to suggest the increased use of direct payments for redistribution .
If this is the wish of Parliament , it must be stated loud and clear .
I have taken note of the clearly expressed wish to considerably increase area subsidies and subsidies related to service to society in comparison to production-related subsidies .
After all , I see a confirmation of the Commission 's view in what the report says about subsidiarity and decentralization .
Subsidiarity - yes ; decentralization - yes ; renationalization - no !
I am pleased to discover that the report follows a similar guideline to that of the Commission as regards expanding policy on rural areas and environmental protection in agriculture into a solid , second pillar of agricultural policy .
I note that the direction taken by the report in a series of points actually goes much further than the Commission 's proposals and that these points refer explicitly to the conclusions of the Cork conference and support a greater financial contribution for rural development on behalf of the Community .
This possibility exists under the agricultural guideline , provided that the political will is to hand and that the agricultural guideline remains in its current form , a point on which the rapporteur and I are in agreement .
I also share the opinions expressed in the report in the areas of food quality and food safety .
I find the report - and I can say this here - very encouraging in many points , but it also opens up many issues which we will disagree on .
I am grateful for both these facts and am already looking forward to further discussions on this and to our continued cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
2000 : Economic and social cohesion
The next item is the report ( A4-0210 / 98 ) by Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on Agenda 2000 , Part 1 , Chapter II : Economic and Social Cohesion ( COM ( 97 ) 2000 - C4-0523 / 97 ) .
Mr President ! Economic and social cohesion in Europe is facing its second test within a short period of time .
Whenever the EU integration project is facing a severe test , an attempt is made to put cohesion policy aside , although this is precisely what has made the European single market a success .
Harmony and uniform development are prerequisites for stability .
For this reason it is imperative that the large export countries , who owe their profits to the single market concept , be involved , at least in some very small way , in realizing the European social model .
We must not allow fate to decide whether people within the European Union are numbered among the winners or the losers .
I would like to say very clearly once again : anyone wishing to terminate the EU 's solidarity project is attacking the very heart of the integration process .
We reject outright any net contributor discussions , as these deny the basics .
On the other hand , it should certainly give us food for thought that , despite considerable financial expenditure , we have not succeeded in overcoming the divide between rich and poor regions .
Unemployment in the ten poorest regions is still seven times higher than in the ten richest regions .
This split economic development is now continuing in rich regions , forming islands of prosperity and cutting right across society .
The human tragedy of mass unemployment , poverty and exclusion are affecting increasing numbers of the population .
In view of this desperate situation in terms of economic and social cohesion , enlargement to include the ten countries of central and eastern Europe and Cyprus is an enormous challenge , making the structure of politics the key to the EU 's ability to enlarge .
The Commission 's revision proposals must not be restricted to concentration .
The goal of efficiency means that we must above all recognize that traditional economic methods cannot be used to meet the challenges of increasing unemployment and the process of transforming the economies of the Eastern European countries .
Jacques Delors stated in the White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment that such methods needed to be adapted for sustainable development .
Essentially , we must achieve development models which are based on low consumption of non-renewable resources and achieve a balance between economy , ecology and social development .
I would like to emphasise once again to the Member States : " Administrative arrangements are not to be equated with dismantling democracy ' .
The European Structural Funds grant the local and regional authorities and the social players extensive rights of participation .
These rights can , however , only be used by the regions in question if the Member States involve them early enough in helping to formulate plans and projects .
Due to the delay in the Structural Funds Regulation by the Council - the first half of 1999 is too late for planning - we find ourselves in a dilemma in that the principle of participation is laid down in the regulation but cannot take effect because the plans have already been drawn up to ensure that the implementation period could begin on time .
If we are to take " Citizens ' Europe ' seriously , we must succeed in securing the participation of local and regional authorities early enough and to a sufficient degree .
The situation cannot be simplified by putting together different areas to be supported .
Thus , Objective 2 in the Commission 's proposal seems to simply pass the problem down .
In my opinion it is the responsibility of the Commission to remove competition at the European level between urban and industrial areas on the one hand and rural areas on the other .
The report 's proposal offers the opportunity to develop transparent procedures and guarantees the rights of participation of those affected in the rural areas and the rights of the European Parliament .
In this report , Parliament confirms once again its determination to support the euro region at the borders with its Eastern neighbours by means of a joint fund .
The Agenda provides us with the unique opportunity of setting up this fund in a budget category and under the responsibility of a Directorate-General .
Why does the Commission continue to refuse to make concrete proposals ?
I am very pleased that we have succeeded in achieving broad consensus in this report and in adopting it unanimously in the Committee on Regional Policy .
It is my responsibility , as rapporteur , to ensure that this consensus remains , and it is a unique opportunity for the European Parliament to demonstrate to the Council that we can reach consensus within a very short space of time .
I thank all those colleagues who contributed to this succès d 'estime in the Parliament , and I hope that we succeed in it .
Mr President , the rapporteur 's consensus extends beyond her own committee because , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , I think we would go along with most of what her report says .
So I just want to say that although most of our amendments have not been formally incorporated , most of them have been taken on board implicitly . Basically , our amendments only reflect this House 's decision of 4 December 1997 .
So I do not think there is any problem on our part .
I do want to make two brief comments .
For one thing , we expected a stronger reaction from the Committee on Regional Policy .
As we see it , the provisional pre-accession instrument , from the structural point of view , is not a structural fund , ladies and gentlemen , but an alternative Cohesion Fund .
And that could cause problems in the future .
It does not have the same mechanisms and aims as the Structural Funds , so we think the candidate countries are still not really being prepared for the Structural Funds . They are going to get used to the idea of a Cohesion Fund , which is a different matter .
In the general context of the agreement , I should like to mention a point we think is perhaps fundamental .
We in the Committee on Budgets want a revision clause on the financial result of the structural fund reform - and enlargement , of course .
But whereas we accept the Commission 's hypotheses and figures at the moment , we must point out that if the costs corresponding to pre-accession and enlargement are added to the current figures for the Structural and Cohesion Funds , there is still room for manoeuvre within the 1.27 % ceiling .
In other words , if the structural appropriations are reduced for the Fifteen , it is not to avoid exceeding the 1.27 % ceiling , but in order to keep it much lower .
This year , we stand at 1.14 % .
And I wonder , how many decimal places of GNP are we talking about ?
What we are really talking about at the moment - it was discussed at Cardiff - are mere pittances , in percentage terms .
Mr President , I would just like to add that we must be really aware of the economic and political importance of Heading 2 for the process of European political construction .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the point of view of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I can but welcome Mrs Schroedter 's report .
It shows awareness of the problem and really gets down to the issues of enlargement .
It shows that justice has been done to ideas on achieving economic and social cohesion and it shows a political effort to avoid incoherence .
Enlargement is of course not only an opportunity for positive development but shows us all today , at this early stage , that not all questions of enlargement can be looked at only from an economic point of view , nor will they be a stroll in the park .
Basically , all motions for a resolution , all resolution issues of 4 December are to be found again in the Schroedter report .
My concern is that we need to strike a balance between the areas of infrastructure , transport , environment and human resources in order to achieve cohesion .
This must be regarded as unilateral .
It must be done as a single unit and this must be discussed .
Of course , the role of the social partners is also important in this context , a topic which was broached here as well .
Without the social partners we cannot achieve ratification in the developing countries , in the countries which will be joining .
We need instruments for this and thus we must reorganize PHARE in order to be of significant assistance .
All of this must be done .
Thus , for me it is still a point for discussion .
The new definition of Objective 2 is also very important .
I would just like to point out that the combination of industry and rural areas could represent an opportunity for the future .
I would also point out that in the three regulation proposals shortly to be under consideration , dealing with instruments of structural policy for preparation for accession , there is sufficient time for discussion in order to create a plausible framework for the whole area and to do justice to what we want to achieve , which is a homogeneous enlargement to include the countries of the former Eastern bloc .
Mr President , I welcome today 's debate on the Schroedter report on the Agenda 2000 chapter on economic and social cohesion as a solid basis on which to launch Parliament 's more detailed and comprehensive work on the regulations governing the Structural Funds .
As Mrs Schroedter said , there was a unanimous vote in the Committee on Regional Policy but I think she would also admit that was as a result of very substantial amendments tabled by many political groups , and , indeed , we have much more work to do in this area .
In response to Mr Colom i Naval , I would say that now is not the time to deal with the very detailed regulations in the Structural Funds : we will look at them when we draw up specific detailed reports .
This is a timely debate , following on from last week 's discussions under the British presidency in the Informal Council in Glasgow and the General Affairs Council in Luxembourg , and in the light of today 's very topical discussion at the Cardiff Summit on the progress report on Agenda 2000 , prepared by the British presidency to identify those areas where a consensus exists in the Council .
Therefore , in the light of these discussions , I wish to take some time to highlight a potential approach that my group will be taking during the reform process .
There is no doubt that this reform of structural and Cohesion Funds represents the most significant changes in the last ten years with a view to meeting the challenges of enlargement and EMU .
Enlargement will surely offer opportunities to our regions but we will want to ensure that the proposals presented by the Commission match our objectives and priorities as socialists , namely to continue the Delors legacy of promoting jobs , sustainable growth and the competitiveness of our regions and the central objective of economic and social cohesion of the Treaty to enable all citizens , regions and Member States to participate on an equal footing .
The Union 's benefits must be at the forefront of our policy process .
This is just as much about creating equality of opportunity as removing the disparities between poorer and wealthier regions .
We should be clear about the internal challenges we face : one in five of Europe 's youth is out of work , unemployment among women is consistently higher than among men , long-term unemployment persists as a scourge of modern society .
The reform process must , therefore , combine fairness with affordability and durability , with more simplification and efficiency .
It must be fair in order to ensure we give priority to our poor regions without abandoning those problem regions going through the process of economic and social restructuring in wealthier Member States .
Solidarity , if it is to enjoy mass support , must be a two-way , and not a one-way process .
Subsidiarity and decentralization must be the cornerstone of our future policies to ensure that our regional policies are relevant to the needs and interests of local communities .
I would , therefore , like to welcome the decision that Parliament should be fully associated with the reform process .
We welcome the interinstitutional agreement and wish to see it signed and sealed under this presidency .
We have had a positive letter from Robin Cook , the President-in-Office , but we need to move forward now on the more fundamental items .
Finally , I wish to raise some areas where we need to consider the Commission 's proposals in more detail : efficiency , of course , is fundamental to ensure the better use of funds but if the efficiency reserve leads to more red tape and bureaucracy and an increased monitoring role for Commission staff , then I fear that all we will be doing is employing more private consultants in order to monitor those processes .
So we need to look very carefully at how that reserve would work .
I would be in favour of looking at an innovation reserve with the appropriate procedures of decentralization and subsidiarity .
We will be judged by our citizens on how we handle the challenge of reform .
Only when the EU is seen to be contributing to the solution of major problems in society , such as poverty and unemployment , can we expect to enjoy their support and ensure the credibility of the Union and its policies and institutions .
My group will take this challenge seriously and we look forward to cooperating with the Council and the Commission in improving the Agenda 2000 proposals to gain support from the public .
We sincerely hope we will be given the opportunity of sharing in the executive powers - in a spirit of codecision , I might add .
In this way we can only add to the democratic legitimacy of the reform process .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank the rapporteur for her willingness to cooperate .
She made a significant contribution to the quality of the report .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party I would like to note the following : the Structural Funds must adjust their support objectives in accordance with the objectives of the treaty and the tasks of the Community .
This includes inter alia the balanced and sustainable development of economic activities , a high level of employment and of social protection , equality between men and women , and economic and social cohesion and solidarity among Member States .
The principle of subsidiarity must be considered to a high degree in this context , as must the financial framework .
Under no circumstances must enlargement be used to reduce the upper limit of 0.46 % of Community GNP for structural spending or that of 1.27 % for total expenditure .
In my view , countries participating in monetary union can no longer receive additional support from the Cohesion Fund .
Moreover , solidarity does not mean taking more assistance than necessary .
Thus , for Objective 1 the 75 % threshold of per capita GDP must be adhered to rigidly .
I therefore welcome a transitional period for regions currently eligible for aid within the framework of Objectives 1 , 2 or 5b .
The new Objective 2 is , unfortunately , not logical , Madam Commissioner . It is and remains a scrambled objective .
80 % of EU citizens live in towns , and if rural areas become increasingly disadvantaged in terms of EU support the relationship will deteriorate further .
This means that migration from rural areas to the towns will increase even further .
There are two possible ways to improve the Commission proposal .
The first is an independent objective for rural areas and the second is a subdivided objective with two separate budget lines .
The criteria must be capable of being extended and weighted by the Member States in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Under no circumstances must the planned concentration of funding hold the Member States back completely from determining the level of assistance they are to receive .
The upper limit of the de minimis rule must therefore be raised considerably .
Aid from Objective 3 must be flexible and easily applicable .
The reduction of Community initiatives to just three is to be welcomed . But PHARE-CBC funds previously earmarked for cooperation with Interreg cannot under any circumstances be used at the borders between the CEECs .
SME assistance must be increased but , even more importantly , it must be simplified , Madam Commissioner .
The 10 % level for reserve funds is too much .
In this way , the Commission is attempting to gain greater influence because in the end it also determines the use of these reserve funds .
In my view , this is a clear violation of the principle of subsidiarity .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I would first like to tell the rapporteur , Mrs Schroedter , that she has produced a good report on Agenda 2000 .
I am not going to go into the details of the future debate on the Structural Funds , but I must repeat that economic and social cohesion is a fundamental aspect of European construction and , in that sense , we should value the role of the Member States and the regions , and the contributions they should make , together with the EU , towards directly applying the principle of subsidiarity .
I think the desired simplification of the Structural Funds is a good thing , with a large Objective 2 . Study is needed to find the best way to include rural areas , industrial areas in decline , urban areas and fishing areas , with a proper application of the principle of subsidiarity in all cases .
Consideration should also be given to the role that regions with a legislative capacity can play in the implementation of these Objective 2 development frameworks .
In that sense , I do not think a single regulation would be valid without taking account of how each Member State will decide to apply this Objective 2 , according to its internal organization .
I think the suggestion about Objective 3 is very important , especially in view of the EU 's biggest problem at the moment - unemployment .
And all the thinking in that area should bear in mind the future eastwards enlargement of the EU .
In that respect , I think it is a good idea for the Interreg Community initiative to also provide funds for the central and eastern European countries , but without compromising the funds which go to the current EU Member States .
Finally , I would like to say that it is always good for the Structural Funds and the allocated resources to be implemented efficiently , so I hope it will be possible to determine a good approach , to distribute these EU funds as efficiently as possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , this is the last opportunity that this House will have to express our positions on the broad principles of the reform of the Structural Funds before we start to examine the detailed legislative proposals in the coming months and it is therefore an extremely important report .
From the outset I would stress that economic and social cohesion is an enshrined principle now and for the future .
It is not about the very short-term fortunes of any national political party for electoral purposes .
We have an obligation to be serious about our contribution to the future development of the Union and our ambitions for a better way forward have got to meet the expectations of all the citizens of the European Union .
Broadly speaking , I am in agreement with the Schroedter report .
There are , however , a couple of points that are of particular concern to me .
I am in total agreement with , and strongly support , the Commission 's view that there is no link between EMU participation and eligibility under the Cohesion Fund .
I would stress to certain colleagues that there is no basis in the Treaty to support such a link .
Amendment No 25 by Mr Novo Belenguer and others correctly represents this position and I will be glad to support it .
I can accept the principle of a mid-term review for the Cohesion Fund .
However , I would find it unacceptable if there were not to be provision for transition arrangements for any Member State that ceases to qualify under the mid-term review .
It is essential that adequate transition arrangements be put in place for regions such as my country , Ireland , which cease to meet Objective 1 qualifying criteria .
Transitional arrangements for Ireland must be adequate in terms of the level and duration of funding so as to address our continuing significant developmental needs .
Whereas the level of funding must in particular meet the needs of the less-developed Irish subregions , it is my view that they should cover the whole country during the entire seven-year period of the next financial framework .
Building a solid house is a long term investment .
You do not build a house on foundations that have not been consolidated .
Yes , we in Ireland have made rapid progress towards the EU average in GDP but - yes - we still need new significant levels of funding for the period ahead if we are to consolidate our economic progress achieved to date .
Finally , I do not believe that anyone would seriously contest our aim of reaching a situation in which our higher levels of prosperity are copper-fastened and ensured on a permanent and sustainable basis .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Agenda 2000 caused a great commotion but there is , as yet , no coordination to be seen , as the Member States are rejecting the Commission 's script .
Heated fights for allocation , owners of assets who make their presence felt - and in the midst of all this , we lose sight of what is actually at stake ; the great , great settlement with central and eastern Europe .
But what are the rules of the game ?
The first is that enlargement is only possible if the agricultural and structural policies are reformed .
Secondly , some better-off regions are excluded from current aid , and indeed this applies both to Germany and to Sweden or , for example , Spain .
If the German Länder demand that budgetary risks for the Länder be prevented in the finance regulations , it is recommended that they use the interim deadline of four to six years to guarantee this for themselves .
Thirdly , unlike the previous speaker , I believe the Cohesion Fund should be dissolved following monetary union .
However , if the Spanish government and others wish to cling desperately to it , it should be said honestly - and the rapporteur does allow this opportunity - that we cannot in principle deny Poland , Hungary , the Czech Republic , Slovenia and Estonia access to it ; this is the logic of the game .
Those who demand things for themselves also achieve things for others .
Fourthly , if we are going to haggle about money , then let us do it properly ; this would mean clarifying the net contributor debate , particularly as far as Mr Waigel is concerned .
The justice gap can only be closed on the income side and not on the expenditure side .
Those in favour of reform must also be in favour of dismantling agricultural subsidies .
A reduction of the British rebate in agricultural subsidies and a possible move to co-financing would at the same time pave the way for a general corrective mechanism .
If we adhere to these rules , there will be some kind of coordination and we will have a script which will finally allow us to reach the end of negotiations .
Mr President , Mrs Schroedter 's report calls for a more interdependent Europe , where rich regions give poorer regions more help .
It calls for an enlarged Europe , enlarged to the scale of the continent , where the first fifteen Member States are committed to raising to their own level the central and eastern European countries , whose average per capita purchasing power is up to five times lower than in the Member States . At the same time , in Cardiff , our intrepid Heads of State have agreed upon one thing only : to pay less , and to receive more , so Europe will take a huge step backwards .
At the same time , my region , Hainault , is now , in the Commission 's own words , a " disaster area ' , because of forty years of absolute Socialist rule , because European funds are being squandered by the Socialist Party 's friends and accomplices , following an old Socialist and Walloon tradition .
At the same time , we are blowing hot and cold on the countries of central and eastern Europe .
We have invited them to join us , but at the same time , we see a mote in their eyes , their lack of democracy , when in it is our western democracies that are moribund . Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this report is a contemporary version of the torture of Tantalus : the harder we try to reach out to Europe and the benefits it could give our fellow citizens , the more it eludes us .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have less than a year ; by then everything must be in place - everything that we want to have discussed and decided in relation to Agenda 2000 .
Less than a year is not much time .
So we really must set about rolling up our sleeves and getting started .
I believe Elisabeth Schroedter 's report is a good start .
It provides a great deal of information without anticipating decisions which we have yet to debate intensively .
I believe this is exactly the right approach .
In past debates - at this juncture , I would remind you of the plenary session in Brussels - we have experienced what happens if we try to lay down measures rashly or in hasty speculation .
These cannot be the terms under which we work ; instead , we must discuss matters seriously and thus find useful solutions .
The report provides some guidelines , even if I would not accept in blank everything contained in it .
There are also further amendments .
We will vote on it tomorrow .
Then we will finally have a result .
But I believe it is important that this step has been taken .
What is the aim of all this ?
The aim in developing Agenda 2000 is not only to distribute money .
It is to achieve a balanced system .
It is also a question of working together to improve and develop an instrument of aid , and of how we get along together .
There can be no question of our standing here and saying " We have received money from the Member States , ' and the Member States saying , " Give it back to us - we know best how to distribute it . '
No , the aim is not to achieve a European added value .
We must work together on this .
I believe that in many places we must point out weaknesses .
In the conflict between globalization and regionalization , it cannot only be a question of bringing as much as possible back and saying to the people at home , " Do what you want with it , ' and sufficing with that .
Nevertheless , we will have to examine the Commission 's proposals carefully .
Here , in many places , it is necessary to introduce simplification and the transparency which has been announced .
We will examine this carefully , as it has been pointed out to us that simplification , for example in partnership or in programming , would , of course , bring with it an increased level of pressure and bureaucracy , which we do not want .
We will consider this very carefully .
In my view , our task over the next few weeks and months will be to look at which countries need money and which countries receive it .
Of course , we must also ensure that this Community instrument is developed into a transparent instrument with which we can work together for the future of our regions .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is easy to agree on principles , certainly when the principles in question make sense .
Thus , in principle , we happily agree with the Schroedter report and the proposals for the reform of structural policy within Agenda 2000 .
Recognizable areas of concentration instead of spreading funds too thinly , objective criteria for the allocation of EU funds , bottom-up partnership , evaluation , what more could we want ?
In the interests of those affected , we must want more !
Rural areas , which have already been mentioned today , have not yet been given the necessary consideration , at least not in the initial drafts .
Rural areas must at least be worthy of a subgoal within Objective 2 , with guaranteed funding .
In order to meet with the wide approval of our citizens , for the next round of enlargement we will need the opportunities offered by Interreg and a guaranteed level of Interreg funding for the Union 's border regions .
Indications from Brussels regarding funding constitute better advice than words of concern from various political ultra-peripheral regions .
Moreover , without upper limits on finance , some so-called net contributors will feel that too much is being asked of them .
The Schroedter report will meet with broad approval only when we allow room not only for the principles but also for particular interests , and I use the term advisedly .
Let us work together with the Commission and the Council to achieve a good balance in the coming months , so that we will have a result which meets with broad approval throughout the Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , reforms in EU regional and structural policy have to be able to meet the growing challenges that spring from regional inequality .
The development of the global economy , mass unemployment , enlargement and EMU are all factors that require a structural policy that will level out differences and create new opportunities .
EU regional policy must be more adept and flexible in its attention to differing circumstances .
For example , more flexibility is needed in assessing population cover and national funding , according to the circumstances of the country .
We have to keep rigidly to the Agenda 2000 timetable for debate .
The effective implementation of the programmes and the participation by the different parties involved requires sufficient preparation time .
Large rural areas such as eastern and northern Finand are in a critical situation as far as the future is concerned .
These areas are suffering acutely from population loss .
We are now in urgent need of a policy of reform for these regions that will help to bring opportunities for the development of human capital , entrepreneurship based on the new technology , and a diverse array of incentives .
The focus has to be the creation of permanent jobs locally and the support of local initiative .
Mr President , I would like to underline the importance of the partnership principle , especially when defining programmes and their methodology .
I would particularly like to underline the fact that , if the measures for the development of rural regions are not clearly defined and decided , we risk causing great damage to local and regional cooperation .
Meanwhile , there is another concern that should not be underestimated , and that is the danger that in the new view presented in Agenda 2000 economic and social cohesion will tend to blur the competences and control of the European Parliament .
If this were to occur , it would truly be paradoxical that at a time when we are faced with the decisive issue of enlargement , the democratic guarantee of the European Parliament would be weakened .
At the same time , we are of the view that it is useful to facilitate cooperation with non-EU countries through Interreg and PHARE , creating appropriate legal and financial instruments like , for example , common funds .
We are puzzled as to the actual usefulness of the proposed 10 % reserve mechanism .
Similarly , we would like to highlight the paltry amount of credits made available .
Enlargement requires a rational and effective structural policy , in spite of the budget restrictions that are imposed .
In general , when we look at the innovations of Agenda 2000 , we see that the number of Community initiatives is reduced from 13 to 3 , that the budget for the Cohesion Fund is only ECU 3 billion , that the eligibility criteria for aid seems simplified ; we also see that no major progress has been made in structural policy , which is even more important today because of the new countries seeking membership .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our financial forecasts for the years 2000 to 2006 , upon which our cohesion policy depends , will be decided in March next year , according to the Cardiff Summit , after the effects of the German elections have been put into perspective .
Thus Mrs Schroedter 's report , while it is a good piece of work , is merely a preliminary step , although it is imbued with the best of cohesion philosophy .
But we are bound by circumstances , in the light of the vote a fortnight ago in the European Parliament , which was unexpectedly hostile to the countries that benefit from the Cohesion Fund , to take the matter up again in the form of some amendments to the Schroedter report .
The vote on these proposals represents a significant test of the present sensitivity of Members of the European Parliament .
It will indelibly mark out the difference between national selfishness and Community solidarity , between the laws of the market and the ethical imperatives of cohesion , in short between words and actions .
And let it not be said that the Cohesion Fund is intended to help its beneficiaries to join the euro , and nothing more .
That is mere sophistry : false reasoning masquerading as sound argument .
The fact is that the need to keep the Cohesion Fund is even further justified with the coming of the euro .
Economic geography and history show us that when the market is unified , harmonized , extended and supplied with a single currency there are advantages for the whole , but on the other hand there is also a strong tendency for already existing geographical centres and economic groups to be strengthened , to the detriment of the most peripheral and outlying regions .
These are real risks which should not be underestimated ; on the contrary , the Fifteen should be working to counteract them .
How ?
By giving priority to the principle of balance within our territory and to policies of cohesion .
This is why the Cohesion Fund must be kept and why , in short , it would be a very serious mistake to abolish it .
The European Parliament , which over the years has championed the principles of solidarity , would seriously compromise its reputation if it did not now unequivocally keep faith with its traditions and the values on which it is built .
Madam Commissioner , the efforts of the European Union to achieve economic and social cohesion within its borders must continue unabated while there remain substantial inequalities at both regional and national level and while such tendencies are , in certain cases , on the increase , despite the significant steps that have been taken towards achieving nominal convergence .
This situation , together with the imminent enlargement towards countries of central and eastern Europe , places increased responsibilities on the European Union , which impose a new way of dealing with social and structural policies in the future .
Against such a background , the first substantial issue to be raised is that of the structural perspectives , which is an issue which must be clarified as soon as possible so that we know what money we will have at our disposal , in order that we can determine in a responsible way the relevant policies .
This is an issue which , of course , belongs chiefly within the powers of the Council .
The Community budget , up to 1.27 % of Community GDP , of which 0.46 % is allocated to structural policies , may well prove to be inadequate in the future to cover satisfactorily both existing and new countries and policies .
On no account must enlargement turn out to be at the expense of current Member States , especially the poorest .
That is why the financial perspectives must be re-examined , before the first wave of enlargement , with a view to dealing with the new requirements and developments which will have arisen or which , by then , will have become more apparent .
The regions of Objective 1 , which are those with a per capita GDP lower than 75 % of the Community average , in other words the poorest and those with the greatest needs , must continue in the future to receive two-thirds of Structural Fund resources , as recommended moreover by the Commission .
The share of financing for these regions must remain high , while they must be even higher for island regions due to the special problems they face , as recognised moreover by Article 130a of the Amsterdam Treaty .
The implementation of an integrated policy , based on this provision in the new Treaty , is also necessary for the islands , in order to deal with the special problems that arise because of their island status .
It is also right to reduce the Objectives from six to three as well as the Community initiatives from fifteen to three , for the purposes of simplification and focus .
Finance equivalent to 5 % of resources also seems logical to me but there certainly needs to be a doubling of resources for innovative actions which , precisely because of their pioneering and guiding nature , may prove to be especially advantageous .
I would like to finish by stressing that in the future there must still be a Cohesion Fund for the financing of large structural projects in the fields of transport and the environment , in which countries with a per capita GDP lower than 90 % of the Community average must once again be able to participate .
Mr President , I want to congratulate Mrs Schroedter on her report , and tell her that the best thing about the report - and she should not be upset by this - is that it is indebted to the proposals made by the Commission , and specifically the Commissioner here with us today , Mrs Wulf-Mathies .
This report is in line with the Commission proposals , and that is exactly where its strength and positive nature lie .
It has another positive aspect : it is going to allow us to go back over the incredible events of the last part-session when , because of a series of mistakes , a conclusion was reached on the Cohesion Fund which does not represent the majority view of the House , as we will have the chance to find out in tomorrow 's vote .
I want to ask Mrs Schroedter to please try to educate a certain member of her group a little , because she has certainly taken full account of what the Cohesion Fund is , and what cohesion means . The Cohesion Fund is provided for in the Treaties , should continue to be provided for in the Treaties , and to change it would mean changing the Treaties .
It cannot be presented as an option for some countries which do not want to give up certain subsidies .
We are talking about the Treaties , and those countries with less than 90 % of Community income have a continued right to the Cohesion Fund , because that is what is said by the rules of the Fifteen with which we have provided ourselves .
Mrs Schroedter certainly has understood what cohesion is .
And cohesion cannot be understood without the fundamental link to the internal market which now , with the single currency , is a full internal market .
The positions achieved are also the positions achieved by those countries , regions and companies which , in a common market , have enjoyed a situation of privileged competition . That is why cohesion arises : so that this competitive privilege can be borne in mind , and the least favoured regions can be helped .
Let us be logical when we talk about cohesion , Mr President .
Mr President , I want to start my speech by joining previous speakers in congratulating Mrs Schroedter on her report .
She certainly deserves those congratulations , because of her hard work in preparing her report and , especially , because of the efforts she has made to seek compromises between the various political groups . These compromises have meant that this report was approved almost unanimously in the Committee on Regional Policy .
Among the report 's conclusions , I would like to emphasise - because it is so important for cohesion policy - the express recognition that two-thirds of the total Structural Fund resources should be allocated to the Objective 1 regions . Only by concentrating resources on the least favoured regions can we reduce regional disparities within reasonable timescales .
I think the reference in recital A to the Cohesion Fund 's important role in promoting the harmonious development of the Community is very positive . However , not only do I think the statement in recital L should be incorporated into the conclusions , but I also think it needs to be worded in such a way as to clarify the debate currently underway , in view of the vote on the Berend amendment in the last Brussels part-session .
So I think the text of Amendments Nos 5 , 6 and 14 , presented by members of the PPE Group , the ARE Group and the PSE Group , brings the debate back to more reasonable terms , without hasty pronouncements .
These amendments support the maintenance of a Cohesion Fund after the year 2000 , without prejudging the final position of the European Parliament , which will be expressed in the context of the legislative procedure on the Cohesion Fund . They allow this House to begin the debate with the necessary composure and respect for the Treaties , in an atmosphere of parliamentary calm , unaffected by electoral stances arising from the important national elections underway .
I think that , as the report underlines , it is very important to reclaim powers for the bodies responsible for European regional policy , with respect to the programming and monitoring of programmes within the framework of rural development , otherwise the coherence which should characterize all aspects of regional policy will be lost .
I conclude by thanking our rapporteur again for her excellent work , which will serve as a guideline for the Committee on Regional Policy in its task over the next few months , in analysing the highly reasoned and balanced legislative proposals presented by the Commission .
Madam Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we must be careful - in the context of the solidarity always mentioned in connection with economic cohesion of the Union - not to repeat the fairytales told to us by the Council and other powers , sometimes even the Commission .
On the one hand , we cannot plan , with the approval of all Member States , an enlargement of the kind that is obviously planned here - the poorest and most sizeable enlargement which Europe 's history of integration has ever known . On the other hand , we cannot believe that we will have to pay less than in the past or indeed that we can maintain existing structural policies and Member States ' incomes as they were in the past .
Our fellow citizens will not accept this and indeed it is also an insult to our own intelligence .
Thus , it will be a question of proper distribution .
In this regard , some colleagues are indeed right .
We not only have a north-south conflict in the area of cohesion but also , to a certain extent , a north-north conflict .
Here I must point out to some of the preceding speakers that there is no point in only considering structural policies as such .
Of course , no later than October , when the Commission adds up the income side of Agenda 2000 and says that this country has to pay so much and that country has to pay so much , we will have a new debate on expenditure in category 2 of the structural policies .
For this reason it is also important that we include , for example , expenditure on agriculture .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development cannot make its own decisions on this and say that none of it is its concern .
I am directing this particularly at our Bavarian representative here .
Of course , this is to be included as , if we have major new tasks ahead of us , and that is a certainty , then it poses a challenge to our solidarity .
Then it will no longer be possible for the second richest country in this Union to be a net beneficiary because of this - crazy - agricultural policy ; then our fellow citizens of the Union will no longer accept such a policy .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to express my approval of the priorities of this report , which owes its current form not least to the cooperation of the rapporteur and to many changes in committee .
We are in favour of the proposed concentration of funding for development and structural adjustment of underdeveloped regions ( Objective 1 ) , as proposed by the report and by the Commission .
We support the strict application of the criterion of a regional per capita GNP , expressed as purchasing power parities of level NUT 2 , less than 75 % of the Community average , for the selection of future Objective 1 regions .
Two-thirds of the structural funds appropriations for Objective 1 do in fact guarantee the necessary concentration of funding for the regions most in need .
In this context , however , I would remind the Commission not to deviate from the strict application of this criterion .
In simple terms this means that all Objective 1 regions are entitled to receive equal funding .
In view of the regional orientation of Objective 1 , the criterion relating to national welfare is not suited to equal treatment .
On the contrary , it creates new inequalities and thus , we reject it .
Like the report and the Commission , we are in favour of financing European structural policy while maintaining the ceiling of 1.27 % for own resources and the percentage of structural funds at 0.46 % , and also of not deviating from these central points in the context of enlargement .
As far as the Cohesion Fund is concerned , we agree with the rapporteur that after the year 2000 , we should have a Cohesion Fund as support for reaching the convergence criteria .
However , we do not want the continuation of the existing one , as currently provided for by Agenda 2000 .
A translation error relating to this will be corrected tomorrow by means of a corrigendum .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , economic and social cohesion is an essential objective of European construction , and just as important as monetary union or the single market . If the effort towards cohesion has been important , the economic data show that so far it has not been enough .
To make sure that people understand what we mean , we are not talking about charity here , or about indefinite , indiscriminate subsidies .
Cohesion is synonymous with solidarity and fairness in the different efforts of the various European regions to achieve competitiveness .
Cohesion is the other face of the single market and monetary union . In that context , and in the context of enlargement , economic and social cohesion will be needed more than ever , and rightly so .
Monetary union and the single market will mean that investment is centred on the rich countries more than ever .
Enlargement will make solidarity even more necessary , when cohesion has still not been achieved among the Fifteen .
So the Cohesion Fund is an essential instrument .
The Cohesion Fund is needed by the current Member States which have a per capita GNP of less than 90 % of the Community average , as established by the Treaty , regardless of whether or not they join monetary union .
Lastly , the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries attached to the Schroedter report mentions an injustice which I want to underline : the inadequate structural attention paid to the fisheries sector in Agenda 2000 .
The special nature of coastal regions , which are generally peripheral and highly dependent on fishing , with no easy employment alternatives , means they need the structural support of a horizontal regulation to include the whole European coastline , to give these zones the concrete actions they so badly need and should have , but which do not exist at the moment .
So I conclude by congratulating the rapporteur and calling for real improvements in economic and social cohesion in Europe .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and say that Agenda 2000 puts a brake on the development of cohesion policy with a cut in the percentage of the expenditure objective decided in Edinburgh from 0.46 to 0.39 % , considering that heading 2 of the budget must give up ECU 7 billion to pre-accession .
That is why we are calling first of all for the creation of a new budget heading - heading 7 - a reflection on the 1.27 % that should be revised when the dates and numbers concerning enlargement are known , and a distribution of funds that leaves the cohesion policy the way it was decided , without reducing it to a kind of privilege for a few .
I actually wonder whether Agenda 2000 , in wanting to concentrate the distribution of funds as much as possible , has taken into account the actual needs of regions or whether it has blindly chosen a figure as the maximum criterion .
I also have doubts as to the choice of per capita GDP as an absolute reference .
This figure should be examined thoroughly so that it accurately reflects the socio-economic condition of a region , otherwise , we will find ourselves with obvious distortions of reality like , for example , in the case of the island regions .
How does a Eurostat parameter show the major difference that exists between the 76 % achieved by an island region and the 76 % achieved by a region on the mainland ?
Several items in the chapter on cohesion policy in Agenda 2000 leave me puzzled , beginning with the 10 % reserve .
I will just say here that I would like to see some rethinking of the Cohesion Fund as soon as possible so that in the near future it is not eliminated but regionalized .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank you , Mrs Schroedter , for the report and the resolutions which are critical and constructive and offer a further opportunity for discussion of Agenda 2000 in the European Parliament .
I would like to emphasize in particular the broad agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission , which is very positive , especially as regards the significance of economic and social cohesion , but also as regards common goals such as sustainability , combating unemployment , increasing the competitiveness of the regions , the importance of human resources and equality of opportunity .
We are starting to see some progress in the Council too .
The British Presidency has gone to great lengths in recent weeks , not only in the Council working parties but also in the informal Council in Glasgow , to initiate a first political discussion on the reform of the Structural Funds .
Perhaps the most important message from Glasgow is , in my view , that there was no fundamental opposition .
The political philosophy of the Commission 's proposals was broadly confirmed .
It is also significant that the Ministers accepted the connection between simplification and decentralization on the one hand , and increased accountability on the other .
But on this issue - as several speakers said - considerable discussion is , of course , still required .
Allow me to clarify the following once again in relation to the balance of the overall package .
Firstly , enlargement will not be at the expense of the poorest regions .
On the contrary , genuine Objective 1 regions will be the beneficiaries of this reform .
I would specifically mention , in this regard , that the existence of the Cohesion Fund and adjustment in line with the Stability Pact are part of the Commission 's overall proposal .
Secondly , concentration efforts are distributed equally and fairly among all Member States and are not at the expense of either rural areas or other problem regions .
Thirdly , the pre-accession package contains an attractive offer for those states wishing to join and does not place excessive strain on the current Member States .
Allow me to say , regarding your doubts on the financing of enlargement , that Agenda 2000 's overall package is financed cleanly .
However - and I would emphasize what was said here - the proposals on the reform of more important Community policies and on the gradual inclusion of applicant countries form one unit .
One is not possible without the other .
The applicant countries are also required not to allow their efforts to achieve the Community acquis to diminish .
If all participants proceed rationally , enlargement can be achieved without additional cost to the European taxpayer , even if growth should prove to be lower .
In addition , when discussing finances we should not forget the advantages of enlargement , politically and in terms of security , but above all for democracy and economic progress .
I believe that we are not exactly giving a welcoming impression to those Members who view accession to the Community as a way of belonging to a democratic system which guarantees peace .
With regard to your request that a single financial instrument be provided for the pre-accession strategy , I would point out that the Commission , in accordance with the instructions of the Luxembourg European Council , has proposed three financial instruments .
Because of the different legal bases , one would not , after all , simplify things for us any more than the attempt which we have now made , which is to try to make the process as uniform as possible by means of the coordination regulation and the functioning of the three regulations .
You , like many Member States , are in favour of a close interlocking of the pre-accession instrument with Interreg .
I would point out that it is not sufficient , in the area of cross-border activities , to restrict ourselves to ISBA ; instead , we should place emphasis on Interreg , PHARE-CBC .
Moreover , PHARE will continue to be responsible for introducing regional policy in the accession countries by means of small projects and institution building .
In continuing PHARE-CBC , the Commission considers it necessary , in the context of cross-border cooperation and in contrast to the decisive " No ' of the draft resolution , to devote greater attention to the Eastern borders ; this is also linked in with the pre-accession strategy .
However , and here we are in agreement , this must not result in the Western borders being neglected .
Strengthening cross-border cooperation is of particular importance , not only for acceptance of enlargement towards the east but also for purposes of introducing the procedures and substance of regional policy .
Partnership and an integrated approach are the innovative elements of the new Structural Funds regulation .
I thank you for the support of the European Parliament for the growth of this partnership .
However , it surprises me that after years of discussion about the necessity of integrated regional development strategies , the integrated approach should suddenly be called into question .
And yet all the experiences summarised in the cohesion report show that structural policy was particularly successful in all places where infrastructural measures , support of private investment and the development of human capital were components of a uniform regional policy .
I would consider it to be dangerous if we were to end up with fragmented activities and a sectoral patchwork , which would be inconsistent with an integrated regional development strategy and thus particularly with efficiency of aid .
Moreover , one programme per region is a considerable simplification which , nonetheless , in no way excludes the possibility of a detailed consideration of various problem areas or an objective examination of rural areas .
I considered your request for a subdivision of Objective 2 into two subgoals - or indeed the creation of an independent goal - to be counterproductive .
It is precisely this competition between town and country that we wish to overcome by means of a regional development strategy , Mrs Schroedter .
There can be no question , dear Mr Schiedermeier , of the rural areas being disadvantaged .
Looking to the future , that is first of all the application of Objective 2 in line with the principle of subsidiarity , with the opportunity for countries and regions to select a considerable number of the areas , and the horizontal support in Figure 3 , goodness knows this cannot in any way be seen as neglect of rural areas .
I am pleased that the European Parliament 's proposal for a performance reserve is approved at least in principle , and hope that we can still dispel your scepticism by means of range and feasibility .
This also applies to the Commission 's proposal to create incentives for good financial management of the programmes .
I agree that we must yet discuss this critically but I would ask you not to allow yourselves to be affected by particular ministerial interests .
The Austrian Presidency is determined to have the main points of the reform ready for judgement before the Council Summit in Vienna so that the whole package can be adopted early in 1999 .
Here I hope for the active support of the European Parliament and ask you to focus all your efforts on this and not on an interim regulation .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Could you inform Commissioner Fischler 's cabinet that mobile phones are not allowed in this House .
It is discourteous to Members and interrupts the debates .
Thank you , Mrs McCarthy .
We have all noted your remark .
That includes the Commissioner , of course .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m. tomorrow .
Common organization of the market in bananas
The next item on the agenda is Mr Thomas 's report ( A4-0220 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending ( EEC ) Regulation No 404 / 93 on the common organization of the market in bananas ( COM ( 98 ) 0004- C4-0046 / 98-98 / 0013 ( CNS ) .
Mr President , today we are considering a Commission proposal which will bring the European Union banana regime into line with a ruling delivered by the WTO dispute settlement body .
Although many of us would like to , we are not at liberty to alter the judgment and many of us , myself included , would criticize the way that decision was reached and the method by which the original complaint was taken .
However , that said , the European Union is required to put new arrangements into place by 1 January 1999 .
The world trade in bananas is a very complex business with many players and conflicting interests .
I firmly believe that although we must work within the legal framework of our international commitments , our primary objective must be to protect EU producers and those countries to which we have committed our support in the context of the Lomé Convention .
The provision of quality fruit at a reasonable price is just one aim of the banana regime .
However , world trade should not be driven solely by economic considerations .
We have a duty to contribute to the fight against poverty and towards the protection of acceptable social and environmental standards .
I broadly support the Commission proposals which make as few changes as possible to the existing regime .
The Commission proposes maintaining the existing tariff quota at its current level of 2.2 million tonnes at the same rate of duty of ECU 75 per tonne with an additional autonomous tariff quota of 353 000 tonnes at a rate of ECU 300 per tonne to take account of an enlarged European Union .
My main concern with the Commission proposals is that duty-free access to bananas from traditional ACP suppliers up to a ceiling of 857 000 tonnes will continue while at the same time the current licensing system will be abolished and individual countries will no longer be allocated a share of the quota on a country basis .
The licensing system is one element of the banana regime condemned by the WTO which must be replaced .
The Commission proposal does not detail how licences will be allocated and this gives rise to concern .
I urge the Commission to preserve a balance in the supply of bananas on the EU market and to ensure that in allocating a quota they use the best possible statistics which take account of changes in trade flows in recent years .
It would be totally unacceptable if those ACP countries which have traditionally provided bananas for the EU market and whose economies depend on the revenue they receive from the banana trade lose out when new arrangements come into effect .
The Lomé Convention refers to individual states and not the ACP as a whole and the WTO ruling recognizes the commitment the EU has made to the ACP states .
Traditional ACP suppliers also risk losing out as a result of the increasing involvement of American multinationals in banana production in some of the non-traditional ACP states .
I trust that the Commission will monitor this situation very carefully and bear this in mind when allocating market access .
I am pleased that in this context the Commission has brought forward proposals for a financial package of ECU 370m to assist ACP banana producers and bridge the competitive gap between the ACP and Latin American bananas .
Mr Liese is the rapporteur for the Committee on Development and Cooperation for these proposals and they are linked with mine .
They should be treated as an urgency this week .
It is important to have a mechanism which will enable ACP states to expand their production .
I have suggested that the Commission include an expansion coefficient in their calculations .
It is easy for an Englishman to forget that 17 % of the bananas eaten in Europe are produced domestically .
I would like to thank my Spanish and Portuguese colleagues for the time they have taken to ensure that I was fully instructed on this fact .
We discussed EU banana production and its importance to the industry in some of the more peripheral areas of the Union at some length .
The Commission proposal does not contain any specific measures to favour our own banana producers who stand to lose as a result of the changes to the regime .
I therefore proposed in my report that the maximum quantity for EU bananas be increased by 15 % from the present level of 854 , 000 tonnes to 982 , 000 tonnes and that the standard reference income be raised by 20 % .
In this way we can ensure that EU producers also benefit from the growth in the market .
The ECU 78m which will be saved as a result of higher duties should be redeployed to facilitate banana production in those regions of the EU such as Madeira , the Canaries and Crete whose economies to a large extent depend on this crop .
Finally , I would like to make a special mention of Somalia .
The civil war and severe flooding have devastated the banana industry .
We have a duty to extend a helping hand to the people of Somalia and ensure that they can rebuild what was a flourishing industry .
I urge the Commission and the Council to be flexible and show some compassion .
There is much more I could say about my report .
I hope colleagues will support it as it was overwhelmingly supported in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union consumes approximately four million tonnes of bananas every year .
76 % of these are imported from nonEU , non-ACP countries , most of whose plantations are controlled by American companies .
So far as we know , this form of production , or this way of producing bananas , has no environmental or social concerns .
Thus , from the point of view of production in the European Union - which , as you know , includes the island of Madeira , which is part of the territory of Portugal - we have been protecting either common production or production in the traditional ACP countries .
That protection has been provided by subsidies and preferential treatment which is expressed in a special system of import certificates and a customary duty-free import quota .
That system , as you know , has been challenged by the United States and some Latin American banana producers as an alleged breach of Article 13 of the GATT .
As a result , the Union has been requested to change the system by the dispute-settling body of the World Trade Organization .
The Commission has accordingly put forward a amendment to Regulation 404 / 93 on the common organization of the market in bananas .
That amendment is the subject of our report .
Having examined and studied all its aspects , particularly its budgetary implications , the Budgetary Committee essentially agrees to the proposals on the legal side of the matter ; however , particularly bearing in mind the resulting implications for its own producers and for traditional ACP producers , the Budgetary Committee has drawn up a series of amendments to the law - which it hopes may be included in the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development - the purpose of which is , by means of an annual report by the Committee , to control and keep checks on the financial consequences of the new system and examine the proposed aid framework .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Fischler , the establishment of a European market for bananas in 1993 has had largely positive results : a sevenfold increase in intra-Community flow , convergence and stability of prices , renewed confidence in producer countries and , finally , an increase in the market shares of European operators by comparison with American operators .
More specifically , of the three great multinational companies which control three-quarters of the world market in bananas , only Chiquita 's market share is decreasing , which I have to say is the result of strategic and management errors . Chiquita therefore only has itself to blame .
However , this company with its colonialist attitude , which is used to getting its own way , by force if necessary , and which has been convicted several times for abusing its dominant position , blames European regulations , and what is more , the American government and certain other countries have followed its example .
Of course , Chiquita 's president has an important political role and great political influence , as he gave over one million dollars to the big political parties during the presidential elections in the United States .
So , the problem has nothing to do with the principle of liberalization of the European market in bananas .
The COM has apparently expanded the market .
The essential problem has something to do with our view of the economy which is opposed to that of the United States , especially when such an important country allows it decisions to be dictated by an utterly unscrupulous company .
Faced with the WTO rulings , and after having exhausted all other means of recourse , the Union has in fact decided to bring the COM in bananas into line with the rules of international trade .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation accepts the solution proposed by the Commission and amended by the rapporteur Mr Thomas , whom I must thank for having incorporated many of our proposals .
We accept it because it complies with the 1993 compromises : it respects the interest of the various sources of supply , and takes into consideration the Union 's commitments , that is , Community preference and preferential access for ACP countries , pursuant to Protocol 5 of the Lomé Convention .
In many African , Caribbean and Pacific countries , bananas are the main crop , the only crop to generate exports , the main employer .
They are the " single engine ' of fragile economies , trying courageously and obstinately to enter the modern world .
This new regulation will test the Union 's political ability to defend its policies and its identity .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating David Thomas , the rapporteur , on his excellent work on this crucial issue of our trade in bananas .
I also wish to offer an apology , Mr President , to you , Parliament and Commissioner Fischler , for I have to leave immediately after this speech for a bilateral discussion with my Dutch colleague , Jozias van Aartsen , about this dossier and price-fixing generally , before the Council next week .
After all the hard work that has gone into this dossier , I am optimistic that the Council will be able to arrive at an agreement at our June meeting .
Today is an opportunity , therefore , for me to express my sincere appreciation to Parliament , David Thomas and all his colleagues for the speed with which this issue , this complex and , as we know , controversial dossier , has been considered .
Ever since the latest WTO dispute began two years ago , we have accepted that , in the event of an adverse ruling , the Union would have to bring its arrangements into line with those WTO rules .
The Union committed itself to do that immediately , once the ruling was published .
We now have until 1 January next year to get the revised system into place .
That is why we must reach agreement at next week 's Council so that there is enough time for the detailed rules to be agreed and implemented before that deadline .
The revised arrangements will not be as favourable as the present arrangements for the producers in the ACP countries , to whom we have obligations under the Lomé Convention .
Taking my presidency hat off for a moment , we in the United Kingdom are particularly concerned about the situation of the Caribbean producers .
Because of our long-standing relationship with the region we are acutely aware of their current dependence on banana production to sustain their whole economy .
The Council recognizes the importance of bananas , both in terms of exports and employment , for those Caribbean and , indeed , all ACP countries , and for the ultra-peripheral areas of the Union .
At the same time , we accept that the revisions the Commission is proposing are the best way forward in the very difficult circumstances following the ruling by the WTO .
It is important , therefore , to reach agreement as soon as possible , both inside the European Union and outside it , too , in order to provide the stability in the market that both producers and traders require .
Regrettably , while we seem to be moving towards an acceptable deal within the European Union , the signs from some of the WTO complainants are less helpful .
These countries have , of course , been following the negotiations on the revised arrangements with close interest .
They claim that what the Commission is proposing is not sufficient to bring the bananas regime into line with the ruling .
I must say that I find this attitude very disappointing .
I hope that once the United States and others have a chance to look at what the Council agrees , they will accept that we , working together with the Commission , have found a reasonable way of honouring all our international obligations - that is obligations under the Lomé Convention as well as obligations under the WTO .
I certainly hope that is so , because the uncertainty created by the ongoing threat of further WTO action would be neither conducive to the proper functioning of the market nor to the ability of ACP and EU growers to adjust to the new arrangements .
I firmly believe that the proposal represents a carefully judged reconciliation of the Union 's obligations under the WTO and its commitment to the ACP countries under the Lomé Convention .
I am determined to reach agreement in the June Agriculture Council , and I am most grateful for the European Parliament 's helpfulness in making this objective possible .
I once again apologize for having to leave .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to extend my warmest thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Thomas , for his report on the reform of the common market organization in bananas .
The starting point which made it necessary to reform those points of the common market organization in bananas which regulate trade with third countries is well known .
I would like to add at this point that the WTO rules do not affect internal Community rules ; for this reason they do not need to be changed .
Nine major series of questions stand out from among the large number of amendments .
The first problem concerns autonomous tariff quotas and the balance sheet .
In the Commission 's view , the relevant amendments do not take into account the supply requirements of the enlarged Community of Fifteen .
We must also ensure that we fulfil the valid expectations of those traders who previously had privileges .
I would also like to note that each increase in autonomous tariff quotas benefits non-traditional ACP countries and that EU producers always profit from an increase in consumption as their production quantities are not limited .
The Commission cannot , therefore , accept Amendments Nos 11 , 15 , 23 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 46 or 53 .
The second problem concerns the regulation on deficiency payments .
The Commission proposal ensures that the regulation is in line with the WTO provisions , which nonetheless do not affect internal Community rules .
Thus , in the Commission 's view , it is neither necessary nor appropriate to change the deficiency payments regulation .
I would like to emphasize , however , that the income guarantee for EU producers is always granted , without full compensation , regardless of the actual market price .
Amendments Nos 5 to 8 , 10 , 21 , 22 , 24 to 26 , 48 and 51 therefore constitute a problem for the Commission .
As far as the ACP suppliers are concerned , a subject dealt with in Amendments Nos 3 , 6 , 9 , 36 , 48 , 55 and 57 , the existing preferences are retained in the Commission proposal .
We believe that access is gained to the Community by means of the third preamble in the original regulation .
Special assistance should be laid down in the Commission proposal in the form of a special framework of assistance for the traditional ACP suppliers which , it is to be hoped , will be accepted soon and which was previously the subject of the vote in the urgent procedure .
Thus , the Commission believes that in this context , changes to our proposal will not be necessary .
I should add , in relation to Amendments Nos 48 and 55 , that the revision of the WTO mechanisms lies outside the scope of this regulation .
As regards Amendments Nos 14 , 28 , 45 , 50 and 52 concerning non-traditional ACP bananas , in the Commission 's view access of non-traditional bananas to the Community market by means of the ECU 200 preference is already sufficiently guaranteed .
With regard to Amendment No 50 , it should be noted that the allocation of 857 000 tonnes applies only to the traditional ACP suppliers and that this fixed provision guarantees access to the Union 's market .
Amendments Nos 16 , 17 and 32 refer specifically to Somalia .
If we were to grant Somalia a special quota , this would clearly be an infringement of WTO provisions , as would preferential granting of licences .
In any case , Somalia benefits from the overall ACP quota , although it did not sign the last Lomé Convention .
The next problem area concerns import licences and the licence system .
A balanced supply is guaranteed by the quotas for third countries and not by the licence system .
Furthermore , the details of the licence system for bananas and the coefficients of expansion to calculate the number of licences to be allocated every year to each group of traders are decided in the course of the management committee procedure .
I cannot , therefore , approve Amendments Nos 12 , 13 , 33 to 35 , 44 or 49 .
I will now turn to the question of proper conditions of competition , which I know is very important to many of the Members of this House .
This question concerns Amendments Nos 1 to 4 , 18 , 19 , 37 , 38 , 40 , 44 , 54 , 55 and 58 to 60 .
I would emphasize that the Commission is very much in favour of proper conditions of competition and organic production methods .
In our opinion , the corresponding measures should be taken across the board and not just for bananas .
This question is currently being discussed by the services concerned in order to clarify the position of the Commission on the issue of proper conditions of competition .
Thus , I do not wish to pre-empt the results of these Commission discussions .
Amendment No 29 aims to ensure that smaller suppliers , in particular smaller ACP countries , are not disadvantaged by the introduction of tariff quotas .
The WTO provisions , however , already offer smaller suppliers higher protection and we will comply with these provisions .
Thus , in the Commission 's view , it is not necessary to change the original wording .
In the Commission 's opinion , there is still sufficient time , before the review at the end of 2005 , for the regulation to prove that it is fully workable and for its efficiency to be tested .
For this reason I cannot accept the amendments which suggest different limits for the duration of the regulation or for the review .
The Commission welcomes the European Parliament 's constructive cooperation in this extremely difficult and sometimes emotional subject , which is of the utmost importance both within the EU and from an international point of view .
The Commission 's caution regarding the amendments tabled is linked to the fact that we must strive to avoid a second WTO panel in this matter , as this would certainly cause considerable harm to the standing of the European Community and its institutions .
Thank you , Commissioner Fischler .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m. tomorrow .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is questions to the Commission ( B4-0474 / 98 ) .
Having welcomed Commissioner Wulf-Mathies , and once she has got settled , I invite her to reply to Question No 45 by Richard Corbett ( H-0501 / 98 )
Subject : Money-laundering and transition to the single currency
Article 3 of the 1991 Council Directive on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money-laundering establishes an identification requirement for customers involved in any transaction amounting to ECU 15 000 or more .
Will this be applicable to monies changed from national currencies to the euro ?
If not , why not ?
If necessary , will the Commission put forward proposals to ensure that the transition to the euro provides a unique opportunity for nullifying the value of large sums of money in the hands of criminal gangs and others ?
Mr President , the terms of the Council Directive on prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering also apply fully to the period of transition to the euro in terms of the exchange of national currencies into the single currency .
However , according to the Directive , only the laundering of drugs money is prohibited .
This is why it is planned to extend the ban to a broader spectrum of serious crime .
According to the Directive , anyone wishing to open a bank or savings account must provide identification and the data recorded regarding identification must be kept for at least five years .
Moreover , identification is required of all customers concluding transactions of over ECU 15 000 .
This is the case regardless of whether the transaction is carried out in a single operation or whether it spans several operations which are , or appear to be , linked .
Where there are grounds for believing that customers are not acting on their own behalf , measures must be taken to determine the real identity of the persons on whose behalf those customers are acting .
If there is any suspicion of money laundering , the identity of the customer must be established regardless of the amount of the financial transaction .
All suspicious transactions must be reported to the relevant authorities .
The Commission expects continuous vigilance on the part of credit and financial institutions in the run-up to the changeover to the euro ; during this transition , criminals may attempt to channel their cash back into the financial system or to exchange national currencies into other currencies .
This applies equally to the actual changeover period .
At the same time , the Commission admits that banks could face further difficulties in exposing suspicious transactions , in particular those under the ECU 15 000 threshold , if a large number of unknown customers appear at their tills .
The Commission is continuing its internal consultations on the effects the changeover to the euro may have on the fight against money laundering .
This problem should also be tackled by the money laundering contact committee set up within the framework of this Directive .
In addition , the Commission will soon be adopting its second report on the incorporation of the money laundering Directive into national law , and expects to present it to Parliament before the summer recess .
Thank you , Commissioner , for that detailed answer which is quite encouraging .
But I would urge you to go further and ensure that this unique opportunity is seized .
The black economy is largely a cash economy .
Drug dealers and others like dealing in cash rather than through bank accounts because it leaves no trace .
With the transition to the euro , they will at some point have to convert old notes and coins into euros and , at that point , there is an opportunity for control and follow-up of leads that have perhaps been given from other sources .
That is why a full and proper application of this directive and the further measures that you refer to is essential so that we can use this occasion to have an extra bonus in the transition to the single currency , over and above the economic benefits that it is going to bring us .
May I urge you to persevere .
Mr President , I think we are in agreement on the most important points .
We will continue to observe matters carefully and will endeavour to respond to potential problems using the proposed new directive .
However , we must recognise that old banknotes may be exchanged by honest citizens , too , who simply prefer the piggy bank to the High Street bank .
Thus , above all we must exercise great care in ensuring that banks provide the necessary information and precautions .
Question No 46 by Georgios Anastassopoulos ( H-0542 / 98 )
Subject : Commission obligation to monitor the use of Community funds to prevent them being used for Government propaganda
Given that the Greek Government is using substantive amounts of Community funding ( for instance , Drs. 1.5 billion from the CSF ) for Government propaganda and television broadcasts , without respecting the balance of political power in Greece and without giving MEPs the opportunity to inform Greek public opinion , will the Commission say :
What Community funds have been used over the last three years for actions of this kind and why has it failed to carry out controls so as to ensure compliance with the principles agreed on with Parliament ?
Since prefectural and local elections are taking place in Greece in 1998 , does the Commission intend , in the light of the accusations which have been levelled , to change the present system so as to prevent the unilateral use of Community funds for government and ministerial propaganda and to highlight the Community contribution to the development of Greece ?
Mr President , under current Community law the Member States provide appropriate publicity for campaigns assisted by the Structural Funds to draw the attention of potential beneficiaries and of trade associations alike to the opportunities offered by these campaigns , and to inform the general public about the work of the European Structural Funds .
The operational programme " Technical aid within the Community support framework for Greece ' provides for the implementation of an action plan for publicity and information , for which ECU 6.2 million was made available .
The national and regional programmes and the Community initiatives also include publicity and information campaigns which are provided with less funding .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , the Greek authorities are responsible for proper implementation of the tendering and award procedure for information and publicity campaigns .
Before the invitation to tender was issued , the Commission was consulted on the corresponding specifications .
The Greek ministry responsible consulted the Commission on the action plan and on the national " Publicity and information ' guide , in order to ensure a consistent approach .
All actions taken by the Greek authorities in terms of publicity and information are in accordance with the provisions of relevant Community guidance .
As far as the Commission is aware , the advertisements on television and radio and in the press are politically neutral .
Also , there have been no complaints so far regarding the campaign introduced in 1997 .
Indeed , Mr Vice-President , as we understand it , the person asking the question played an active role in the campaign himself .
Again , in the talkshows held in 1997 , participation of Members of the European Parliament to represent the major political groupings was secured .
The Commission will ask the Greek authorities responsible to guarantee ongoing balanced participation .
As municipal elections are being held in Greece in October 1998 , it has been agreed with the Greek government that the publicity and information campaign co-financed by the Structural Funds is to be postponed from August to October in order to forestall any possible criticism .
I wonder if the Commissioner can be satisfied with the reply she has given me , when there are complaints .
And I am afraid that the neutrality the Commissioner asserted does not exist .
Have the Commission services not informed the Commission that use is being made of Community resources for government propaganda and for the promotion of ministers ?
Let us not confuse certain information action plans in which the European Parliament also participates and in which I co-preside over a committee with Commissioner Marcelino Oreja and give guidelines , and in some of which Greek MEPs have also participated .
The one has nothing to do with the other .
Recently Greek MEPs have not been taking part in some of these information programmes and this is one of the aspects of the complaint .
Mr President , I believe I made it abundantly clear that with the exception of one isolated case we were not aware of any complaints and that we have now taken preventive action .
I believe this guarantees sufficient impartiality .
Of course , where such information is concerned , we cannot prevent the relevant Ministers from issuing this information .
In my opinion , this is even necessary in the interests of correctness of information .
But allow me to emphasize once again that in Greece , in our opinion , not only is party political neutrality guaranteed ; some particularly positive steps have also been taken , for example Commission and European Parliament projects in high schools in Greece , which we consider to be exemplary .
I wish that other Member States would make this a subject of study in schools .
In this respect we assume , therefore , that the necessary precautions have been taken to prevent abuse .
Thank you very much , Mrs Wulf-Mathies . However , I would ask you to spend a little longer on the subject matter of this question , because I have received two requests for the floor , and according to the Rules of Procedure , I am obliged to grant them .
Mr Hatzidakis has the floor first , for one minute .
Madam Commissioner , what you have told us is of course constructive , that is , that between the end of August and the end of October the transmission of these " politically neutral ' advertisement slots will stop because , in my opinion , they are not .
Nevertheless , I thank you personally for this intervention on the part of the Commission , because it really is important , in view of the municipal and prefectural elections in Greece , but over and above that I wish to dwell on two points .
Balanced participation in these programmes does not exist .
There was a programme , Commissioner , in which there was not a single representative of the New Democracy Party , which is the second largest party in the Greek Parliament , representing 38 % of the electorate , and we did not have a representative .
You must look into that .
It is interesting to note that , as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party on issues of regional policy , I have never been invited to appear on such a programme .
I do not say this as a personal complaint , but simply so that you can understand the climate and act accordingly .
I will conclude by asking you this : do you know whether , in the regional business programmes , the regulations concerning the allocation of advertisement slots to advertising companies have been complied with ?
I am not referring to the national slot , where the regulations have been observed , but to the regional programmes .
Has the Commission been informed that the regulations have not been complied with there ?
According to our information , the Community Directives and provisions have been adhered to .
I would consider it appropriate if you would pass on to us any specific cases of complaints you may have .
We are not some kind of general remote monitoring organization .
If there are problems , we look into them individually .
But I do not believe that a theoretical debate here in Parliament will serve any useful purpose .
Thank you very much , Mrs Wulf-Mathies , but as I said , I would like you to stay on the same subject because Mr Seppänen also wants to ask you a supplementary question .
Mr Seppänen has the floor for one minute .
Mr President , Commissioner , this problem does not just concern Greece . I maintain that in Finland too Commission money and resources are used for purposes of political propaganda that are biassed and ignore the fact that there are various national groups in our country that view critically the decisions that are taken by the EU .
For this reason , I would turn your attention to the fact that in Finland money is used , for example , for the purpose of bringing the euro into the market , and that money is for the exclusive use of citizens ' organizations that have a positive view of the euro .
Commissioner , do you really believe that only the people who said ' yes ' should be allowed to use funds for propaganda ?
I will say it once again . It is a question of the principle of subsidiarity .
That means that the Member States are responsible for publicity campaigns within the framework of the general provisions laid down by the Commission .
If there are specific complaints , we should investigate them .
I consider it difficult to pursue this theoretical discourse .
Question No 47 by Charlotte Cederschiöld ( H-0556 / 98 )
Subject : Excise duties
The Swedish Government has introduced a bill ( Proposition 1998 / 97 : 100 ) to extend powers to carry out checks on the payment of excise duties , owing to the increase in cross-border trade in alcohol and tobacco .
One firm involved in such trade is the German company , Warendienst OCC GmbH , which arranges deliveries from Germany to individuals in Sweden via the Internet .
It is proposed that the customs service should have the right to seize and , in some cases , confiscate goods if there is a risk that the excise duties will not be paid .
It is also proposed that customs should be given powers to open private consignments where it is suspected that they contain alcohol or tobacco .
Does the Commission consider this draft law to be compatible with the principles which govern the internal market and those enshrined in the European convention protecting personal correspondence ?
Mr President , Mrs Cederschiöld , the provisions of the internal market do not preclude Member States from exercising domestic controls .
Community rules expressly provide for excise duties to be charged in accordance with procedure in the Member State concerned .
Member States can therefore set up their own monitoring systems , provided that these do not give rise to any frontier formalities and are in accordance with the general principles of Community law relating to non-discrimination and proportionality .
The Commission was not able to examine the proposed amendments in detail but , according to the information available , the provisions in question do not appear to be inconsistent with the principles of the internal market .
Thank you for your reply .
However , my question was whether this proposal was compatible with the Convention on Human Rights , since the personal import of tobacco products and alcoholic drinks from other EU countries is a civil right under EC law .
The law which is to become effective on 1 July gives the customs authorities the right to open private mail and parcels from other EU countries .
This is not compatible with Swedish constitutional law or with EC law , according to the learned EU specialists who have expressed an opinion .
Even the Law Council , the Attorney-General and the bar association in Sweden do not think this is allowed .
The proposal is in fact contrary to human rights , which only allow restrictions on mail confidentiality if the country 's economic well-being is threatened , which is not happening in this case .
Here people would be able to seize and forfeit ' suspected ' lorries through a simple court order without impartial , public legal proceedings .
I would just like to ask whether Commissioner Wulf-Mathies thinks this is compatible with human rights , and whether crossborder trade is not more important than a Member State 's right to charge taxes .
Yes , Mrs Cederschiöld , I am afraid I must disappoint you , as the Community is not a party to the European Human Rights Convention .
For this reason it is not appropriate for the Commission to comment on whether national legislation is in agreement with individual provisions of the European Convention .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her reply which clarified matters .
As I see it , the question put by Mrs Cederschiöld was a contribution to the Swedish election debate since we have an election in September .
There is one party in the Swedish Parliament which is opposed to the proposal currently before the Swedish Parliament , namely the Conservative Party .
However , the rest of the parties think the current proposals to maintain the excise duty rules and to maintain the age limits which we have on the sale of alcohol and tobacco are compatible both with the single market and the European Convention on Human Rights .
Besides , these issues can be put to the test .
An overwhelming majority of the parties in Sweden share the Commissioner 's view that the proposals we are discussing here do not conflict with the single market .
Mr President , the agreement reached between the European Union and the USA at the London Summit on 18 May is a package solution with the realistic prospect of a lasting settlement of the disputes with the United States concerning the Helms-Burton Act , the law on sanctions against Iran and Libya and the more general problem of extraterritorial sanctions .
Despite this agreement , the Commission holds to its position that these laws violate the law of nations .
Thus , at no stage did the Community recognize their legality .
In case measures should be taken against persons or companies from the Community , it has reserved the unlimited right to take the case up again within the framework of the WTO .
The agreement reached is of a purely political nature and does not constitute the legitimization of US laws which continue to be illegal .
The package solution includes three points .
The first is an agreement on certain disciplines which prohibit new investment in illegally expropriated properties . The second is the USA 's promise to eschew future extraterritorial legislation in an agreement on the transatlantic partnership for political cooperation , and , of particular importance for the Community , the assurance of the US government that it will suspend application of the two contentious laws to the Community and to businesses from the Community - that is , the guarantee of the so-called waiver .
The Community has received clear agreement that the US government will immediately try to obtain authority from Congress to issue an unlimited exemption from Title 4 of the Helms-Burton Act , the waiver .
It is important that the Community does not apply the agreed disciplines before the exemption is actually issued .
The European Union will only fulfil the agreed obligations when the USA complies with its part of the agreement .
There will therefore be no advance concession from the European Union .
A very important factor in the agreed disciplines on the prevention of new investment in illegally expropriated properties is that investments made before 18 May are exempt from this ban .
These disciplines therefore apply only to future investment in properties which the Member States are convinced have been expropriated illegally .
They state essentially that no aid may be granted either by the state or by businesses for investment in illegally expropriated properties . Investments which have not received state aid are not affected .
I will repeat this to ensure that it is clear : the disciplines are not applied by the Community before the US Congress has given the President of the United States the authority to issue an exemption from Title 4 of the Helms-Burton Act and this exemption has come into force .
In addition , the agreement on disciplines for investment in illegally expropriated properties provides that the Community and the USA bring these disciplines up jointly in the negotiations on the multilateral investment agreement .
Madam Commissioner , first of all , thank you for your full and thorough reply .
Nevertheless , I continue to harbour understandable doubts about the behaviour of the European Union in these negotiations of 18 May , for the following reasons .
Firstly , I should imagine the Commissioner is already aware of the importance to Spain of our relations - economic , social , cultural and everything else - with Cuba , and that any type of sanction would therefore do great harm .
But the second question I would like to ask , in the light of your reply , is that on the one hand , the text released to the public said that the European Union undertook to inhibit and discourage future investments , and in your reply you said , also directly , that this referred to expropriations which are considered illegal .
So , my specific question is whether that means acceptance of the US position on these questions and the indirect adoption of the Helms-Burton Act .
Mr President , I would like to emphasize once again that we are in fact dealing only with future investment and state aid for future investment .
It is crucial that , before we actually implement this , the American government should commit itself to waiving extraterritorial legislation and also that it issue this waiver .
This means , therefore , that it is a deal based on mutual interest , if you wish , and first of all the American government must repeal the effect of the HelmsBurton Act for European investment before the European Union reciprocates .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
I still have two supplementary questions on the agreement of 18 May on the Helms-Burton Act .
Mr Newens has one minute to ask the first of these .
Mr President , if the waiver on titles 3 and 4 of the Helms-Burton Act goes through - which is unlikely in view of the statements of Senator Jesse Helms - would not efforts to deter future public support for investments in so-called expropriated properties be contrary to agreements made by individual European Union Member States and Cuba ?
In that case , which would have the overriding force ?
Should not the United States be encouraged to make a settlement with Cuba over compensation for nationalized properties as other states , including those in Europe , have done ?
In these circumstances there would be no case whatsoever for the Helms-Burton Act .
Mr President , I really would not like to speculate on what might ensue if Congress did not adopt this regulation as both we and the American government would , of course , stake everything on it being passed .
Furthermore , the agreement is not concerned with a ban on investment in Cuba but only on the part relating to state aid .
With that reply , we have come to the end of this block of questions .
I thank Mrs Wulf-Mathies for coming here and answering our questions .
Mrs Cresson , we welcome you , and I invite you to take the floor to reply to Question No 49 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0567 / 98 )
Subject : " Destructive embryonic research '
What is the Commission 's position on " destructive embryonic research ' , and are such research projects assisted with EU resources ?
The legitimacy of research using embryos is one the most complex and sensitive ethical questions which can arise in science .
It is also an issue on which there are the widest possible differences in the perceptions , approaches and regulations of the various Member States .
The main problem is to strike a balance between the interests of infertile couples and the sick , and respect for fundamental ethical principles and the moral and religious convictions of various sections of the population .
Careful attention is generally paid to ethical aspects of research in the field of life sciences and technology during the implementation of the Union 's research programmes .
Some types of work are therefore explicitly excluded from the Fourth Framework Programme on biomedicine and health .
This is the case with research on human cloning or research leading to transmissible genetic modifications in particular .
On the other hand , research using foetal and embryonic tissues is not prohibited as such .
This type of research is of great interest in areas such as medically assisted procreation , and the diagnosis and treatment of cancer or genetic diseases .
Like all proposals presented within the framework of the research programme on biomedicine and health , proposals relating to research involving the use of human embryos or foetuses nevertheless have to comply with regulations and legislative provisions , defining the ethical requirements in force in the countries where the research is carried out .
Proposals of this type that have been submitted under the Fourth Framework Programme have been examined by a group of experts on the embryo and foetus , set up by the Commission , with particular responsibility for evaluating the ethical aspects of research carried out within the scope of EU programmes .
One of the aspects taken into consideration in this evaluation was the lack of alternatives to the proposed method .
The group 's opinions have been forwarded to local or national ethics committees responsible for granting the preliminary authorizations as required by the Commission .
All the provisions in force relating to ethics in the field of life sciences and technology will be maintained in the Fifth Framework Programme .
Considering the sensitivity of this question , I shall ask the ethics group chaired by Mrs Noëlle Lenoir to issue an opinion , before the specific ' Life Sciences ' programme comes into force .
The approach to ethical questions relating to research involving embryos is therefore based on the need for such research in order to increase our scientific knowledge in the interest of patients , whilst at the same time respecting fundamental ethical principles and the diversity of national feelings .
Madam Commissioner , if I understood your reply correctly , exhaustive embryo research projects are assisted .
In any case you have not expressly ruled it out and you pointed to national standards .
But are there not also EU standards now ?
I would remind you of the most recently adopted patents directive for biotechnological inventions ; here , with regard to cloning , we said quite clearly that a human being is a human being from the beginning - that is , from the moment of conception , and thus has the right to protection , and in this regard we clarified this considerably in the interinstitutional dossier , the result of which goes far beyond the statements of the advisory body on the ethics of biotechnology .
I am of the opinion that the standards we have developed in connection with the patents directive are the clearest EU standards thus far , and that we must develop our own EU standards on this basis as it cannot be satisfactory in the long term , as we have said , for the Commission to proceed differently in terms of aid depending on the state concerned .
Yes , Mr Posselt , I agree with you entirely that it would be highly desirable for us to have European standards .
Apart from a number of basic regulations , to which I referred earlier , such as the prohibition of human cloning , I also said that the regulations are different , perhaps even extremely divergent , in the various Member States of the Union .
I have furthermore had a table drawn up showing the situation as it stands today , country by country .
I do not think this is an ideal situation , and we must do everything we can to draft a general regulation .
But it will also need to be acceptable to the various Member States .
However , the Commission does not consider that research involving embryos should be excluded as such from the Union 's research programmes , and just now I referred to the opportunities that such research can provide in very important sectors .
Provided compliance is ensured with fundamental ethical principles , such as those I have mentioned , the Commission believes that research of this type may be legitimately carried out , in the interests of scientific progress and in the interests of patients .
It seems to me that a precedent would be created if we were to align the relevant provisions with the most restrictive national legislative provisions , because , of course , it would be possible to try to adopt common standards on the basis of the most restrictive provisions . That precedent could mean that the same principle would be adopted as a solution whenever there are differences between national legislation .
You will be aware that this is the case in a large number of areas , which could have negative repercussions with regard to research and for citizens .
We have not yet completed our discussion of this subject and I understand your question perfectly , and agree that it is pertinent .
However , we are in a situation where some Member States have a very restrictive attitude , and others , on the contrary , have a far more lenient attitude .
Should we authorize the manufacture of embryos for the purpose of experimentation ?
Some Member States , one in particular , would go so far as to allow this , whilst other Member States - in fact most other Member States - have a far more restrictive attitude .
The Commission cannot impose the most restrictive standard as a single standard , nor do I think that would be desirable .
Furthermore , we must be extremely vigilant from the ethical point of view , and we have only just started our discussions . I therefore consider that we have some very important work ahead of us .
With the resources at our disposal today , we have no option but to continue our discussions , and to try to persuade Member States to adopt a common definition , but I repeat , we do not have any means of compelling them to do so .
This is why we can only adopt a position of principle , the principle of respect for fundamental ethical values , and for the time being all we can do is accept the situation as it stands in the Member States .
As the author is not present , Question No 50 lapses .
That brings us to the end of the set of questions to Mrs Cresson .
I thank her for attending and for her collaboration .
Question No 51 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0498 / 98 )
Subject : Cultural cooperation between the European Union and international organizations
Article 128 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on European Union states : " The Community and the Member States shall foster cooperation with third countries and the competent international organizations in the sphere of culture ... '
The UN organization UNESCO is an authoritative and universally recognized world body responsible for cultural , educational and scientific cooperation .
Will the Commission say whether the European Union cooperates with UNESCO and what action is taken to implement European Parliament resolutions ?
Mr Oreja Aguirre , I welcome you and invite you to reply to Mr Alavanos ' question .
Mr Alavanos , cooperation between the European institutions and UNESCO goes back many years . It was basically established through an exchange of notes in 1964 , followed by another in 1973 , and was confirmed by Article 128 ( 3 ) of the Treaty .
More recently , a cooperation agreement signed by the Community and UNESCO in 1996 removed certain normative barriers which had considerably hindered cooperation actions in the past .
But project related cooperation problems still exist , caused by the current differences between the financial regulations of the Community and UNESCO , and by their implementation .
In practice , although relations between that organization and the Community institutions are excellent , cooperation between them has not so far resulted in a significant number of joint activities , for various reasons . In particular , because of its global remit and scant financial means , UNESCO does not consider Europe to be one of its main priorities in regional terms .
From that point of view , I can only stress that the fields of intervention of the European Union and UNESCO complement each other .
With respect to the cultural sphere , UNESCO and the European Union , within the context of their respective competences , regularly exchange information and data in certain sectors of common interest , such as statistics or goods , often take part in specialist meetings organized by either one , and sometimes finance certain projects jointly .
We also cooperate with UNESCO in the areas of education , information and the fight against the illegal use of drugs .
This collaboration could serve as an example for closer collaboration with UNESCO in the cultural field , in the context of the EU 's external action .
As for the future , cooperation between the EU and UNESCO is mentioned in Article 5 of the proposed Framework Programme for Culture for the period 2000-2004 , which I had the honour of presenting to the Commission very recently . That programme has been approved by the Commission , and I have presented it to the European Parliament and the Council .
Once it has been approved , this programme will constitute the frame of reference within which cooperation on an equal footing can be strengthened , including from a financial point of view .
I hope Parliament will approve this framework programme , and after that we shall have to see how we can operate in the future .
I very much thank the Commissioner for the comprehensive reply that he has given me and for giving me the opportunity to make the rejoinder which is at the very heart of the debate .
One of the fundamental positions of UNESCO which relates to Europe , which is not totally cut off from Europe , and which was decided upon by the General Assembly in 1982 , is the return of the Parthenon marbles from the British Museum to Athens .
This concerns Europe directly and you know that there is tension between the Member States of the European Union on this matter .
I would like to ask the Commissioner if , in his opinion , a country has the right to place this issue within a European Union context , based precisely on Article 128 , paragraph 3 of the Amsterdam Treaty , which provides for cooperation with international cultural organizations .
I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Commissioner how he would comment on the great devastation that has befallen the Parthenon marbles and which was revealed last week in the British press .
Mr Alavanos , I am aware of what that represents , and I share your concern .
But you know that with the means available to us , with the means provided by the Treaty and , furthermore , within the context of cooperation with UNESCO , that route does not offer any solution .
I know your sensitivity towards an institution such as UNESCO , and I must tell you that the matter you have raised , like many other matters , demands that we should cooperate more , and not ignore each other .
And I want to tell you something else .
We are here in a hemicycle which is also used by the Council of Europe .
And in this hemicycle , in other capacities , I have proclaimed the need for greater harmony between three institutions concerned with culture : the European Union , which has a restricted range , the Council of Europe , which has a wider range , and UNESCO .
And I think we are at least going to try to achieve that .
A few years ago that was not possible , because we did not have the instruments to do it .
This is no longer the case .
Today the Community has such an instrument in Article 128 .
So I would like to see how the three institutions concerned with the cultural sphere can progress together in the same direction . In many cases , we turn our backs on each other instead of looking in the same direction .
Mr President , I must say that the Commissioner has tried to respond to the significance of the issue and the question .
But I would like to ask him not to regard the matter as simply of concern to Greeks .
It is a sensitive issue which must affect every civilized person and this Community as an organization , since much has been declared about respect for our cultural heritage , which in this case is at risk , not only from the event that Mr Alavanos referred to and which was denounced in the English press , but also because of the fact that these marbles do not have independent artistic value .
They of course have autonomy , but they gain their value when they are united with the body they belong to and that is the Acropolis .
The English are dragging their feet in this affair in the most uncivilized way - how can I describe it ? - and they are still refusing to return them .
There are similar cases which may concern your own country .
I would ask you , as the European Parliament , to address the matter more courageously and more realistically , regardless of the cooperation you may ensure with other organizations .
Mr Ephremidis , when we consider Classical Greece and its artistic riches , we are all Greek .
So I sympathize with your wish to identify with something which , of course , goes far beyond its national meaning .
And allow me , as a European , to share that sensitivity with you .
I also want to say that , at the moment , we have no further legal routes by which to address the matters you raise . You know that very well because you are very knowledgable about the Treaty .
But for that reason , I want to go back to the idea of sensitivity .
I think it is very important because , in the end , sensitivity is also a part of our European cultural tradition .
Mr Alavanos , the Commission has already started proceedings against Greece , in accordance with Article 169 of the Treaty , because of the incorrect implementation of certain provisions of Directive 89 / 552 .
At the moment , the Commission is studying that country 's reply . I am sure you will appreciate that I cannot give you any further information at this delicate stage of the proceedings .
It would be highly indiscreet of me to go any further .
However , I repeat that the procedure has been initiated in accordance with the rules laid down in the Treaty .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank you for your warm words about the drama that our colleague , Mihail Papayannakis , is going through .
I think that you express the feelings of all the Members and of the whole of Parliament .
I would next like to thank the Commissioner for the reply he gave to my question and to simply say to him that I understand the reply .
I just wish to express my fear , my intense concern , that , with all this bureaucracy , the time-consuming procedures which are in force in relation to Article 169 and the commitology procedure , this blatant violation which is occurring in Greece concerning the advertisement slot will continue for a long time to come .
I will just say that now the procedure is underway , we are exchanging correspondence with the Greek authorities .
The Commission 's services are currently studying the latest reply from those authorities .
It is a difficult case .
It is not simple because Greece has incorporated the directive properly and has imposed fines on the broadcasting organizations which break the rules .
So what the Commission has to do now is show that these fines may perhaps not be enough to actually dissuade those broadcasters from breaking the rules .
That is what we are studying at the moment .
Question No 53 by Robin Teverson ( H-0568 / 98 )
Subject : European Cultural Institutes
I understand that a European institute for cultural itineraries is opening in Luxembourg in addition to a cultural centre funded by UNESCO , the Council of Europe and the European Commission .
Given the importance of Europe 's cultural tapestry , I would like to have details of the European Commission 's role in these centres , from their inception , and the financial implications .
In addition , what other kinds of organizations which promote Europe 's rich heritage does the Commission support ?
Mr Teverson , the Commission is not participating financially in the creation of the European institute for cultural itineraries in Luxembourg .
According to the information we have received from the Luxembourg authorities , the centre has been created within the context of a cooperation agreement between the Council of Europe and the Luxembourg authorities .
Of course , the Commission takes a favourable view of this initiative because , given the importance of the European cultural network , the centre can make a positive contribution to improving the link between cultural heritage and cultural tourism on a European scale .
At present , the Commission has the means to provide financial support for European cultural centres in the context of the Raphael programme , which supports joint and cooperation activities , but does not give aid for them to be set up .
It provides aid for the development of joint and cooperative activities , but not for their establishment .
That is what I wanted to clarify in relation to Mr Teverson 's question .
I thank the Commissioner for his reply which is fairly comprehensive .
I do not wish to say much more as a supplementary except that we , in Cornwall - in the south-west of the United Kingdom - which I represent , have been very thankful for the support that some of the Commission and Council of Europe programmes have given to upholding our Celtic cultural identity .
One statement I would like to make as a British Member of the European Parliament , in response to some of my colleagues ' comments earlier on , is that I personally would like to back the campaign to move the Elgin Marbles back to Greece .
That is right and it has my support .
Perhaps that may be necessary , in any case , because Mr Rübig has requested the floor for a supplementary question .
You have the floor for one minute , Mr Rübig .
Mr President , I believe that educational systems are of particular importance in Europe because our culture is based largely on educational values .
It would be a considerable contribution not only towards promoting education but also an essential basis for lifelong learning .
We should therefore investigate the method to see whether best practice models and benchmarks could not be included so that we can see how an opportunity for Europe can be developed in the various educational possibilities offered .
I want to say to the honourable Member that I think one of the things we must consider when putting the framework programme into operation is precisely the fact that , in cultural matters , we must not get bogged down in what we might think of as high culture . We have to project it towards other areas , such as culture and nature , culture to combat the problems associated with a lack of solidarity - in other words , how culture can help with social inclusion - and also culture and tourism .
For all those things , I think training is essential .
In that sense , the proposals I will be presenting for the development of the framework programme will be along those lines , if the honourable Members approve it .
You should not imagine that I am ignorant of the role played by high culture .
It forms part of our heritage , of course , but I do not think we should limit ourselves to high culture .
Two weeks ago I attended a meeting between nine large cities , which addressed the subject of culture as a means to combat exclusion , and I was very encouraged by that meeting .
That is a step in the same direction as the honourable Member was just talking about .
So let us open up the field of culture to new horizons and new frontiers .

Question No 54 by Ioannis Theonas , which has been taken over by Vassilis Ephremidis ( H-0595 / 98 )
Subject : Preservation of the historic bridge to Monemvassia
The bridge linking the Pelopponese mainland and the historic fortress of Monemvassia is in imminent danger of collapse .
This sixth century bridge is a monument of great historical value and still carries the only road to the ancient fortress .
It has suffered severe damage from both the action of the sea and the huge amount of motor traffic which crosses it , especially throughout the tourist season .
Do the Community programmes for preserving the cultural and architectural heritage include shared funding for the repair of the damage to the Monemvassia bridge so that they may make a contribution to the urgent action needed to preserve an important monument from the Byzantine period ?
Mr Ephremidis , the Commission shares your concern about the conservation of the historic Monemvassia bridge , which I have had the good fortune to visit , and which really is part of the heritage of us all .
As you know , the framework for action to support cooperation initiatives to conserve and improve our architectural heritage is provided by the Raphael programme , which was adopted last year , and has a budgetary provision of ECU 30 million for the four-year period from 1997 to 2000 .
I would like to inform Mr Ephremidis that the Commission 's services - the DG X services - will give very careful consideration to any application from the relevant authorities as long as they meet the eligibility requirements for action through Raphael , as published in the Official Journal on 31 March .
I also want to tell you now that the deadline for applications this year is 10 September .
So I would request that the application be made before 10 September , and you can rest assured that , although I do not make the final decision , I will personally ensure that this important matter receives special attention .
I wish to thank the Commissioner and to assure him that , as far as I am concerned , I will do what I have to do , that is , I will convey to the inhabitants of Monemvassia the interest that you have shown .
I will say that , before September , as you have said , they must put forward the proposal in any way they think necessary .
What is more , I will go with you , because I think that they will spontaneously invite you to visit Monemvassia again .
To the extent naturally that you have pushed forward the issue and the damage to the bridge has been repaired , you will be able to go and see the monument , the Castle , and the whole of Monemvassia , because the whole of Monemvassia is a historical place full of monuments , history , reminders of the past and culture .
And in this way you will be helping thousands of tourists who go every now and again to the Peloponnese and want to visit this place , but the destruction and the damage to the bridge prevents them from doing so .
Mr Ephremidis , I am glad you are so enthusiastic , but I would be grateful if you would wait for me to give you the floor before you speak .
Please do not do my job for me . I have to earn my pay .
Mr Marcelino Oreja Aguirre , would you like to reply to Mr Ephremidis ' supplementary question ?
( Interjection from Mr Ephremidis )
But I have not given you the floor .
Why are you speaking ?
Mr Marcelino Oreja Aguirre , you do have the floor , granted by this Presidency .

Mr President , I want to tell Mr Ephremidis , whom I have known for many years and respect greatly , that I undertake to do what I have stated here in this House . I hope we will be able to watch the start of the restoration works together .
Of course , the application will have to be presented in the correct manner . Although I am not the one who makes the final decision , I am responsible for making sure that decision is taken properly , and will do so .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
You can rely on Mr Ephremidis to accompany you , even if the work does not start for 20 years .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is the end of that block of questions .
I would like to thank Commissioner Marcelino Oreja Aguirre .

Having welcomed Mr Van Miert , I propose that we now move on to Question No 55 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0500 / 98 )
Subject : Unfair competition in international trade
In the Commission 's view , what are the common principles which should be established to prevent practices of unfair competition in international trade ?
Mr Van Miert , I invite you to reply to Mr Camisón Asensio 's question .
I would be glad to deal with this question , as it is a problem the Commission has recognized for a number of years . That is also the reason why we as a Commission took the initiative as far back as in 1994 to set up a group which we asked to consider a number of measures we might propose if necessary .
This group produced good work , and the Commission subsequently made some suggestions to the Council of Ministers , which accepted these suggestions . This meant that , for the first time , this affair was put on the agenda of the World Trade Organization .
This explains why , in the context of the World Trade Organization , a working party is looking into the problem of competition and trade , with a view to making a number of suggestions .
I obviously cannot anticipate the result of this work , although the work in itself seems to be progressing very well .
I cannot hide the fact that not everyone is completely happy about this initiative from the European Commission .
In America , for instance , there is some hesitation . However , during my recent visit to Washington I noted that there is also the will and desire to continue thinking with the European Union about how this problem could be dealt with positively in future .
What kinds of things are we thinking of ?
Firstly , we are trying to , as it were , expand a number of basic rules regarding competition policy at the global level , and to see these rules incorporated into the legislation of various countries in the world .
We also want to improve the enforceability of these rules and , if necessary , deal with certain conflicts afterwards in a specific framework , which we believe would ideally be a global framework .
This is roughly the state of affairs .
There is no more I can say about it , unfortunately , but I am pleased to be at the disposal of the European Parliament , and I will return to this issue once the working party has finished its task , in particular with regard to the talks we will be having with our American colleagues .
Commissioner , you recently told the WTO ambassadors - and have confirmed it here today - that there is a lot of unfair competition at international level in the current global economy , and that since it is subject to different jurisdictions , it therefore causes serious problems .
You even said today - and then as well - that the ideal solution would be a global agreement able to solve the problems which arise at national level , by jumping to a different scale .
It would indeed be ideal to create competition structures which include basic principles , such as restricting abusive practices and concentrations , common principles to prohibit unfair competition in the international sphere , and the development of a cooperation instrument based on experience gained in this field .
We think that all sounds very good , Commissioner .
It would be ideal . I think it is a good idea to carry on thinking about it , but it is urgent .
When are we really going to see something practical done about this urgent matter ?
Unfortunately I cannot predict when there will be concrete results , because as I have just indicated , there is still some hesitation from the side of America , as well as in South-East Asia , where there is a great deal of resistance .
After all , as you know , their markets quite often remain tightly closed , whereas it is competition which allows markets to open .
At the moment we are trying to get as much support as possible for this initiative from the World Trade Organization in the context of the working group .
Because one thing is clear ; the European Union is the most active member of the most active authority actually trying to make progress .
But it is also very important that we reach a certain understanding with our American friends to be able to pursue the objectives with more force .
But having said this , I am not naive , nor is the Commission ; it will take a lot of time , but is important that we support this issue , and that we send out a clear signal .
Because globalization is moving forward and because more and more problems are arising globally , it is necessary to have certain rules which can also be enforced worldwide .
As you say , Commissioner , competition policy is a way of opening up markets .
We in this House have urged you to apply it to World Cup tickets , which I see have now become a subject of intercontinental trade .
Could I ask you , Commissioner , what you think about President Chirac 's reported attack on President Santer at the European Council for the way the Commission intervened to make more World Cup tickets available to non-French citizens , and what the Commission will do to defend the powers conferred upon it by the Treaties ; what you think about the current ticketing arrangements , in the light of recent World Cup matches ; and whether you will now take FIFA and the CFO to the European Court of Justice on the basis of the legal opinion that has been obtained by Parliament ?
This seems to be a slightly different question but I am happy to give an answer or to state my position .
There is no doubt at all that this question goes far beyond the national boundaries : it is a question of common interests .
Therefore , the Commission , which received a considerable number of complaints , as you know , had to do its job , which means it had to investigate these complaints .
Since there was , and is , clear discrimination , the competition rules apply .
Therefore we will continue with this case , and the statement of objection is under preparation .
But , as you know , we have to stick to the rules ourselves , in particular the procedural rules .
If new elements are brought to our attention , obviously we need to have the opinion of the organizing committee as well .
That is the way things have to be tackled .
So we will continue , in spite of some comments which have been made .
By the way , if we want to be nearer to the public - to the citizens - we have to behave as we are doing .
It brings our institutions nearer to the public when they see that we do indeed take their complaints seriously .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Thank you for interpreting the content of the original question so generously , given that the Rules of Procedure do not oblige you to reply to questions which go beyond the strict scope of the original question .
I know how generous you are , and I thank you , and I hope we can still go back to the real subject of Mr Camisón Asensio 's question .
Mr Wibe has requested the floor to ask a supplementary question .
You have the floor for one minute , Mr Wibe .
I will try to be very brief and to the point .
I was interested when you , Commissioner , spoke of the fact that you discussed urgent measures against unfair competition .
Could you say more precisely what these measures concerned ?
Did they concern taxes , capital income or any kind of common treatment for foreign investors ?
Could I just have a little clarification on this issue ?
Mr President , indeed , this is the subject of further discussions and deliberations as to what could be put into what I would call a basket of basic competition rules , which would then be applied worldwide , but by national competition authorities .
One of the things we are considering , for instance , is that export cartels are carving up the markets worldwide .
That this might happen in some cases should be considered by all competition authorities as flying in the face of one of the most basic principles of sound competition policies .
This is just one example of what may be discussed .
That being said , we should continue to make a distinction between trade issues and competition issues , because trade issues concern attitudes or measures taken by authorities , while competition-related issues are mainly derived from attitudes by companies , so constitute private behaviour .
We should keep this distinction .
Let me give a concrete example to illustrate what kind of difficulties might occur .
The Americans had a very high-powered case , the Kodak case , where their complaint was that the Japanese market was too close and did not allow American competitors real access to the market .
They took the case to the World Trade Organization but at the end of the day the panel said it was none of their business because these restrictions , or the difficulties put in the way of market access in Japan did not arise because of governmental measures , but were the result of the private behaviour of Japanese competitors .
So it was a competition case and this case showed the Americans that they could not tackle this kind of question through the instruments of the World Trade Organization .
For that , either you would need a bilateral agreement with Japan to ensure that they would also apply competition rules in a normal way to open up the markets ; or else we could think what might be done in a broader framework like the World Trade Organization , but specifically designed to tackle competition issues and competition problems .
Question No 56 by Sören Wibe ( H-0511 / 98 )
Subject : Support for production in peripheral regions
It recently became clear that the Volvo plant in Umeå is not being allowed to receive assistance towards transport costs from the Swedish government .
The consultants ' report on which the Commission 's decision was based was secret .
Volvo and the Swedish government believed the report to be flawed , but , because it was classified secret , any errors that had been made could not be corrected .
The decision has now been taken , but all those involved must learn a lesson for the future , so that events such as these are not repeated .
Will the Commission operate more openly in future and allow the authorities of the Member State concerned to see the documents on which its decisions are based ?
Commissioner , I invite you to carry on your discussion with Mr Wibe and reply to his question on production in peripheral regions .
Once again this question is being put to me by the honourable Member and I am happy to reply to this question .
Firstly , we have sorted out with the Swedish authorities how this regime has to be phased out .
As you know , it is regarded as operating aid , which is out of the question in the transport sector .
We have an agreement .
It is a fair and balanced one which will phase out this type of aid by 2002 .
So we have an agreement .
The question is related to a report drafted by an expert who is consulted from time to time by DG IV when we have to deal with automotive issues or problems .
But this is only done for internal use by my department .
In this case this report was drafted with the aim of conducting some fact-finding as to whether the Commission should open the procedure : not take a decision but open the procedure .
Some of the elements of this report were taken on board .
The facts presented by the Commission when we opened the procedure have been published in all official languages .
Everyone who was interested was invited to give their opinion about our fact-finding in relation to the opening of the procedure .
Therefore , it is an internal business matter and I would like that fact to be understood .
It could happen that some of these reports will be of very little use to our services .
Sometimes they may be of more use .
But it is a strictly internal matter .
Obviously , the position taken by the Commission when it opens a procedure and the basis on which this is done can be challenged by the governments or by the companies concerned .
The Swedish Government and the Volvo company were in a position , then , to respond to what we put as evidence , according to our findings , at the opening of the procedure .
There should be no misunderstanding about the aim of such a report .
It is not for taking the final decision .
It is just for opening the procedure which then starts the real investigation .
As I said earlier , fortunately we have now reached an agreement with the Swedish Government and it is a fair one .
That is the general context .
I would ask you to understand one thing .
We have to tackle so many cases - about 600 state-aid cases per year .
Some of them are very complicated .
From time to time we have to call in experts to help our services ; not for taking decisions as such but for trying to construe the facts .
I hope you will allow us to continue to do so .
Take , for example , the Crédit Lyonnais case .
We had to call in some experts .
If every piece of expertise had to be made public , it would be impossible for my services to conduct their business as they should .
By the way , from time to time the information involved is very sensitive and the companies are the first to ask us not to divulge it .
So please understand that we are adamant about being as transparent as we can .
The Commission has been criticized in Cardiff by some people because we explain our policies over and over again , why we take decisions or why we do not .
Some people are not happy with the fact that we explain our policy and try to be as transparent as possible .
Please understand that in order to be able to do our job properly from time to time we have to call in experts in a confidential way .
I would first like to thank the Commissioner for his very detailed reply .
However , I believe we have somewhat differing views with regard to transparency .
In Sweden it is quite impossible to imagine that something a civil servant does should be kept secret from the elected representatives .
As the Commissioner quite rightly says , the contents of the report concerned have become outdated , but the report itself has become an important issue of principle for us in Sweden as far as transparency is concerned .
The Ombudsman of the European Parliament , Jacob Söderman , has now intervened on this issue and written a letter to Jacques Santer requesting that this report should be published retrospectively .
My precise question is this : Are you now going to publish this report , and , if so , when ?
We have already had a meeting with the services of the Ombudsman .
Obviously we allowed them to look into the document .
But , for the reasons I explained earlier , we have to stick to the working method which has been used successfully .
In order to investigate - because it is part of the investigation , not part of the decision-making , that is the difference - from time to time we have to find out some specific things and so we call in experts .
So we still feel very strongly that this should remain within the limits of the services being able to come up with something substantial .
Accordingly , it does not belong to the part which should be publicized .
It is part of the investigation .
Once that has been done then you have the next phase which is completely transparent .
What the Commission publicizes is available to everyone .
That is the difference we would like to keep .
Apart from that , we have demonstrated over and over again our eagerness to be as transparent as we possibly can .
By the way , the Commission is now being taken to the Court because some companies and some people find we are too transparent .
I would also like to thank the Commissioner for the detailed reply he gave .
I have two supplementary questions .
Firstly , has this issue been formally decided by the Commission in that the Ombudsman has made a formal request to the Commission to publish the report ?
Has the matter been rejected by the Commission collectively , or is it the Commissioner 's own opinion that this report should not be handed over ?
Secondly , does the fact that the company concerned and the Swedish state , that is , the parties concerned , will read the report and have access to the information play any part in the Commission 's judgement ?
Or is the judgement based solely on the Commission 's internal situation ?
I am a little sorry that Mr Sjöstedt has put a question that has already been put to me previously .
As I explained earlier , we were asked this question by the Ombudsman and our services were immediately able to explain to him what was happening and a copy of the report was supplied to him .
This is the correct way to handle things when the Ombudsman makes a request .
We also explained why we think that in future we should be able to continue to work as we have been doing because this report looked into the various kinds of activities which took place in the plant .
There can be no operating aid to assist the automobile industry .
This is a general rule .
It cannot be allowed in Germany or in Belgium or in Sweden .
As far as that problem was concerned , there was no difference of opinion but we had to be given some advice about the nature of the various activities at the plant .
Once advice has been received , the services , under my responsibility , who discuss the situation with me , try to assess what is relevant to the opening of the procedure , but this is not a decision .
We feel that we should have the option of establishing the facts and constructing a case .
What happens later should be completely transparent .
I am in full agreement with you , but if we are required to make public every single piece of advice , sometimes in very complicated cases , it would make life completely impossible .
We already have a lot of trouble monitoring all the state aid cases .
There is a lack of human resources .
Cases are becoming more complicated so please allow the Commission services to do their job properly .
If we are asked to explain things - e.g. why something was done or was left undone - we are always available to you , to the Ombudsman and to other people as well .
Thank you very much , Mr Van Miert .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is now 7.00 p.m.
We have come to the end of the time specified by the agenda for questions to the Commission .
So Questions Nos 57 to 105 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Common organization of the market in bananas ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the report ( A4-0220 / 98 ) by Mr Thomas , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 404 / 93 on the common organization of the market in bananas ( COM ( 98 ) 0004 - C4-0046 / 98-98 / 0013 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , many of us in Parliament and in the ACP were rather unhappy with the proposal for a global quota .
With that in mind , last week I secured for my group agreement to an amendment which I believe will help to ameliorate the consequences of the proposed changes .
I very much hope that this House will support that amendment .
The Commission proposal does not in any way safeguard the access of the smaller and weaker ACP suppliers .
The risk is that they will be displaced because the traditional volumes will be grown and supplied by others .
Therefore , if we are to have a global quota , can we not have a guarantee that all traditional suppliers will be able to sell their traditional volumes ?
We should insist that if there is a global quota , we must have enforceable and effective guarantees that ACP traditional bananas will be able to get into our markets on at least the level of access assured by Lomé .
I would hope that a form of words can be devised in the Council meeting on Monday that will take this issue of guaranteed access into account .
Cameroon , Côte d 'Ivoire and Belize are expanding their production and export capacity .
They will be able to increase production up to and beyond the point at which the quota will be over-subscribed .
Thus , multinationals in these countries will follow their usual routes of putting profit first and the interests of the ACP will never figure in their calculations .
Is it fair to give these multinationals still further advantages over our traditional producers ?
Should we be persuaded to do their work for them and should we be bullied by the continuing ability of multinational companies and the United States of America to collude so well with the WTO against our interests and the interest of our traditional suppliers ?
Indeed , today the President-in-Office of the Council was able to tell us of a very offensive letter he had received from the Secretary of Trade in the United States .
I do not think the European Union should be pushed around in this way by the United States and its friends in the multinational banana-producing countries .
Mr President , first of all I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Thomas , on his balanced report and his willingness to negotiate , which has fostered dialogue and compromise at all times between the representatives of the various interests involved in the COM in bananas .
In my opinion , the Commission proposal , which aims to adjust the COM in bananas strictly to the WTO decisions , has to be criticized on a basic point : its unbalanced treatment of Community producers and operators , in neglecting to include alternative mechanisms to compensate them for the loss of category B licences . We have to remember that this mechanism was proposed by the Commission itself in order to guarantee the marketing of the Community banana and now , being one of the main points condemned by the WTO , it is not being replaced by anything else .
So we think it is essential to implement a mechanism to encourage marketing , since the current compensatory aid is only granted to the marketed product . This means that in order to receive such aid , the Community banana would have to opt for lower prices in order to make its marketing more attractive , thereby upsetting the market and increasing aid costs disproportionately .
It is also necessary to review the regimen of aid for loss of income , as laid down in Article 12 of Regulation 404 / 93 , through an increase in the overall reference quantity and the flat-rate reference income , as Amendments Nos 22 and 33 to Mr Thomas ' report reflect so well .
As for the licence regime , we fully agree with the views expressed in the report , where it says the reference period should be taken as the shortest and most recent period for which data exist . It also talks about retaining a two year transitional period , justified by the legitimate confidence inspired among category B licence operators by being able to transfer the certificates , as provided by current Community regulations .
As for the Commission proposal on the autonomous tariff quota , I would just like to recall that we also agree with the Thomas report and with the tradition which has been followed here since the Santini report . I do not think we should disturb the balance of the Community supply sources .
Lastly , export certificates should be reinstated into Community regulations and demanded from all the countries which supply the Community , including the ACP countries , since including them in that way would be compatible with GATT regulations .
They should be seen as a way of avoiding fraud with respect to banana origin , and the risks of falsifying the repetition of import quantities .
Mr President , having listened to the Commission this afternoon and noted Mr Fischler 's numerous and categoric rejections of our amendments , I think it is time we reflected on the usefulness and role of Parliament in this matter , as well as the importance which is accorded to the political wishes we express through our requested opinions .
I do not want to repeat the reasons for the Union 's lack of control over the destiny of this sector , sacrificed as it is on the altar of globalization .
Nevertheless , I would remind you that Community production of bananas is specific in every way , for it is an activity carried out in the ultra-peripheral areas which suffer the difficulties we are all aware of , and that it covers only 20 % of market requirements .
Furthermore , given the aims laid out in Regulation 404 / 93 , and more particularly the assurance of sufficient income for producers , it is difficult for us to understand why the Commission has considered it unnecessary to provide for adjustments to Title III of the regulation , due to the significant amendments which will be made to the trading arrangements with third countries .
Furthermore , in spite of some reluctance on the part of the rapporteur , I am happy with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's proposals and reaffirm that Community production must benefit from the consequences of the most recent enlargement and a possible increase in the market .
The system of support to Community production must be adapted to the new rules , due to the raising of the flat rate reference income and to a development in the measures which opens up the right to compensatory aid .
The reestablishment of Article 16 of the regulation is a necessity for better developments in market prospects .
Mr President , this is briefly my opinion on the direction which the European Parliament 's opinion must take with a view to reconciling our interests with those of other producer countries .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is right to denounce the desire of the American multinationals to obtain the dismantling , by the WTO , of the Community system for trade in bananas .
Our determination has enabled the Community preferential arrangements and aid to Union producers , who have long been in line with social and environmental standards , to be respected .
The Commission 's attitude has , unfortunately , been a very different one in which their proposals yield to the WTO 's injunctions , with a 16 % increase in the tariff quota which takes no account of the risks of job and income losses on the part of Community producers .
Conversely , the concern of Mr Thomas ' report is to propose ways of supporting the incomes of Community banana producers .
It modifies the Commission 's proposals by reducing the increase in additional tariff quota from 353 000 to 100 000 tonnes , by increasing by 15 % the Community banana quota eligible for compensatory aid and by increasing this compensatory aid by 20 % .
By adopting these measures and this report , which has my full support , we will be appealing to the Council to reconsider the European Parliament 's amendments .
Mr President , this organization of the market in bananas demonstrates that politics can still take precedence over economics .
Protesting before the panel still does nothing to alter the fact that we are taking a political stance , that we are setting up external protectionist measures geared to social and , not least , ecological points of view .
However , it also demonstrates it is not only the interests of the producers that are coming to fruition here .
In considering the position of the Americans , who scarcely have any banana producers of their own - if any at all , or only in Hawaii - then it becomes apparent that they are now making use of the panel to push through their own capital interests , or those of the major fruit companies .
Germany 's position , too , was not carried by banana manufacturers or producers , but by the interests of commercial enterprise .
But it is a very positive sign that , despite this , we are able to talk about a political settlement .
Commissioner Fischler , this should enable us to take courage in other areas of agricultural production in which we do not produce any surpluses either - we should take courage in disputes with the WTO and take a political stance , not worrying about the possibility of having to face a panel , but instead making use of this or accepting it in the interests of achieving sensible settlements for agricultural production in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the most important tropical fruit produced in the world , the banana constitutes a considerable economic concern for producers in the ultra-peripheral areas of the European Union and for the ACP countries .
Produced under unfair conditions often based on non-existent or disregarded social criteria , the dollar banana competes unfairly , and often immorally , with producers working within more regulated production systems which are fairer but of course more expensive .
Naturally the dollar banana is cheaper to produce - for a reason !
Mrs Carlotti this afternoon outlined the Chiquita company 's practices to us .
Furthermore , a great deal of well-founded information reveals that some exporting countries practise production methods which are contrary to our own technical and environmental standards .
I am thinking of the numerous health problems , even deaths , caused by pesticides used on banana plantations .
What is worse , social conditions are often unacceptable and this should encourage us to demand a clean up of the rules of international trade at the forthcoming WTO discussions , where the Commission 's negotiators would do well to put the social and environmental clauses back on the agenda .
In the face of the pressure being exerted by the WTO and the exporting countries ' multinationals on the European Union to open new quotas , let us not go further than real need dictates . A more reasonable estimate for the autonomous quota is 100 000 tonnes .
Above all , let us make our trade conditional upon the principles which we uphold within the European Union , especially respect for human rights and sustainable agriculture , and let us encourage the actions of those producers who wish to move in this direction , as suggested in a number of the amendments .
Finally , let us apply the principle of Community preference , whilst at the same time respecting the commitments made within the framework of the Lomé Convention .
I would not wish to end without also congratulating Mr Thomas on his report , which on balance we support .
Mr President , revision of the organization of the market for bananas is urgently needed .
Under the pretext of development aid , the Union has set up a costly and inefficient organization of the market .
As far back as 1995 , the World Bank condemned the European banana policy .
Although the regulation was designed for small producers in the developing countries , according to the World Bank it is hardly benefiting them .
The European banana policy is based on a system of import licences .
With the introduction of the B-licences , the European traders , who traditionally had been importing bananas from the ACP countries , secured an important share in the market in " dollar ' bananas .
While this was in the interest of these importers , the farmers in the ACP countries were none the better for it .
The lively trade in category B licences has pushed up the price of bananas on the European market , which resulted in a reduction in consumption .
So there is every reason to take the WTO complaint about the category B licences seriously .
But it is precisely in this crucial component of the organization of the market that the Commission has displayed little creativity .
The Commission is simply opting again for an allocation of the licences on the basis of traditional trade flows .
This proposal has also been adopted by Mr Thomas in his report .
Truly a missed opportunity !
It is high time a change was made .
Instead of the traditional importers , we must give preferential treatment to those who grow bananas in an environmentally and socially responsible way .
This change is lacking in both the Commission proposal and in the Thomas report .
I support the rapporteur 's proposals for a promotion fund and the specific provisions for fair trade bananas .
But as long as the European market remains closed to new initiatives because of a licensing system , I am afraid that the fair trade bananas will not get a fair chance .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Fischler for being kind enough to join us again this evening because I think it is important for him to follow the debate , although it has to be said that the Chamber is not exactly full .
I should like to disagree a little with Mr Martinez about how much we knew about the WTO decisions .
The matter was discussed in the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and in that committee we studied both the WTO working group 's statement and the Appellate Body 's decision .
And it turns out that the European Community was very badly defended .
We find that the WTO Appellate Body was chaired by a former US senator , and that nobody was present in either the working group or the WTO apart from representatives of what we might call free-trade theories , or the new or dominant theory . So the views of the agricultural sectors of the EU were virtually undefended .
Furthermore , the Commission 's legal advisor told us that , in all , he only had five lawyers to defend the Commission 's point of view , against the battery of hundreds of lawyers available to the US Government , assisted moreover by the multinationals .
I am glad Mr Fischler is here .
At the moment , a group of Canary Island banana farmers is in the public gallery .
These people have devoted their whole lives to their work , and at the moment they have no alternative to banana farming .
If the Commission proposal goes ahead as it stands , and the sector does not receive more protection , we are going to find ourselves with a production sector which is now unprotected , whereas prior to the adoption of Regulation 404 / 93 it was fully protected .
And these people cannot move elsewhere or turn to alternative crops .
So in my opinion , I think the Commission would do well to support a lot of the amendments presented by this Parliament - those tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . I hope that next week the Council can finally achieve a good Community regulation which allows a certain level of protection to be retained .
Mr President , it would be good if the European Union resisted the temptation to thoroughly revise the present banana regulation .
There are a great many diverging interests in this sector .
That is why there is the risk of creating one problem by solving another .
We therefore have to start by aiming the revision at solving the WTO problems which have arisen .
This apparently has been the Commission 's intention .
This is why I support the Commission proposal to set the autonomous tariff quota at 353 000 tonnes in connection with the expansion of the EU .
I also accept the duty of ECU 300 per tonne for this autonomous tariff quota , assuming that this will not give rise to new WTO difficulties .
After all , the present duty is ECU 75 per tonne .
In doing so , the European Union is giving a good signal .
The costly , extremely artificial and bureaucratic category B licensing system will be abolished and the ACP countries compensated for lost income . The liberal banana import system of the new Member States will be integrated politically even further into the considerably less liberal EU system .
The burden of this extra bit of protection is borne proportionally by the EU tax payer and the EU consumer , and it does not discriminate between the non-privileged banana-exporting third countries .
It would be good if the European Union would also give an adequate response to another unmistakable development , namely the EU interest in fair trade bananas .
The problem is not so much the need to support commercialization of fair trade bananas ; access to the import quotas is actually the biggest problem .
The Commission must not close its eyes to this .
It should reserve definite space for this category in the daily management of the import licences , while being authorized to do so by Council and Parliament .
Mr President , with this regulation we will have five different import quotas and customs duties for the import of bananas .
That is absurd .
Moreover , I do not believe that this new system will be approved by the World Trade Organization , so presumably we are going to have a new solution in a few years ' time .
Nor do I think that it is right for us to use trade policy for our aid to developing countries .
The great risk of such a policy is that we lock the countries into an obsolete production structure , in this case into the production of bananas .
Our policy towards the ACP countries resembles what we in Sweden call ' Döbeln 's medicine ' , that is , it helps for the moment , but in the long term it is harmful .
Both for European consumers and for the populations of the ACP countries it would be better to have free trade combined with direct aid than the present complex quota and customs duty system .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must voice my opposition to the Thomas report .
I am speaking on behalf of a large segment of the Group of the European People 's Party ; not the whole party , but a very sizeable segment of it .
The Thomas report calls for increased protectionism , whereas what is really needed is less protectionism .
We find Amendments Nos 11 and 28 particularly unwelcome , as they represent a drastic reduction in quotas for the three new Member States .
A total of 10 % is being cut from Latin American bananas , and still more problems will ensue .
I very much doubt whether the Commission 's proposal is in keeping with WTO ratios .
However , I am quite certain that the demands made by Mr Thomas and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would in any case lead to enormous problems with the WTO .
We keep hearing - as we have heard in today 's debate - that we must protect the small , independent producers in traditional ACP countries and the EU against the ' big bad ' multi-nationals in Latin America .
The organization of the market clearly does not do this .
You are all invited to a talk in the press room tomorrow morning with an independent producer from Costa Rica who produces fair trade bananas and has great difficulty with the way the market is organized .
Small producers in Latin America - of whom there are many , in Ecuador , too , for example - are the hardest hit , and that is why we must give more support to fair trade bananas and vote against the Thomas report on this point .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by congratulating the rapporteur , David Thomas , on an excellent report on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation No 404 / 93 on the common organization of the market in bananas .
The rapporteur 's proposals are an excellent attempt to reconcile the interests of all the parties involved , that is to say of Community producers , of the ACP countries and other non-EU countries and of consumers , in a fair and balanced way , keeping to the rules of the internal market and the common organization of the market .
All the same , the question of abolishing the system of allocation of B certificates ignores the consequences this decision will have for Community producers .
As you know , the distribution of import licences has been one of the basic principles of the common organization of the market in bananas , and serves to restrict the quantities of Central American bananas coming in so as to safeguard sales of Community bananas .
The Commission and the Council will have to define the measures they propose to take to stop this gap , clearly and without time limits .
Among the various measures that should be taken , we think the overall reference income should be adopted and increased by around 20 % , so as to restore the necessary income guarantee to Community producers , and the Community should undertake to reduce the independent quota to prevent a possible glut on the market which would jeopardize sales of Community bananas .
Quite apart , that is , from vital additional aid which will be needed to give Community producers back the necessary resources for disposing of their production , thus offsetting the high cost of transport .
For all these reasons we unreservedly support Amendment No 25 , Article 1 ( new ) , in order to protect the interests of banana producers in the Autonomous Region of Madeira .
Mr President , once again we are faced with a debate on the reform of the COM in bananas , and we need to recognize that this time the reform has been forced on us by the result of the dispute within the WTO .
I must say , Commissioner , that this time , in general terms , we share the views expressed in the Commission proposal , because we need to modify the current import licence regime and make it compatible with WTO rules .
Our experience of market behaviour during the last few years suggests that we should take this into account when it comes to setting import quotas , in order to avoid flooding the markets and causing prices to drop , as happened last year in the case of France .
So we think an autonomous tariff quota of 100 000 tonnes , as already requested by Parliament , is better suited to market demands than the 350 000 tonnes proposed by the Commission .
Furthermore , we need to find a formula to allow continued exempted access for traditional ACP producers with whom we maintain economic , commercial and political obligations which cannot be ignored .
Maintaining this sector in the banana-producing regions of the EU is the very reason for the existence of this COM . Nobody has been able to call into question the validity and legitimacy of this COM , despite the constant attacks it has been suffering .
We need to guarantee the survival of Community production , and the EU 's banana farmers need their current income levels to be guaranteed .
The banana sector is one of the most important economic resources of the ultra-peripheral regions of the EU . They cannot do without it , not just for economic reasons , but also for employment reasons .
Taking it for granted that the Commission shares these objectives , we need to know what mechanisms they are contemplating in order to sort out the import regime for third country production . Also , we do not yet know how the Commission plans to compensate Community producers for losses they suffer as a result of not having a licence regime like the one currently still in force .
Commissioner , it would be good to clarify and overcome the two uncertainties I have just indicated : guarantees for maintaining production and income levels .
That is what the sector is hoping for from this new reform .
Mr President , I would like to begin by praising the Commissioner 's proposal , for it endeavours to strike an admirable balance between the different producers ' interests .
Reasonable consideration must be given to EU producers , while we must maintain our Lomé and WTO obligations .
In reality , there is precious little room for manoeuvre .
However , fair trade bananas are one area in which we can improve the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission 's proposal to support ACP producers paves the way for changes in production , and there must be due regard for the environment , but that is not specific enough .
Thus , it is vital that our amendment should propose arrangements for fair trade bananas .
In this regard , I am not suggesting a particular quota , but rather , support for changes in production , a definition of fair trade bananas , arrangements for labelling and monitoring , and support for publicity and marketing of fair trade bananas . Arrangements for fair trade bananas would benefit EU producers and ACP producers alike , and I therefore hope these aspects will be worked into this proposal .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of the banana market has given us another opportunity to declare in this House that it is the principal obligation of the institutions of the European Union to defend the interests of its Member States and their regions in every situation , and to honour the commitments they assume in agreements with other countries , without submitting to the interests of the World Trade Organization .
In the case we are now debating , the Commission may be given the benefit of the doubt when it tries to reconcile the interests of Community and ACP banana producers with the requirements of the World Trade Organization 's panel of judges .
The Commission must understand that the flooding of the European market with large quotas of cheap bananas from non-EU , nonACP countries will seriously affect the income of Community producers and make it almost impossible for traditional ACP countries to compete with Latin American producers .
We cannot set aside the fact that some of our ultra-peripheral island regions , which are marked out by their isolation and low levels of economic development , are among the European banana-producing regions .
It is not enough to recognize the existence of ultra-peripheral regions in the Treaty of the Union ; it is more important that in all circumstances there should be specific and substantive expression of the support which those regions , which expect a great deal of us , call for and demand from the Community .
In Madeira , an autonomous region of Portugal , it would cause incalculable economic , social and environmental damage if the European institutions gave in to pressure applied to them for the purpose of defending interests which are not those of European citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m ..
Freedom of establishment in the transport sector
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0215 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive amending Directive 96 / 26 / EC on admission to the occupation of road haulage operator and road passenger transport operator and mutual recognition of diplomas , certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications intended to facilitate for these operators the right to freedom of establishment in national and international transport operations ( C4-0174 / 98-97 / 0029 ( SYN ) ) .
( Rapporteur : Mrs Maria Berger ) .

Mr President , Commissioner , even if he is leaving us now , ladies and gentlemen , the Community had conceived regulations as long ago as 1974 with the goal of harmonizing conditions of admission to the occupation of road haulage operator and road passenger transport operator . However , in recent years , central , basic conditions in the transport industry have undergone major changes .
The present proposal for a directive comes in response to these changes .
The proposal aims to guarantee that at least somewhat similar statutory terms will apply for all hauliers right across the EU .
The occupation of road haulier is already second to none in terms of being a truly European occupation .
In a matter of days , from 1 July 1998 , this will be reinforced still further through the final clearance of cabotage .
This occupation , too , will thus be able to benefit fully from the terms of the internal market , and hauliers will enjoy unrestricted admission to the market throughout the Union .
In fact , the directive under discussion here today should have been in force by 1 July 1998 .
I must therefore emphasize that Parliament has worked extremely fast and that the Council has been responsible for the delays , having spent rather a long time on the common position ; that is why this deadline has not been met .
Regardless of the actual date , however , we must respond to the fact that changes in operating and production processes in industry and retail in line with the just in time strategy have led to faster , more flexible and , at the same time , higher quality transport services , demanding ramified and ingenious systems of logistics .
Today , we are confronted with a situation whereby smaller and smaller consignments need to be transported with increasing frequency .
There is also a noticeable shift from traditional company transport to professional goods transportation , and larger and larger operators are emerging , offering both haulage and logistics solutions .
On the other hand , we are also seeing increasing numbers of small enterprises entering the market place by virtue of their flexibility and the cost savings they offer , accepting haulage suitable only for smaller vehicles , even for transboundary movement .
The public is becoming increasingly exacting as regards transport services , especially in terms of environmental protection , technical safety and abiding by social provisions .
The emphasis varies greatly from country to country .
Standards in the applicant countries of central and eastern Europe in particular are , without doubt , decidedly lower .
Thus , we have to be aware that operators from these countries in particular will be competing more and more with operators within the Union .
Thus , quite apart from the present concrete directive , I would like to pick up where I left off at first reading in my quest to examine the extent to which steps can be taken under the auspices of existing European accords with the nations of central and eastern Europe , prior to their joining , to bring them gradually into line with EU regulations in this area .
At first reading , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights expressly welcomed all the Commission 's proposed harmonization measures .
These concerned greater requirements with regard to financial capacity , personal efficiency and specialized knowledge as well as the enlargement of the area of application of the directive .
As rapporteur , I also wanted to see stricter regulations adopted to combat fraud in joint transit procedure and to regulate the transit of live animals . I wanted to see regulations adopted setting greater requirements with regard to financial capacity .
I wanted a tighter definition of the concepts of share capital and reserves to be adopted . My proposals at that time were adopted by a very sizeable majority both in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and in the plenary session .
However , in its common position , the Council has only accepted two of our proposed amendments and these changes are actually more in the nature of legal technicalities .
I am particularly disappointed that in the common position , the Ministers of Transport did not even take up my amendments on combating fraud , when these had the support of the Commission .
Thus , I have resurrected most of my / our demands from first reading , and once again , they have been unanimously adopted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
As before , I still consider it extremely important to bring anti-fraud provisions into the domain of haulage operators .
I also propose deleting various items added by the Council , as well as introducing supplementary tests for hauliers who have acquired their credentials in a different Member State .
I would ask for your support in the vote .
Mr President , the second reading of Mrs Berger 's text deserves to do well .
At first reading , I thought we and the Commission had made good progress .
I can understand the Council being a little more cautious in the text we received subsequently .
But what is it all about ?
As Mrs Berger said in her introduction , it has something to do with fair competition .
It also has something to do with transportation , environmental considerations , integrity , etcetera .
I am in no doubt that the House agrees on what it is about , but perhaps we are more worried about how to get it through .
Regulations are fine .
That 's great .
But in my view , free will can go a long way .
For instance , I am confident that in the trade - within Member States - road haulage is being developed along the lines of sustainability , focusing on quality and service .
There has to be the will to make implementation a reality in all Member States .
The committee 's proposal on Community transit and procedures is sensible and deserves the support of Parliament and , in due course , that of the Commission and Council as well .
I would like to ring a little alarm bell about one proposal , however .
The amendment in question is Amendment No 11 , where there is a kind of weighting of offences .
The amendment proposed by the House reads , " ... convicted of serious offences against the rules in force concerning road haulage ' . What is " serious ' supposed to mean ?
Who is going to define how serious something has to be before intervention is necessary ?
This is a kind of grey area , giving free reign to spite , so I would prefer us to retain the original text , stating : " ... convicted of offences against the rules in force ... '
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as always , differences in national regulations lead to distortions of competition .
Moreover , competitive pressure from third countries has also recently increased considerably .
The proposed amendments to the common position bring the harmonization process one step further forward ; they are based on the revised basic conditions - the newly-developed just in time strategy , for example .
They take account of trends in the road transport of goods .
To my party , an important consideration is that in addition to the requested greater requirements with regard to the integrity of the operator , environmental protection and professional duty , there is also a need for greater requirements with regard to combating fraud in Community and joint transit procedure .
This is one inference from the conclusions of the report by the committee of inquiry concerned .
Regrettably , we cannot agree to Amendment No 8 , part 1 .
In this respect , we prefer the text of the common position .
In reviewing an operator 's financial capacity , both capital and reserves should be considered .
In a time of crisis , for example if a major customer leaves , a haulage operator needs to be able to use more capital as a temporary measure for restructuring purposes without running the risk of failing a test of financial capacity during such an emergency , while if elements of reserves had been considered , such as unrealized gains , credit guarantees and similar banking information , the operator 's financial capacity might have been judged positively .
This would ensure that financial capacity would be appraised primarily on the actual solvency of the operator .
The criterion of haulage operator integrity serves to protect the public from injury and danger .
Thus , for serious violations of relevant regulations , an operator 's licence would be withdrawn .
Withdrawing licences for any offence , as originally proposed , would mean that , in extreme cases , even exceeding the speed limit could have far-reaching consequences for the fate of the firm .
This would surely be unjustifiable in terms of the proportionality rule ; this was why the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights rejected this proposal .
I really must thank the rapporteur both for her report and for taking this line .
Mr President , I welcome Mrs Berger 's report which seeks to bring common standards to road haulage operators in Europe .
However , I must say that it is simply not good enough for British authorities to allow a situation to arise whereby Irish hauliers are denied access to and use of British roads , as happened when ports were blocked last Sunday for 16 hours .
The European Treaties have espoused a need for the freedom of movement of goods , persons and services within the territories of the European Union .
This should be protected and maintained at all times .
This freedom is enshrined in the legal right upon which the basis of the European Union is founded .
In fact , one must welcome the recent position of the Internal Affairs Council of Ministers ' meeting , at which it was agreed that the procedural red-tape would be cut , to allow the European Commission to demand reasonable action by Member States to unblock roads or ports within days of blockades being set up as a result of strikes , or face action in the European Court of Justice .
Finally , I should just like to reiterate my recent call for Transport Commissioner Neil Kinnock to intervene once again in the matter of ensuring that the French authorities pay up outstanding claims by national road haulage associations arising as a direct consequence of the blockade of French motorways last year .
There is still £ 2m outstanding to Irish road hauliers resulting from this strike which must be paid by the French Government immediately .
Mr President , I welcome this common position and I think it will give road hauliers free access under similar conditions of operation and in particular will open up access to cabotage .
I congratulate the rapporteur and welcome this common position .
It is favourable to small businesses with one exception which I come to in a moment .
In my view it fits in positively with the principle of subsidiarity .
However , I cannot support Amendment No 8 .
In my view , this would create a high level of immobilised transport undertakings capital , which would be unacceptable .
It would create a very precarious situation especially for small businesses and I would be very interested to hear the Commissioners ' views in this regard .
Like Mr Fitzsimons who wishes to keep all roads open against blockades I invite the Commissioner this evening to make sure that in fact her own country will continue to allow free movement : in fact that principle has been breached twice in the past two years under the nominal excuse of industrial action .
Commissioner Kinnock felt unable to intervene in this regard but it is a breach of free movement and I hope the Commissioner will enter into the spirit of the single market tonight and ensure that it does not happen in future .
I also hope that the Commissioner will go some way this evening towards expressing some willingness to resolve the situation whether there are huge disparities of tax .
In particular , fuel rates in the UK seem to be astronomically high whereas in many other Member States they are very low and this creates distortion within the single market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank you for your work on this initiative , which aims at strengthening current legislation by making the conditions of access to these professions stricter , by harmonizing the application of the three criteria and by widening the scope of the directive .
I am therefore happy to be able to accept many of the amendments presented by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Firstly , I would like to say that I am pleased with the amendments which make the text clearer and the proposal more coherent .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 8 and 11 will therefore be taken into account .
Secondly , although initially the Council did not consider it necessary to take action with regard to combating fraud , the Commission continues to consider this an important aspect and feels that tough measures should be taken with regard to the dishonesty of some people in this sector .
This is why I accept Amendments Nos 1 and 11 , along with the second part of Amendment No 7 .
The first part of this amendment is , however , too vague and could lead to control measures out of all proportion .
Finally , the Commission remains of the opinion that it is desirable to provide for the possibility of flexibility in the control measures , particularly in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises which could face financial difficulties in the short- term at the time when they are evaluated against the criteria for financial standing .
This possibility is especially important due to the emphasis currently placed on employment at European level .
Amendment No 10 can consequently be accepted .
Mr President , there is one area in which the Commission cannot accept the amendments presented .
Although the Commission is extremely favourable to the principle which underlies these amendments , the aim of which is to remove factors relating to problems known as " diploma tourism ' from the common position , it cannot accept that the compromise solution , arrived at with such difficulty , should be rejected .
The Commission remains convinced that the temporary nature of the proposal , combined with the need to consult the Commission in all cases , is a sufficiently restrictive basis for its application .
The Commission is also convinced that the implementation of the new requirements with regard to professional competence will make this measure unnecessary .
This is why the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 6 and 9 .
Mr President , Mrs Berger 's report is both realistic and well founded .
She continues to make a constructive contribution to the Commission 's initiative and enables us to reexamine certain questions with the Council .
I hope that , on this occasion , the Council will realize the advantages of these amendments .
We all wish to see stricter standards applied in this sector , along with a series of coherent criteria , to ensure that only reputable transport operators remain in the market , providing a high quality service in the interests of their clients and of society as a whole .
Thank you for your support . I am sure that it will continue to be forthcoming .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Fifth Framework Programme for RTD
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0226 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision concerning the Fifth Framework Programme of the European Community for research , technological development and demonstration activities ( 1998-2002 ) ( C4-0182 / 98-97 / 0119 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Godelieve Quisthoudt-Rowohl ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can honestly say that this evening you see standing before you a very happy rapporteur .
Once upon a time we began with one proposal by the Commission that we wished to have amended .
I recall that at first reading we dealt with some 750 amendments and - looking over to the other side of the House - they either got through or did not get through , as the case may be , in the midst of much highly controversial debate here .
Next I would like to thank the Council .
Much to our delight , Parliament , and not least I myself as rapporteur , found the common position of the Council so satisfactory that we would now merely like to improve a few points .
No matter how good a paper is , it is and always will be capable of improvement .
Thus , we have concentrated on a relatively small number of points .
In committee last week , we adopted some 40 amendments , almost all of them unanimously .
As always , there was a bit of debate on a few points of detail .
It will come as no surprise to you that the House wishes to increase the overall budgetary level for the Fifth Framework Programme on Research .
Thus , in committee , we once again unanimously adopted the original sum put forward by the Commission of ECU 16.3 billion .
The Commissioner has assured us all along that this amount was arrived at following thorough research and mature reflection .
We will take her word for it ; we are not merely hoping for the support of the Commission , we are absolutely banking on it in conciliation .
We also unanimously adopted amendments delineating the involvement of the European Parliament during the implementation of the programme .
We no longer wish to take our leave as the legislative body for policy on research after we adopt this framework programme presumably tomorrow and then after conciliation .
The much-acclaimed flexibility demanded by the Commission is not synonymous with the whim of the Executive .
Hence , we believe the Commission should be required to report to Parliament .
Moreover , in our opinion , there could well be a review in the middle of the implementation of the programme whereby its content would be open to re-definition .
The overall direction of the programme ought perhaps not to be changed , but we could nevertheless consider whether everything we are deciding right now is still relevant .
Further , we are actually somewhat disappointed that not all the improvements for small and medium-sized enterprises were adopted by the Council .
To be quite honest , I am rather amazed , because support of the middle classes as employers is constantly being lauded , particularly in terms of the creation of new jobs .
This is where action on employment will come from .
We have therefore unanimously adopted these proposed amendments and reintroduced them .
One final comment - which I know will be a sticking point .
The treaty clearly states that research is integral to internal policies and that for such budgetary matters , joint budget authorization by Parliament and the Council applies .
Correspondingly , we have also amended the common position wherever the research budget is mentioned rather than internal policies ; this was done , incidentally , with the full agreement of the Committee on Budgets .
We hope this will serve to increase transparency and constitute a qualitative improvement .
The quality of European research is , in fact , its strength .
If the quality is good enough - not merely adequate , but excellent - and if the decision-making processes are transparent , the advancement of European research will also be more readily accepted .
Today , this is a question we hear all too often : Does it have to go through the European Union ? Are there not any other ways ?
In future , we will have to be able to demonstrate that this is absolutely vital .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and all the members of the advisory committees as - after tough debating , in some cases - we have succeeded in adopting such a consistent paper by a very comfortable majority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Social Democrats , we have never had the least doubt that we would only be giving our partial support to the Council 's common position on the Fifth Framework Programme for Research .
We primarily agree with its thematic structure , because this takes account of our most important proposals from the first reading , including initiatives on socio-economic basic research .
However , we have our doubts as to the adequacy of the Council 's proposals on the budget , financing arrangements and management .
I would like to make four fundamental comments .
The first relates to concentration .
There is still no significant reduction in the number of areas .
A reduction in the number of projects and the scope of the specific programmes is , however , essential to serious concentration .
The second concerns modernization of institutions .
In the interests of efficient administration , the Commission must bear the brunt of responsibility for implementing the programmes .
The programme committees must confine themselves to coordinating strategic and normative issues .
Parliament must be actively involved in monitoring the implementation of the programme .
The third concerns social innovation .
Innovation is one of the key objectives of the programme .
However , innovation is not limited to a technical process ; it is also a social process in need of optimization through investment in a qualified workforce and new types of labour organization .
Europe could gain a decisive competitive edge here .
This is one of the reasons why we are calling for an additional initiative in the area of the information society .
The fourth relates to growth .
The concept of growth must once and for all be taken out of the dead end which is a purely quantitative meaning .
Ecological stability must emerge as a locational advantage of the European economy and hence , the overriding credo of the programme .
I would also like to make just a few comments on the budget .
It is a scandal in the history of Community promotion of research that the Council has no intention of even keeping pace with inflation in the furtherance of research .
In real terms , what the Council has in mind is a 4 % reduction .
My party only agreed to the inter-party compromise of ECU 16.3 billion negotiated in the run-up to this second reading under the constraint of coming up with a qualified majority ; otherwise , we would have set the figure far higher .
As we enter the 21st century , more Community efforts will be required in order to make decisive improvements to industrial competitiveness , to avoid large-scale ecological damage and to combat the economic exclusion of entire segments of the population .
Correspondingly , investment in research would need to be calculated in accordance with the principle of saving up to make public provision for the future .
Unfortunately , it was not possible to achieve a consensus on this with the conservative side of the House .
Let us at least join forces to demand what was agreed as the lowest common denominator in the report by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy - the Commission 's allocation entered in the budget .
Finally , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her efforts , including her successful efforts to bring about a large number of workable compromises and some reasonably consistent parliamentary action .
Mr President , the vote of the Fifth Framework Programme is an important opportunity for our House to confirm the need to guarantee European research the necessary support to face the great challenge of globalization .
The added value of European research is now a proven reality and , on the eve of the year 2000 , the existing connection between research and economic development is clear and obvious .
People specifically want research and technological development to provide concrete answers to problems like ageing or disability .
And I am also thinking of employment - the major challenge at the end of this century - and in this sense I confirm the need to involve producers in the activities of the Fifth Framework Programme , and I am particularly thinking of the role of small and medium-sized enterprises .
In this respect , I actually believe that two and not three small and medium-sized enterprises - as provided for until now - can , through cooperative research activities , jointly entrust third legal entities with appropriate research capacities with the task of solving their common technological problems .
At the same time , I would like to stress the need for the JRC to strengthen its ties with other research institutes so that it can develop its function as a centre for the transfer of technology , something we have all repeatedly stated in committee .
Clearly , cuts in funding cannot be made in a sector that is the future of our young people and our economies .
To go without research today means being less efficient and competitive tomorrow .
It is extremely important to assert Europe 's role in this way .
In conclusion , I therefore hope that we all play our own role and hope , like those who spoke before me , that the Commission and Council will be able to back Parliament 's position on funding .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mrs Quisthoudt on her report and thank her for the work she has carried out , because it is above all thanks to her that the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has managed to come up with a unanimous proposal for the budget of the Fifth Framework Programme .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party is delighted with the budget proposal , in terms of both its level and the substantive allocation .
I therefore hope that this Parliament will once again speak with one voice .
My group does have a problem with Amendment No 31 , however ; this amendment makes it possible to depart from the generally used definition of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Firms with up to 500 employees ( instead of those with up to 250 employees ) are entitled to research grants specifically aimed at small and medium-sized enterprises .
As rapporteur for the specific programme on innovation and SMEs , I do not agree with this .
In my experience it is the small firms , in particular those that promote European innovation , that fall between two stools .
In a definition which classifies companies with up to 500 employees as small and medium-sized enterprises , this means that most research funds will go to the larger companies with 300 , 400 and 500 employees .
In addition , however , the smaller firms especially must be encouraged to take part in the innovation process .
This is the area in which growth is highest and in which jobs are created .
And in the areas of information and communication technology and biotechnology in particular , a great many small , innovative firms are active .
They should benefit to an optimum level from the European research funds .
A restriction of the definition does not exclude larger companies from participating in the Fifth Framework Programme .
A broadening of the definition gives small companies an even smaller chance to claim the already minimal SME budget for the coming four years .
My group will vote against this amendment .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has come to a unanimous agreement regarding the minimum essential budget for the Fifth Framework Programme for Research and Development .
This has been largely due to our rapporteur 's tact and listening capacity , and I would like to pay tribute to her .
Parliament concurs with the Commission 's opinion , and must send a unanimous message to the Council concerning the issue of financing , in order to approach conciliation - which is proving to be difficult - from a position of strength .
I would like to draw your attention to a limited number of amendments which touch on the heart of European research .
This heart is made up of men and women , our scientists and engineers .
The European Union must offer them the recognition they deserve , along with the necessary motivation , by each year organizing a European Grand Prix for scientific and technological research , as proposed in Amendment No 34 .
This heart is also made up of our research infrastructure .
The European Union must mobilize all possible means to support it .
We must make sure that the Fifth Framework Programme draws equally on the Structural Funds , the European Investment Fund and funds from the European Investment Bank .
This is the aim of Amendment No 18 .
Similarly , the Joint Research Centre must enjoy more autonomy with , naturally , the counterbalance of an independent evaluation procedure as provided for in Amendment No 19 .
Finally , Amendments Nos 20 and 21 restore coherence and concentration to the Fifth Framework Programme by dealing in parallel with health issues linked to our nutrition and environment .
This is where the heart and arteries of every European are at stake .
Ladies and gentlemen , by adopting these amendments by a strong majority , we will approach the co-decision procedure under the best possible conditions .
It is a matter of building a European science and technology policy which lives up to our ambitions , that is , one which is at the service of all Europeans .
Mr President , first of all I want to congratulate the rapporteur on her work , which is very careful and very sensitive to all the opinions expressed in committee , which has meant that the report has arrived at this stage with a high degree of unanimity . That backing bears witness to the work done by the rapporteur .
In the few seconds I have available , I want to focus on what I see as a serious contradiction in the construction of the European Union which is taking place .
We are aware of and admit the fact that Europe is behind North America , Japan and even some other regions which are increasing the GNP destined for research on these matters . Nevertheless , we are decreasing our investment , and it is also decreasing in every Member State of the European Union .
I wonder how we can make any progress , with the prospect of reduced research spending .
Mr President , please allow me to present my criticism in note form , so to speak , because I only have a short time to speak .
Firstly , I would like to discuss the financial provision . According to the Treaty of Dublin , this should have been 6 % .
That is now out of the question .
I would simply like to point out that America has just decided on an 8 % growth rate , or a total of 32 % over four years .
Next , I would like to address the total disparity between nuclear and non-nuclear energy .
We have earmarked ECU 1 260 million for nuclear energy and ECU 1 004 million for non-nuclear energy - including coal and renewable energy .
I think this is because we are forever chasing the mirage of fusion . Thus , we would not be doing justice to the task if , for example , I only made reference to the Kyoto Convention .
Besides , an even more pressing task is to probe who actually benefits from growth and what form that growth should take .
Does it make people happier , healthier or more contented ?
Does it reduce unemployment ?
We need to pay far greater attention to this .
The other matter concerns information technology .
We are entering an era when a segment of the population of the EU - and , not least , citizens of other countries - will in all probability no longer have any part in knowledge because these people are excluded - they cannot participate in the new information technology .
This will lead to a major disparity , not only in the European Union , but also in many other countries with which we do , of course , have to collaborate , for example in Asia or in the developing countries .
I do not know how we will resolve this .
We need to spend a lot more money in working with this trend .
It is not just about energy or the environment ; it is also - and more pointedly - about the consequences of the rapid growth of information technology .
Mr President , Commissioner , like everyone else I would naturally like to add to the well-deserved compliments the rapporteur is receiving and perhaps note that when we embarked on the Fifth Framework Programme , Parliament had two clear demands to make .
The first related to the form and structure of the Framework Programme .
We wanted to break with the linear model of research , which belonged to the past , in favour of an interactive model which linked targeted actions to generic technologies .
These demands were satisfied right from the stage of the Commission 's proposal .
Secondly , we wanted the Framework Programme to be responsive not only to the desire to ensure the competitiveness of our industries , but also to be an instrument responsive to social demands .
On this point , too , the Commission moved largely in the direction of our expectations .
And the good news which has come from the Council in the common position is that it has not only confirmed what we have achieved with the Commission but that it has gone further towards Parliament 's position than the Commission did .
The bad news , on the other hand , has been that the Council does not provide , or does not provide us with , the political means with which it is itself in agreement .
Thus , given that we cannot express an opinion on behalf of the Council but that we can at least make ourselves heard , I would like to say three things to the Council .
The first is that we have not decided to make many concessions - and I must stress this point - particularly as we are on exactly the same wavelength as the Commission .
So , we will not change our minds .
The second is that if , in spite of everything , necessity dictates that we must accept a reduction to below the 16.3 billion level , there will be no linear reduction .
It will be hard luck for some of the Council 's priorities .
Thirdly and finally , there are some things which we consider to be essential , such as the independence of the Joint Research Centre and , to reply to Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , the essential tasks of the Euratom Treaty , including thermonuclear fusion .
But that is my personal opinion .
Mr President , I would like to warmly thank Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl for preparing this report .
The Fifth Framework Programme must be got off the EU decision-making treadmill as quickly as possible , so that competitive European research can continue without interruption when the present phase of the programme has ended .
The Commission cannot be allowed to slow down the decision-making process by drawing out the debate until it goes to conciliation .
Stubborn persistence in attitude does not produce results .
A very important area of research for the future in the Fifth Framework Programme is water .
Clean drinking water , surface water and groundwater is now , and will continue to be , a very important issue for the EU ; for example , 2 % of surface water in the EU is being threatened with pollution .
That is why research must help preserve this vanishing natural resource in those areas that still have clean water .
More attention should be paid in research to , for example , the capability of mineral deposits to work as indicators in studies of groundwater .
If ever there happens to be radioactivity in a given area , mineral deposits will reveal this without the need for the time-consuming examination of groundwater .
It is important for European research and competitiveness that the Framework Programme budget be as large as possible .
Only then can we be certain of enjoying high standards in the future in Europe .
Mr President , the four previous framework programmes for research largely funded precompetitive research projects halfway between grass roots research and the commercial development of products .
These programmes had the quality of developing cooperation between scientists , universities and business , but they had only a small impact in social and economic terms and did not enable Europe to catch up in many fields , especially the sectors of the future .
These shortcomings were largely due to the inadequacy of appropriations , their dilution amongst too great a number of programmes and a lack of flexibility in the allocation of appropriations to respond to new needs .
In the Fifth Framework Programme , the Commission has corrected these faults by concentrating appropriations on fewer , more targeted activities , by looking to improve their management and to simplify procedures .
These directions were overall approved by Parliament and the Council , but a disagreement arose regarding the amount of appropriations .
Whilst the Commission and Parliament are demanding a substantial increase in appropriations to bring them to ECU 16.3 billion over five years , the Council has given a figure of 14 billion , which in real terms represents a decrease in comparison with the Fourth Framework Programme .
Given the European Union 's backwardness in the field of research in comparison with competitor countries , appropriations should be increased to ECU 16.3 billion and substantial improvements should be brought about in their use and in the implementation of projects .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteur .
I know it is a difficult task - a bit like squaring the circle .
Irreconcilable interests often have to be reconciled .
It is critical for Parliament to remain united now .
We have one clear adversary , the Council .
We will only be able to resist the Council if we stay on the course we have just mapped out , and I would also ask the Commission to support the House in this .
My second comment addresses a problem that we unfortunately will not be able to solve with the Fifth Framework Programme for Research . I would like to draw attention to this now .
It is the increasing north-south conflict of industrial competitiveness .
Unfortunately , the southern states have cut back their research expenditure more severely than has been the case in the north , although the southern states only had a relatively low level of expenditure as it was .
This will lead to an even greater northsouth divide in the future .
I would like to ask the Commission to devote special attention to this subject , not because I believe the Fifth Framework Programme for Research can solve the problem - there is far too little money for that .
But the political will must come into being in the south - and by that I mean countries with a smaller gross domestic product - as well as in the north .
The latter are not always richer , but as a rule , they spend more on research .
We need to come up with a solution to this ; otherwise , the divide will only get bigger . It will cost us dearly and we will not be able to bridge it by stepping up regional policy .
I am asking you to reflect on this .
In any case , thank you very much , and I do hope we can stand united as we oppose the Council .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Quisthoudt , for the excellent work she has done .
The main issue in this second reading concerns the disagreement with the Council over the budget for the Fifth Framework Programme .
The Council proposes a maximum amount of ECU 12 740 billion , excluding Euratom , whilst Parliament proposes just over ECU 15 billion .
The essential difference therefore concerns this additional 2 billion which this Parliament wishes to allocate to the four research themes , namely the quality of the existing and user-friendly information society , competitive and sustainable growth , energy and the environment .
Mr President , it is essential that Europe 's competitiveness is increased , that the social issues in this area are resolved , and that the Council is persuaded to adopt the position of Parliament .
Research is one effective method of guaranteeing employment in the European Union in the long term .
It now appears that a conciliation round with the Council is unavoidable .
In view of our experience as Parliament with respect to the role of the Commission in the conciliation procedure involving the additional ECU 700 million for the Fourth Framework Programme , I would like to urge the Commission to determine its strategy for the conciliation procedure in close cooperation with the European Parliament .
We can only get the Council on our side if Parliament and Commission act jointly on this issue .
The Commission should avoid giving the Council the impression that the Commission attaches less value to the level of the research budget than the European Parliament does .
I insist on a response from Madam Commissioner to this question , and I would like to know whether she is prepared to jointly develop such a strategy .
Mr President , I am rather sorry that we are discussing such an important subject late at night .
I do not think it is appropriate .
However , I should like to give my congratulations to the rapporteur .
She is a lady who drives a very hard bargain , I have to say .
But I enjoyed our very interesting discussions and I am very pleased that we achieved a result .
The theme of the week , as expressed in Cardiff , is ' let 's bring Europe to the people ' . What better way of doing that than engaging the best brains in Europe on behalf of the people to tackle the problems which worry the people ?
That is what the framework programme is for .
I am very pleased about the attention that is now being given to the theme of gender balance , of mainstreaming throughout the Community 's policies , including the Fifth Framework Programme .
I would sincerely like to thank our Commissioner , Mrs Cresson , for her attention , which will be appreciated by many people in this Parliament .
Another leitmotif of the Fifth Framework Programme has to be sustainable development .
We have to bear in mind all the time that resources are finite and that we must improve life for everyone in the Community .
Like others I have some doubts about the wisdom in the Euratom part of the Fifth Framework Programme of spending hundreds and hundreds of millions of ECUs on research into nuclear fusion which will not generate electricity in the lifetime of anyone in this Chamber tonight .
But so be it .
Socio-economic research which tells us how our society is growing and what we could do to make it better is essential .
What I want to see in the Fifth Framework Programme , which did not happen in the Fourth in all areas , is attention to the implications for society of the research which these brains are working on .
That was meant to happen in the Fourth Framework Programme and it did not .
We seriously want the socio-economic implications of every piece of research to be looked at in the Fifth Framework Programme .
That is very important as well as for some specific areas such as information technology and others where there are very clear societal implications .
I hope that the Council of Ministers is intending to act rationally .
It is not rational to make a cut in real terms in research in 1999 and the beginning of the next century .
That is irrational behaviour .
I hope , therefore , that they are quite clear we will not accept something which cuts the Fifth Framework Programme in real terms in comparison with the Fourth .
That is exactly what this Parliament does not want .
We are bringing Europe to the people .
As I said earlier on , we can only do that with an adequate budget .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the author of the statement on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I must congratulate the rapporteur .
I welcome the Council 's common position , which has taken up the concerns of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , incorporating a separate point on energy , the environment and sustainable development into the topic .
I would particularly like to emphasize the fact that the Council has expressly stressed organic substances in its chapter on ecologically friendly energy systems , including renewable energy sources .
That is a big success , underlining the positive re-thinking process in EU policy .
The facts from Austria , Finland and Sweden show that it is possible to step up the use of renewable energy sources ; renewable energy sources account for between 20 and 25 % of energy consumption in these countries .
EU policy is aimed at sustainable development and the sustainable utilization of natural resources , achievable through increased use of these types of energy sources .
To me , this is also very important in view of environmental protection , particularly with regard to further developing rural areas .
In this connection , I also welcome the fact that the Council has come out in favour of the sustainable development of agriculture , fisheries and forestry .
At the same time , I would like to emphasize that in a truly integrated rural economy , mountainous regions must also be considered .
I am critical of the low level of funding .
Mr President , the rapporteur has my congratulations on being able to bring to Parliament this evening a report which is commanding widespread support and which I hope will serve us well in the conciliation that lies ahead .
The first point I want to make is that , in relation to finance , we must not allow a fall in real terms in the amount we give to research .
Let me give a simple example .
The oil price per barrel is now at its lowest level ever .
Yet the United States is quadrupling the amount of support it gives to the supply and service industry in the oil sector .
When we set out the Fourth Framework , the Third Framework , the Second Framework , the First Framework , society was poorer than it is now .
And yet , are we to believe that we are now poorer in our aspirations for what we want in the future ?
It cannot be .
There are two very specific points I want to mention .
Firstly , we must have solid fuel within the purview of this programme .
We may not like coal , but coal use throughout the world is increasing and we should not forget that .
Secondly , we need to add in the work for disability as well as for the ageing population .
They are not always the same thing , but we need to have regard to this problem in our society .
My final point is that we must realize that we are rich in what we have already achieved in our research programme and we must exploit it more than we have in the past .
If we could achieve that in the Fifth Framework Programme , we would be very happy indeed .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Energy for the future ( renewable sources of energy )
The next item is the joint debate on two reports , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy :
A4-0207 / 98 by Mrs Rothe , on a communication from the Commission on energy for the future : Renewable Sources of Energy - White Paper for a Community Strategy and Action Plan ( COM ( 97 ) 0599 - C40047 / 98 ) ; -A4-0199 / 98 by Mr Linkohr , on network access for renewable energies - creating a European directive on the feeding in of electricity from renewable sources of energy in the European Union .
Mr President , there is already ample testimony to the European Parliament 's positive view of renewable energy in numerous resolutions .
Under the motto of " talk is cheap - we want some action ! ' , Parliament has already requested a strategy and a concrete plan of action in two reports , also tabling some proposals of its own .
The Commission must have been aware that Parliament had high expectations of the White Paper .
Commissioner , I can assure you today , you have not disappointed us .
Even though we would have preferred the White Paper to get down to specifics to a greater extent , it does point the right way .
The Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy gives its unmitigated support to the goal of doubling the use of renewable energy by the year 2010 as a minimum goal , as stated in the report .
However , we expect binding commitments between the Commission and Member States as to goals for the individual countries , broken down by type of energy and annual power prognostications .
These very Member States must be prepared to take up their responsibilities .
The White Paper correctly highlights the major importance of difficult conditions of competition for renewable energy sources .
In this respect I will focus on just one point , the matter of fair access to the electricity network .
The reality of energy policy in the Union demonstrates that countries that do have specific input arrangements for electricity from renewable energy show the highest rates of growth .
Through my report and , in more detail , the report by my colleague Mr Linkohr , we are prompting the Commission immediately to table a motion for a resolution that would organize conditions of access to the electricity network for " green ' electricity in such a way that the investment in plant and running costs for the production of electricity from renewable energy sources would become practicable , enabling wide market penetration regardless of the type of system chosen .
Legislative measures such as those just described , as well as concrete , special policies are needed to support renewable energy .
Therefore , I welcome the Commission 's plans for a major breakthrough campaign for renewable energy in fulfilment of one of Parliament 's demands .
The only other thing we are now proposing is that this campaign should be complemented with an information campaign on " solar heating and solar heating power stations ' .
The White Paper gives special prominence to organic substances in the question of doubling renewable energy sources .
That is a very positive signal , particularly for rural areas of the European Union .
But , Commissioner , if we are to take these proposals seriously , there surely has to be a corresponding logical step in the proposals for the reform of the common agricultural policy .
There is clearly a lot of catching up to be done ; perhaps you could put that to your honourable friend Mr Fischler .
By and large , promoting renewable energy sources is not the sole domain of energy policy .
This task applies to all Community policy right across the board and must also be given considerably greater consideration in the special financial promotion programmes of the European Union , whether within the Community or in programmes in third countries , since the necessary resources for the breakthrough campaign alone will cost the public coffers an estimated ECU 4 billion .
If political will is combined with political creativity at Union level and at national and regional political levels and channelled into new energy sources , doubling looks set to be achieved before 2010 - I am sure of that .
New approaches are also needed , notably in construction policy .
For example , we are asking for a " solar architecture ' action programme in Member States .
Following the successful example of the blue flag , perhaps golden suns could be awarded to hotels and resorts .
The policy of helping renewable energy to make a breakthrough is just as much an opportunity as a necessity .
A doubling by 2010 would give an annual reduction of approximately 400 m tonnes of CO2 ; this alone would fulfil two-thirds of the requirements of the Kyoto objective .
Between 500 000 and 900 000 new jobs could be created , new industrial impulses would be unleashed , new export possibilities would open up , and not least , intensified use of renewable energies represents the answer we need to the finite nature of fossil fuels and the problems of atomic energy sources .
Commissioner , this time we really do want to see some action !
Mr President , I am picking up where Mrs Rothe left off .
Oil currently costs approximately USD 13 per barrel .
Electricity and gas prices in the European Union are set to fall between 20 % and 30 % as a result of increased competition .
That is what we wanted , after all .
However , the question arises - what chance does renewable energy have at all , then , since we know that it tends to be rather expensive , in some cases far more expensive than conventional forms of energy ?
The proposal tabled here - and I hope Parliament will agree to it - does provide an answer to this : fair access to the electricity network for electricity from renewable energy sources in return for reimbursement that makes the investment in plant practicable for the operator .
This is , incidentally , a procedure we have used many times before .
Currently , for example , a parliamentary initiative by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights on a period of grace for innovations has been brought before the national bodies for patent legislation .
This procedure is permitted under the Maastricht Treaty .
Parliament can take the initiative ; at any rate , it can vote on it .
The Commission is then free to take up this initiative .
As a rule , the Commission would be well advised to stand by the decision of Parliament .
Since I am only too well aware that this is a very complex issue , I do not pretend that what has been penned here is the last word in wisdom .
That can be said of very few of our decisions in the European Parliament , anyway .
It would be presumptuous to say that one 's own paper really is the best thing we have for the next hundred years to come .
Nevertheless , it is a contribution .
Therefore , I recommend that Parliament should vote in favour of this motion for a resolution , together with its annex , because the annex only says that the Commission should give due consideration to the enclosed text .
Please consider the content very carefully .
It may well be that you have better ideas .
I will gladly bow to superior wisdom .
Please take that into consideration .
Hence , I would like to ask my colleagues to assist the Commission in this regard through the official channels as we go to the vote .
Up until now , the European Parliament has shown unity regarding renewable energy .
We have dealt with several reports - the Mombaur report , the report on energy policy by Wim van Velzen , the two Rothe reports on the Green Paper and the White Paper .
Now we have this report bearing my name .
Each time , the House has lent its unified support to renewable energy forms , and results have been forthcoming .
I say that for Parliament in all modesty .
It also helps the Commission to know that Parliament stands united behind renewable energy forms .
Thus , I appeal to my colleagues to remain on the course we have mapped out .
The content of the proposal - due to shortage of time , I will not read it out , as you can all read it in your mother tongue - the actual message of this proposal is that we should mobilize private capital to promote renewable energy in the European Union .
As we know from the White Paper referred to by Mrs Rothe , the strategy for the promotion of renewable energy will cost some ECU 80 000m - ECU 100 000m over the next decade .
I ask you : where is this money coming from ?
It is definitely not coming out of national budgets .
It is not coming out of our regional budgets - we have too little room for manoeuvre for that .
Neither is it coming out of the European budget .
We could try , but there is no way we could come up with ECU 80 billion - ECU 100 billion .
This can only be done through the mobilization of private capital .
That is , in fact , the objective of this paper .
Accordingly , I ask you once again for your support .
The current debate also helps shape public opinion in Europe , for without this unified public opinion in questions of renewable energy , we would not be able to keep the promises we made in Kyoto , the same promises we will , no doubt , be reiterating in Buenos Aires .
Following on from Mrs Rothe 's comments , may there be action to accompany our words !
Those who come after us will thank us for it .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen - we are currently debating the future of European agriculture on all political fronts .
The support of multi-functional rural areas is a key point .
Using replenishable raw materials as renewable energy sources brings this goal within reach , and I therefore wholeheartedly welcome the Commission 's White Paper on renewable energy .
However , at this juncture I have to criticize the inadequate proposals for reform in Agenda 2000 .
The Commission 's objective , according to which renewable energy sources would reach a proportion of 12 % , is laudable and corresponds to a doubling of the current proportion .
However , a further increase is vital and entirely feasible , as Austria , Finland and Sweden testify .
Organic substances have tremendous potential for the future development of rural areas as a whole .
Jobs will be created through decentralized production and use , promoting integrated development .
Regional purchasing power will be increased in tandem with value creation , and income and living standards will rise .
The result will be a reduction in demographic migrations and thus , the retention of intact rural areas with their irreplaceable value in terms of leisure and relaxation .
In order to promote renewable energy sources accordingly , uniform tax reductions or tax relief would have to apply throughout Europe .
Likewise , reimbursement for electricity input from renewable energy sources would be needed right across Europe in order to set up a reliable legal framework for its development and use .
In parallel , the Commission should also advocate an increase in duty on fossil fuels .
Self-regenerating raw materials are of particular significance especially in view of the imminent enlargement of the EU .
The Commission should initiate a pan-European information campaign on the introduction of renewable energy sources , and I urge it to do so .
The success of organic substances is largely dependent upon their acceptance by our citizens .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Rothe warmly for the excellent work she has done in preparing this report on future renewable energy sources .
In my opinion , Mrs Rothe has succeeded in presenting the effect of renewable energy sources on employment and regional policy quite well in her report .
The effect on employment is greater than with other energy sources .
There is a good argument both for using renewable energy and for the decentralized production of energy , particularly in the regions of the EU that are remote , sparsely populated and which have high unemployment .
By supporting research and development in renewable energy we can create hi tech jobs for these regions and so improve conditions for sustainable development .
There are widely differing resources to exploit in different regions ; for example , biomasses , solar energy and wind power .
Energy policy development should always take stock of local conditions .
In my opinion , the Commission 's announcement does not give sufficient attention to the importance of wood as a renewable energy source .
Wood as a source of energy production remains largely unexploited in , for example , the northern regions of the EU .
This has not been emphasized sufficiently in Mrs Rothe 's report either .
Supporting renewable energy through taxation will be unavoidable if Member States wish to fulfil the goals set for the Union at the Kyoto climate conference .
With tax controls we will be able to increase both the use of wood-based and other biomassbased energy as well as the combined production of electricity and heating .
In this way the Union 's energy policy can be more clearly based on renewable sources and not , for example , on the further building of nuclear power plants with the risks they entail .
Mr President , the Commission has called its White Paper " Energy for the Future ' .
We truly are speaking of matters pertaining to the future here - human health , the conservation of the natural basis of life , careful use of resources , securing supplies and the independence of supplies from possible crisis areas of the world and lastly - of paramount importance to all the members of my party - jobs .
I believe renewable energy can contribute to achieving all these goals , which are integral to the sustainable , environmentally sound development of the Union .
Thus , I would like to thank the Commission for its White Paper and Mrs Rothe for her report , as well as everyone else who has been working on the report to make it so admirable and meaningful .
We need to increase the proportion of renewable energies in all Member States as rapidly as possible .
To this end , we must implement strategies that promote specific action , because renewable energy is regional energy .
Action is necessary in regional , agricultural and transport policy , and , of course , also in research and economic policy , as well as , ultimately , in fiscal policy .
We also need to discuss how we can better motivate people to use renewable energy .
In my own region , renewable energy accounts for 30 % of energy consumption and people often say with pride , " I use solar heating in my house ! '
We ought to be hearing that from a lot more people in the Union , whether it is solar power , wind power or something else again .
One final point in closing : if we truly wish to promote renewable energy , a legal basis will have to be drawn up to allow these programmes to be implemented accordingly .
Mr President , I will begin with Mrs Rothe 's report .
The White Paper on renewable energy sources is without doubt one of the most significant - or perhaps even the single most significant - ecological document produced by the Commission in recent years .
The Green Paper was highly acclaimed for its excellent analysis , but it was also loudly criticized for taking too little account of practical considerations for implementation .
This weakness has not been totally surmounted , but it has at least been assuaged by means of a helpful take-off programme .
Mrs Rothe 's report constitutes one more qualitative step towards the acceptance of renewable energy sources .
The 41 points listed represent a decidedly successful combination of competent , well-informed demands for further development of the thinking behind the White Paper .
It is to be hoped that it will be given the most extensive consideration possible .
Mrs McNally 's Amendment No 2 recognizes the need to set a minimum level of reimbursement for electricity produced from renewable energy sources in consideration of social and ecological use .
I would like to add a further two thoughts .
Firstly , changing over to renewable energy sources is not only of importance in terms of the ecology or of socio-economic considerations such as the creation of jobs .
Renewable energy sources are also worth striving for to conserve resources and promote future export business .
Another significant point is that renewable energy sources would also be of consequence to peace policy , above all .
We find ourselves in the thick of struggles over the distribution of the Earth 's resources in Africa , the Middle East , the Caucasus area and around the Caspian Sea .
A peace deal for the 21st century can thus only be achieved through the changeover to renewable energy sources .
The second thought is that renewable energy sources really only have one single enemy .
Not the big multi-national companies or the suppliers of natural gas or traditional energy companies .
Their one and only enemy is ignorance of the fantastic possibilities these energy sources offer humanity .

Mr Linkohr 's report does throw up some very constructive ideas , for example in chapter 2 paragraph 3 , which states that there needs to be a right to input electricity produced by renewable energy sources into the grid .
However , regrettably , the report restricts itself largely to so-called funding and special funding for the promotion of renewable energy sources .
Accordingly , we cannot really talk about an input directive , but about a directive on input funds .
There is a grave difference here .
Reimbursement along uniform and harmonized lines in all Member States is a prerequisite to the acceptance of renewable energy sources .
This should be calculated in such a way as to make the investment in plant for the production of renewable energy sources worthwhile .
There are plenty of exemplary models for this in Europe ; German input legislation and the Danish model spring to mind .
Amendment No 3 proposed by Mrs McNally relates to this requirement and should therefore be embraced without reservation .
This criticism of the report is in no way a fundamental rejection of the proposed funding model ; it is , however , intended as a clear signal that , in its existing form , it simply cannot fulfil its purpose - the practical implementation of the specifications of the White Paper .
The demands of the European Parliament need not be any more reticent than the ideas of the Commission .
Mr President , we would not be able to have this debate if Commissioner Papoutsis had not presented us with his White Paper and we thank him very much for it .
The priorities of the current presidency are environment , jobs and crime .
As far as the environment and jobs are concerned , renewable energy is extremely relevant - I am not so sure about crime !
We certainly know that this is an important contribution to both those priorities .
Mrs Rothe has written an extremely wide-ranging report and I am delighted to see that there are supplementary reports from three other women .
It must be a record that all the reports on this important issue are by women Members .
Mrs Rothe has 41 conclusions and I ask colleagues to read these conclusions carefully .
Each of them is sensible .
We know the barriers for renewable energy .
They are legal , financial , administrative , etcetera .
Her Recital G makes it clear that we will not make much progress without a reliable legal framework of one sort or another .
We could hope for an energy chapter .
We could have hoped for an energy treaty like the Euratom Treaty .
That was my wish , but I accept that a charter is a little more realistic .
So , let us try for that .
Mrs Rothe and Mrs Graenitz are quite right to point out that many other policies are taken up by renewable energy , and there is a whole list : environment , agriculture , regional , transport , etcetera .
I would like to turn now to Mr Linkohr .
Reproach has been made in my presence that it is not the European Parliament 's job to put forward this sort of initiative .
Why on earth , then , were we given the powers to do so ?
Were we given powers on condition that we would never use them ?
That is absurd .
Of course not .
The intention was that we would use those powers , and I urge you to think very carefully before you reject this constructive measure .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Parliament and Council directive on the internal electricity market - which of course arose out of a Commission initiative , and represents so much work by our colleague Mr Desama - clearly recognizes , in two points , the importance of renewable energy sources .
In one of these points , it clearly says that the Member States can demand that network operators give priority to installations which generate electricity using renewable energy sources .
Mrs Rothe 's second , excellent report is along the same lines . It refers to the Commission White Paper , just as the Green Paper was referred to before .
We can only give it our most enthusiastic support .
Since time is short , allow me just to underline paragraph 40 , which calls upon the relevant authorities to prepare what the text refers to as a treaty on renewable energies , EURENEW , which combines the European acronym with the English word " renew ' .
If , as I expect , Mrs McNally 's amendment is accepted , I dare say we shall talk not about a treaty , but at least about a charter .
We have the example of the European Energy Charter , which was inspired by special circumstances , in Eastern Europe . Now we have another set of special circumstances : moving from the potential to the actual , and turning the new challenge presented by renewable energy into valid legal documents .
So I have little to say on this .
I also want to mention Mr Linkohr 's initiative , very briefly because time is short .
I think it is an excellent initiative , although I must also admit that it provokes some negative reactions . My colleagues who have yet to speak will not fail to mention that .
Not because of the principle , Mrs McNally , not because we want to relinquish our rights , but because of the content of some of the provisions which , to my mind , suggest that this document should be considered further and subjected to a better analysis within the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy . Otherwise , there is a serious risk that this important document may be rejected and fail to obtain enough votes in this House .
That , Mr President , would be a great pity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to congratulate both rapporteurs , Mrs Rothe and Mr Linkohr , for their reports which contain many recommendations for stimulating the use of renewable energy .
Our future energy supply must be based on renewable sources of energy .
Renewable sources of energy that generate electricity should be given preferential development .
Rules for supplying such energy to the grids are also part of this issue .
My group welcomes Mr Linkohr 's initiative for a directive on the supply of electricity from renewable energy sources to the electricity grid .
But we are facing a classic dilemma .
On the one hand it is an excellent signal to the Commission and the Member States to make proposals in this sphere .
But on the other hand , the proposed regulation in the annex is too detailed and , in my group 's opinion , not always in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity .
Overregulation does not belong in a liberalized energy market .
In conclusion I therefore say to you that we will vote in favour of the legislative resolution , but unfortunately , we are not able to support the proposals in the annex .
Mr President , surprisingly little attention has been paid to the idea that increasing the use of renewable energy sources is also a security policy .
EU dependence on imported energy is growing .
In twenty years time 94 % of our oil , 80 % of our coal and 75 % of our natural gas will be imported from parts of the world which are very often unstable .
This also speaks in favour of the increased use of renewable energy resources .
We see , however , a conflict between worthy aims and insufficient means .
It is quite clear that at the present rate the 15 % share for renewable energy is not going to be achieved , and it will not be possible either to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 8 % by the year 2012 .
There is a particularly clear contradiction , as has been said here , between the White Paper and Agenda 2000 .
That is that the increased use of biomasses is , above all else , a matter of agricultural policy and not energy policy .
I myself would prefer to have the heat from the sun and the heat from the earth .
Mr President , renewable energy has been something of a lame duck in the Community .
We talk about it but we do not use it .
The practical effects of our past proposals have been rather small .
Even in the buildings of the European Union and the Parliament there is no real attempt to incorporate renewable energies in a serious manner .
The White Paper could become a point of change and I thank the Commission for their initiative in this way and also the excellent reports of Mrs Rothe and Mr Linkohr which make practical proposals for change .
We could be about to really influence the energy agenda for the year 2000 and Mr Linkohr 's proposal for the right of access for renewables to the electricity network is crucial .
For electricity production the introduction of a Community-wide law on inputs to the grid is a most important step .
Throughout Europe , inputting electricity at specific prices is an instrument for gradually dealing with the centralised structure through secure access to the market for decentralised electricity production from renewable sources .
Mrs Rothe 's report also has excellent practical proposals and although the Commission 's targets are extremely modest given what is technically feasible it is the actual implementation of even modest targets that must be our first objective if we are to achieve anything real .
Campaigns such as the one million roofs , the one hundred solar communities and the golden sun awards are visionary ways of making renewables real to people on the ground and I know that they will be very interesting if we can actually pursue them in a practical way .
One of the sectors of the European Union with a high percentage of CO2 emissions is the construction sector , and technological decisions in the construction sector have a long-term effect on the emission rates of all our Member States .
The attention that we must pay to buildings but are not yet paying is a crucial aspect of these reports and I recommend the practical effects of those to all of us .
Mr President , as I mentioned during the discussions on the ALTENER II project , Luxembourg already has a supply system , that is , a guarantee on the part of the State regarding the price of electricity from alternative energy sources .
Whilst congratulating Mrs Rothe and Mr Linkohr on their report , I would like to speak about an ongoing technical problem , that is , the fact that access rights to the grid for a guaranteed minimum remuneration is not sufficient .
Often , landowners are not willing to make their land available to the management of a renewable energy system - windmills , for example - to enable the windmills to be hooked up to the nearest distribution station .
What can be done ?
We must base the principle of the public utility of alternative energy production firmly in national legislation , which would enable the expropriation of land from owners opposed to these forms of electricity crossing their lands .
We know very well that the nuclear industry is a strong lobbyist , particularly with regard to the cultural associations , and particularly in my country .
We will put an obstacle in the path of this lobbying in order to offer a true opportunity to wind energy .
This said , Mr President , I will conclude by insisting on the fact that the Commission should truly establish the principle of public utility .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the rapporteur for this own-initiative report .
The Group of the European People 's Party warmly supports the supply of renewable energy to the existing electricity network .
The rapporteur has taken the trouble to delve deeply into the practices of various Member States , and , on the basis of this , has developed a concept directive .
Nevertheless , Mr President , we unfortunately have some fundamental objections to the way this draft directive was worked out in the annex .
Firstly , it is debatable whether this Parliament should take the place of the Commission by working out a directive in such detail , which in fact has to be drafted by the Commission .
My group would have preferred a report that did no more than formulate general principles , leaving the Commission the space to interpret the directive on the basis of consultation with the Member States . This leaves more scope to take into account subsidiarity and the introduction variants and routes taken by various Member States .
As an example I would like to mention that the rapporteur is thinking in terms of two main models which exist in Member States .
The Dutch model of ' green certificates ' , which allows much more space to the energy partners to express their own responsibility , is at loggerheads with this regulation .
Amendment No 1 , submitted by Mrs McNally , does not resolve this issue .
This example shows that the draft directive has not quite taken shape .
Secondly , there is a profusion of regulations .
We believe that this is the wrong signal to give to the increasingly liberal energy market .
We believe another mixture of instruments could be applied , namely mechanisms such as price , the development of an energy stock market , a buy-back obligation , as well as education .
We think it is particularly regrettable that the instrument of regulation was opted for .
Let there be no misunderstanding : the PPE Group shares the intentions of the rapporteur completely , but disagrees for reasons of principle with the details .
That is why , with much regret , my group will not support the annex to his proposal .
I ask the rapporteur to refer his report back to the Commission so that a better and wider consensus can be achieved .
Mr President , the whole debate on energy now centres on two issues .
The first is the notion of guaranteed supplies , which is necessarily undergoing major developments .
The second is clearly the climatic consequences of energy .
This was the issue at Rio and Kyoto .
Faced with the issue of climate , there are obviously alternatives to fossil fuels .
The two alternatives are , on the one hand , nuclear energy - whether you are in favour or not , it is an essential answer to the problem - and , on the other hand , renewable energy sources whose only handicaps are that they are far from having reached the same degree of maturity as nuclear energy and that they raise a certain number of problems on an economic level for those who invest in the sector .
Faced with these difficulties , how can the share of renewable energy sources be increased , a share which we know will , in any case , remain a modest one ?
On the one hand , we can put our trust in the market , by telling ourselves that the internal market for energy has been liberalized .
Yet we know very well that it will take a very long time for the market for renewable energy to truly gain a foothold .
A completely voluntarist action is thus required , and this is what makes Mr Linkohr 's initiative interesting , despite the objections which can be raised on one or other aspect of his proposal .
Mr Linkohr has in fact put the problem very bluntly and has gone one step further than the previous excellent reports , the most recent of which was the report by Mrs Rothe .
To hide behind the complexity of the problem as the Group of the European People 's Party is doing by not voting for the Linkohr report is quite a puzzling attitude .
It amounts to depriving oneself of the right of initiative which is recognized within the Treaties .
Consequently , we cannot accept this view .
I believe we should vote for Mr Linkohr 's report .
We must do this in order to give the Commission an effective way of proposing a whole range of actions in favour of renewable energies .
Mr President , renewable energy is essentially about producing electricity .
We have a conceptual problem in understanding the demand for electricity in our society and how it is growing ; and indeed , how much electricity comes out of a conventional power station .
An extraordinary statistic is that if you took all the wind-farms in the world and put them in the United Kingdom they would still only provide 10 % of the United Kingdom 's electricity demand .
That gives you a perception of how far we have to go in promoting renewable energies .
There are three essential points .
Firstly , we need to clear the way for planning permissions .
In the United Kingdom planning permissions , perhaps more than anything else , are holding back the development of renewables .
We need also , as the Linkohr report says , to have access to the grid and perhaps even to make sure that the grid is near to where we want the renewable energies to be .
There is sometimes a problem in the geographical locations : wind energy , for instance , is very often in areas where there are no grid connections in the first place .
So we have problems in that regard .
Linking all this together is the need to find a mechanism for giving financial support while these energies grow - a mechanism which is not just open-ended but also has within it an element of competition which will eventually help to drive down costs .
We have seen evidence of that being possible .
I hope that as a result of these debates - and I know that we have all got reservations about the detail - the Commission will come forward with a proposal which will help us to move into an era where renewable energies will provide more of our electricity supply .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate both rapporteurs , Mrs Rothe and Mr Linkohr , on their splendid work .
It is true to say that both reports make a substantial contribution to the debate on promoting the use of renewable energy sources .
Their views indeed enrich not only the proposals that have already been put forward , but also those that we are now preparing .
During the preparation of the White Paper the Commission made every possible effort to take into consideration the 1997 resolution of Parliament concerning the Green Paper on renewable energy sources .
As a result , the White Paper essentially expresses in large measure the positions of the European Parliament .
We have now set in motion the review of all existing programmes and actions for the promotion of renewable energy sources at the level of the Member States and , of course , at a Community level .
I have to say that , further to the White Paper , we have been briefed on the development of a series of national action programmes for the promotion of renewable energy sources .
It is clear that the considerable effort that we are urging Member States to make over the next decade has already begun to take on a specific shape .
Nevertheless , there is still a great need and much scope for further action .
And , of course , there can no longer be any excuse for inaction , in view of the pledges made at Kyoto .
In this context , I would also like to express my satisfaction at the endorsement given by the European Parliament to the ALTENER programme .
I also wish to inform you that the ALTENER programme came into force with the recent Council decision of 18 May .
The Rothe report contains a number of constructive proposals .
First of all I wish to assure you that we are making every effort to complete the examination of existing programmes and measures throughout the whole of the European Union within the current year .
With regard to the campaign for the take-off of renewable sources , we , in the Commission , are at the stage of planning measures in various sectors and we are also preparing the necessary activities for the purpose of information and dissemination .
More specifically , with regard to buildings , we will examine construction legislation , with a view to incorporating provisions in favour of renewable energy sources , especially solar thermal power .
In order to promote the reduction of CO2 emissions from coal we will encourage the joint use of renewable energy sources and the conserving of energy in buildings .
We are also studying the way in which we can promote more fundamentally the penetration into the market of the use of solar thermal power and , especially , photovoltaics .
In addition , in order to diffuse good practices , we are studying , inter alia , the inauguration of awards as well as the carrying out of other actions that are proposed in the campaign for take-off .
With regard to the issue of the promotion of renewable energy sources via other Community policies , we are studying how we can make better use of the continuing reform of the Structural Funds and the common agricultural policy , as well as the policy of energy production .
More especially indeed , within the framework of the European Commission proposal for the regulation of the European Fund for Regional Development , in Article 2 , which lays down all the sectors which will be funded as a priority in the next financing round , the growth of renewable energy sources is categorically referred to as one of the basic priorities .
And I believe that this is the basis for the allocation of considerable resources , while at the same time fully abiding by the principle of subsidiarity , as shaped by the Community frameworks to support renewable energy sources .
In addition , issues related to the financing of actions in the sector of renewable energy sources via various other Community programmes will , I believe , be tackled during negotiations - and also during the budget procedure - which are expected to take place within the next few years .
I hope that the European Parliament will give special priority to renewable energy sources in the context of its own role , in relation , of course , to the budget .
With the regular progress reports and follow-up reports which are envisaged in the action plan , we hope to ensure that the defined objectives are better realized and that they are suitably adapted as necessary .
Of course there will always be the possibility of discussing the progress of the penetration of renewable energy sources with all the interested bodies and of course with the European Council throughout the entire twelve-year period during which this strategy will be implemented .
Of course the action plan will be amended following recommendations whenever this is expedient .
Turning now to the Linkohr report , I have to say that the Commission agrees with the conviction of the European Parliament that the right of access of renewable energy sources to the electricity market is of decisive importance , especially with regard to our objective of doubling the share of renewable energy sources in the energy balance by the year 2010 .
Last March the Commission submitted its first report on demands for harmonization , which are provided for in the directive for the electricity market .
This report focuses almost exclusively on the matter of renewable energy sources and underlines the fundamental issues which must be examined during the preparatory stage .
The Commission is continuing its analysis of the way in which all possible obstacles can be overcome , in view of the developing situation in the Member States .
The aim of the Commission is , by the end of the current year , to submit a motion for a resolution for joint rules concerning the electricity produced by renewable energy sources .
This motion for a resolution must , on the one hand , give a powerful boost to the production of electricity from renewable energy sources and , on the other , ensure a harmonized approach within the Community .
I also wish to thank Mr Linkohr for his detailed and reliable advice .
His report will be of help to us , especially during the phase in which we find ourselves today , that is , the preparatory phase of our proposals on this very issue .
With the Rothe and Linkohr reports the European Parliament is continuing to provide sustained support and advice for the promotion of renewable energy sources .
Once again I wish to thank you and to assure you that the European Commission regards the promotion of renewable energy sources as one of the chief energy and environmental priorities for the immediate future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Counterfeit and pirated goods
The next item is the report ( A4-0223 / 98 ) by Mr Valdivielso de Cué , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 3295 / 94 laying down measures to prohibit the release for free circulation , export , re-export or entry for a suspensive procedure of counterfeit and pirated goods ( COM ( 1998 ) 0025 - C4-0159 / 98-98 / 0018 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , bad ways , profit and the human condition in general often lead us down certain dark alleyways , which are easier and more profitable than the legally established routes , in order to satisfy our desires to get rich quick .
That is the general basis of my report : the establishment of measures designed to prevent certain types of activity , such as the illegal use of trade marks , or the manufacture or marketing of pirated goods . Such practices are very widespread , although that does not make them any less illegal .
I would like to give a brief definition of counterfeit and pirated goods .
" Counterfeit goods ' means goods , including the packaging thereof , bearing without authorization a trade mark which is identical to the trade mark validly registered in respect of the same type of goods .
" Pirated goods ' means goods which are or embody copies made without the consent of the holder of the copyright or neighbouring rights in relation to a design or model .
Moving on to the report proper , I should point out that it mentions the importance of the problem , underlining the macroeconomic and sectoral impact and subsequent social consequences of the phenomena of counterfeiting and pirating .
This impact is very difficult to measure .
Nevertheless , I felt it appropriate to request the Commission to make increased efforts to assess the monitoring and repercussions which may follow the entry into force of this Council regulation , and subsequently to communicate them to the parties concerned .
The Commission has proposed introducing into the new regulation a series of proposals which substantially modify the earlier regulation currently in force .
Among the most significant proposals , we underline extending the regulation to a new intellectual property right , such as certain patented inventions , which constitute an essential aspect of intellectual property and occupy a very important place among all the means available to protect innovation .
Such protection is essential , given that this coverage provides a suitable framework for the investment in research and development which is so important for the development and competitiveness of European products in the face of international competition .
Customs services are also being given the chance to intervene in new customs statuses : goods in a free zone or warehouse and goods under customs supervision .
The regulation is also being adjusted to take account of the introduction of the Community trade mark , so that the right holder will be able to lodge a single application for customs protection , instead of the fifteen currently required to cover the whole of the territory of the Union .
So those are the most important new features included in the modification of the regulation .
In addition , the European Commission - which I would like to congratulate on what I think is a good piece of work - held a series of meetings and discussions with different business and pressure groups who had certain aspirations they wanted the new regulation to meet .
In that respect , the Committee on External Economic Relations has stated its opinion on the following matters . With respect to the controversial question of non-commercial imports in travellers ' personal luggage , two amendments aimed at restricting this sort of situation were rejected in that committee .
The European Commission considers that , within the ECU 175 limit , imports of a non-commercial nature are permitted .
In my opinion , this matter raises a basic problem . It is probably illegal but , nevertheless , is provided for de facto by this regulation .
Even so , the European Commission feels that this relative permissiveness has the effect of favouring small-scale trade and promoting tourism .
The problem of Community harmonization of the penalties which Member States are obliged to impose has become a very difficult problem , mainly due to the coexistence of different legal systems and traditions in the various Member States .
In any case , the report states that such penalties must be effective and proportionate and constitute an effective deterrent .
Finally , I should like to mention and stress the importance I have tried to give in the report to the possible non-commercial disposal of confiscated goods .
In a world in which millions of people live in conditions of extreme poverty and need , I hope Parliament will be understanding and give its support .
It is absolutely outrageous to destroy these confiscated goods , rather than try to find a non-commercial way to dispose of them and go some small way towards meeting some of the needs of those people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Valdivielso on his report .
The problem of piracy and counterfeit goods is very real and a threat to European industry .
Companies are not only disadvantaged in their sales to the European market , they also do not get a chance to expand their export to developing countries . The market in the developing countries is contaminated , we can safely say flooded , with counterfeit goods .
I saw this once again for myself in Indonesia not so long ago .
The problem is extremely acute for digital products .
Given the state of technology it is almost impossible these days for consumers to judge from the quality of the product whether or not it is authentic .
Mr President , my group is pleased with the inclusion of patents in the scope of the regulation , but is worried about control .
Who should carry out controls and where ?
Customs officials ?
Will they be trained to do so ?
Ladies and gentlemen , trade flows should not start to take a different course on account of differences in customs control .
My group 's question to the Commission is therefore : how does the Commission intend to guarantee uniformity of border controls on this issue , in particular in those places where , after enlargement , the European external borders will be monitored by customs officials from a different legal tradition , who are a long way from fully integrating European legislation .
In conclusion , parallel imports should not and cannot be prohibited .
This is not a solution .
The internal market should not be hindered by protectionism .
The free movement of goods provides healthy competition , and that is good for the consumer .
Mr President , the protection of material and intellectual property is immovably enshrined in our legal system .
This control is of immense value not only to the individual , but especially to the economy .
The protection of property includes the protection of patents on inventions , guaranteeing the viability of research and development .
The dismantling of internal borders makes customs points for traffic with third countries the last instance of control to prevent the infringement of property rights by means of the import or export of illegal , counterfeit goods .
However , for this protection to be effective , water-tight pan-European standards of security need to be in place to prevent illegally produced counterfeits from reaching the European market through weak links in the chain - in other words , countries known to have less rigorous customs arrangements .
Thus , we challenge the Commission to scrutinize the customs points of all such Member States very carefully and ensure that they guarantee a sufficiently high standard of security to do justice to the importance of protecting intellectual and material property .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that European companies have had to undergo far-reaching reorganizations in order successfully to meet the challenges of an increasingly competitive and open economy .
Nevertheless , these efforts alone are not enough .
It is also essential , among other measures , to establish a legal framework which guarantees respect for the rules which govern the world of commerce .
In this context , we should welcome the Commission 's proposal to amend the regulation on trade in counterfeit and pirated goods . The aim of this amendment is to extend the scope of the regulation and adjust it to developments in Community rules on intellectual property rights .
Faced with competition from third countries - especially emerging economies , whose low labour costs make it very difficult to compete with them - it is essential to combat the falsification of trade marks , designs and models , and to protect intellectual property , given that the main competitive advantages of European industry are product quality and , especially , creative ability .
That is why the Commission 's text represents such an opportunity . It proposes to suspend customs operations in cases where the goods concerned are suspected of being counterfeit or pirated goods covered by an intellectual property right , at the request of the right holder .
And that , in turn , is why the Commission needs to accept the amendments contained in the Valdivielso de Cué report , insofar as those proposals will help to guarantee respect for international trade rules in matters of intellectual property , and will make it possible to combat commercial practices which cause serious harm to European companies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the support of the European Parliament for the Commission proposal clearly demonstrates the desire of all of us to fight hard against fraudulent imports in the context of lawful and balanced competition .
First of all I would like to thank all of you and especially your rapporteur , Mr Valdivielso de Cué , as well as the Committee on External Economic Relations for the thorough and detailed work which has been completed in a very short space of time .
I am especially delighted with this report , as it is being presented today , because it is necessary to give Parliament the opportunity to express its view on the three basic innovations in this text .
And here I am referring , first of all , to the broadening of the scope of the provision on customs protection to include certain patents .
I am also referring to extending the regulation to include all goods which are held under customs supervision and , finally , I am referring to the institution of a procedure to lodge a single application , which will be valid for all Member States , for the benefit of the validly registered Community trade marks .
With regard to the question put to me by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , I would like to say that in fact the Commission is coordinating an effort on the part of Member States to train customs officials in respect of the unified application of control measures .
We believe that , in the future , in the next few years , and with a view of course to enlargement , we will have achieved the widest and best possible training of customs officials .
The proposed amendments naturally take account of the Commission objective , which consists in strengthening the possibilities of effecting controls along the external borders of the Community .
However , the Commission , more for technical than for political reasons , cannot adopt all of the proposed amendments .
The Commission is able to adopt Amendment No 6 without any reservation whatsoever .
It cannot adopt Amendments Nos 4 and 5 for the simple reason that they go against certain amendments of a structural nature .
Indeed , the position of Amendment No 4 on the text of the regulation should have been different and the Commission could then adopt it because there is such an agreement .
In addition , with regard to Amendment No 5 , the exemption from control of medicines whose compatibility with the legislation relating to patents has already been proved , which the European Commission approves , could be framed with greater precision .
However , the Commission cannot adopt Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 and 7 .
It cannot adopt Amendment No 1 , as the fee must be proportionate to the cost of the service provided , since by its very nature this cost varies from Member State to Member State according to the size of the means that must be mobilized .
The Commission cannot adopt Amendment No 2 , as the security that the customs authorities may require is used to cover their responsibility in the case of goods held unjustifiably .
Given that this is a national responsibility it is not necessary for the security to be obligatory , since the public authorities must at all events always be regarded as reliable .
Nor can the Commission adopt Amendment No 3 , as the compensation of the holder of the goods , the details of which fall within the sphere of the law of each Member State , is always considered to be in full .
Finally , the Commission cannot adopt Amendment No 7 , since , in practice , experience has shown that the data obtained in the context of the implementation of the regulation do not offer the possibility of an analysis being undertaken of the kind envisaged in the amendment in question .
The results of the operation of such an instrument , which are obtained by the Customs Union , are measurable and the Commission analyses them in detail in the report it has presented to you .
The phenomenon of the irregular exploitation of intellectual property , the roots of this phenomenon and all of its repercussions are themselves a different issue , which goes well beyond the scope of the present regulation .
In closing , once again I wish to thank your rapporteur and , of course , all who have contributed to this work today during the presentation and examination of this directive .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Second WTO ministerial conference
The next item is the debate on the Commission announcement on the conclusions reached at the second WTO ministerial conference from 18 to 20 May 1998 in Geneva .
Mr President , between 18 and 20 May I led the European Commission delegation to the ministerial conference of the WTO which was held in conjunction with the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of GATT , the WTO 's predecessor .
President Santer represented the European Union , together with many Heads of State from around the world .
Both the ministerial conference and the 50th anniversary commemoration were successful .
There was recognition , rightly , that the GATT system has made a tremendous contribution to the growth of employment and economic stability over the past 50 years and the participation by so many countries in that system and the fact that over 30 additional ones are keenly awaiting membership is a clear reflection of that recognition .
There was also recognition that in today 's global economy further trade liberalization within the rule-based system of the WTO is the surest way to maintain and spread that prosperity .
Those messages in favour of the WTO system were expressed by virtually all countries at the conference , both developed and developing .
On 20 May the conference adopted a ministerial declaration which encourages and enables us to work to achieve the objective of further trade liberalization as a means to secure greater prosperity and stability .
The conference reiterated the importance of all WTO members fully implementing their obligations under the WTO which all WTO members are clearly committed to .
The European Community , for its part , expressed its view that by and large implementation of the Uruguay Round has been proceeding well but where an individual country is having difficulties , we are ready to provide technical assistance to ensure that implementation proceeds properly .
That pledge was welcomed by some of the lesser developed countries .
Secondly , the ministerial declaration inaugurates a process to prepare the ground for a decision to be taken at next year 's conference in the United States on further multilateral liberalization .
That process , the work programme that has been set up , does not pre-empt next year 's decisions but makes it possible to take ambitious decisions next year if , as I hope , we decide to do so .
The process we authorized will respect existing timetables but also allow work where necessary to be intensified so that all the elements are in place for decision-making next year .
We hope that a decision will be taken next year to launch a comprehensive new round of negotiations - the millennium round - which would cover not only the subjects already agreed to be negotiated , such as agriculture and services , but other areas and sectors of importance to European industry and business , such as industrial tariffs , investment and competition rules , government procurement and so on .
It is the view of the European Union that our economy would greatly benefit from agreements in those fields and I believe that is in the interests not only of our industrialized partners but of developing countries too .
I took pains to explain during the ministerial conference why a new round would be the right way forward and perhaps it is worth referring to the arguments today .
Firstly , it is only through a comprehensive approach that all sectors and interests can be confident that their particular concerns will be covered in the negotiations .
Without a comprehensive round , there is a risk of certain sectors and legitimate areas for future work being left to one side .
With a round the agenda-setting process is far more wide-ranging and there will be far more options for ultimate decisions than would be the case if a narrower , sectoral approach were pursued .
Secondly , this comprehensive approach means that the built-in agenda , the Singapore work programme , and new items , too , can be discussed .
A round also involves the so-called single undertaking approach whereby , as in previous rounds , all participants must accept the whole outcome of the negotiations , not just pick-and-choose .
That means that issues which are difficult for some but important for others cannot be blocked in isolation .
That is the key to a successful outcome .
Finally , a comprehensive round implies a single end date which attracts strong political attention at the highest level within member governments and thereby brings pressures to bear to conclude negotiations in time .
At the ministerial conference there was considerable support for our approach and it is very significant that President Clinton was careful not to rule out such an approach and Mrs Barshefsky also indicated that work could be done which would enable such an approach to be pursued if a decision was taken next year to that effect .
Of course our ideas do not yet command universal support and I hope that the consensus-building process will continue in such a way to enable an agreement to be reached to that effect next year .
That is what we will be working towards .
In making the case for further trade expansion and liberalization we must explain clearly to our respective electorates the importance of trade liberalization for promoting growth and creating jobs .
We have to demonstrate to all interested groups the benefits flowing from that and we must show that trade and other legitimate public policy concerns , for example those relating to the environment , are not mutually incompatible but could instead work to mutual advantage .
At the ministerial meeting I stated my belief that we need to tackle head-on the criticism that trade is necessarily disruptive of the environment .
A determined effort to resolve some of the difficult trade and environment issues would go a long way towards reassuring public opinion .
And this call drew support , notably from President Clinton , for our idea of a high-level meeting as the way to take this forward .
The Ministerial Declaration reflects the recognition that we have to persuade broader civil society as we carry out our work in the WTO and we have to find new ways to engage representatives of civil society in the process .
We have to demonstrate to them the benefits of the system to ensure that it remains transparent , and we have to listen to their concerns .
The Community has been very much in the vanguard of calls for this kind of approach .
Before concluding I should refer to the resolution of the European Parliament regarding the outcome of the Ministerial Conference .
I welcome the resolution and can agree with much of it .
It rightly notes the enormous positive contribution of the GATT over the last 50 years and the achievements of the multilateral system in general .
It also reflects the support of Parliament for continued multilateral liberalization , a message which we welcome and intend to take forward as we prepare for the new round .
Parliament also raises some legitimate concerns about the need to ensure that developing countries fully benefit from the WTO system .
I do not share the view that the WTO has benefited only the industrialized countries , but I am the first to recognize that we should continue to make all possible efforts to ensure that further liberalization continues to benefit the poorer members .
The resolution also - and I welcome this - stresses the importance of better integrating environmental and other issues in WTO work and increased dialogue on the WTO with our various social partners .
Parliament has , finally , made some observations on the recent agreement over the Helms-Burton Act reached with the United States .
I do not agree with Members on that .
The settlement was unquestionably a good result for the European Community and in no way detracts from our longer-term objective of seeing those laws repealed .
It is good for Europe because it will permit our countries to invest in Cuba and Iran , but it also includes a strong commitment from the American administration to resist future attempts at extraterritorial measures .
It is entirely consistent with the spirit of the WTO whose rules expressly encourage settlement of differences through bilateral means .
And , of course , if the Americans do not honour their commitments - which I have no reason to believe would be the case - we will reserve the right to return to the WTO dispute settlement , as we can do .
I should like , finally , to place on record my appreciation of the participation of Members of the European Parliament at the conference .
Their participation was welcome and effective .
I look forward to a similarly close association with Parliament in the coming months as we prepare for the Third Ministerial Conference .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner - the ministerial conference in Geneva could not , of course , answer all the many open questions concerning sensible ongoing development for the WTO .
I am thinking of adherence to social standards and the reduction of adverse impact on the environment due to manufacturing , as well as involvement in the current negotiations on multilateral investment accords of developing countries not actually represented in the OECD .
A corresponding WTO code of conduct for multi-national firms would thus be worth advocating .
Such a code would give clarity , providing international terms of reference .
In order to permit the undisputed benefits of world-wide trade to become a tangible reality to as many people as possible - not only shareholders and big companies - we must continue to work intensively , within the framework of the WTO , with the consequences and by-products of world trade as they affect national distribution of prosperity .
If this is not tackled , free trade will be discredited altogether and the advances in prosperity achieved thus far through the WTO will melt away .
However , one positive outcome of the WTO ministerial conference is that , in the face of increasing uncertainty among international economic players as a result of the crisis in Asia , it confirmed the need to keep the multilateral liberalization of world trade on course .
Nevertheless , this liberalization is not an end in itself .
As the ministerial declaration stated , it must benefit all concerned .
Unfortunately , that is not yet strictly speaking the case , because , at the end of the day , the undertakings made at the Singapore summit and reiterated at the 1997 high level meeting in Geneva - to facilitate market access for the least developed countries - must be put into practice by all WTO members .
The EU has taken a step in the right direction by harmonizing market access conditions to include those non-ACP nations that are among the world 's least developed countries .
Of course , the least developed countries must take action themselves to drive world market integration and internal growth forward step by step through economic diversification .
In many cases , this necessitates new thinking on the part of those in positions of leadership ; that has to be stated clearly .
Today , the balance of payments in many developing countries is weighted not only by debt , as addressed in the ministerial declaration , but also by other factors , for example , keeping to traditional energy imports .
Thus , for example , we need to build up genuine cooperation between the EU and developing countries in the energy sector in order to give developing countries and third countries alike the possibility of developing their own alternative energy production under their own steam .
The House has already addressed this in detail earlier this evening in a different context .
All in all , I would like to use this report as an opportunity to point out that the European Parliament needs to make its voice heard more audibly regarding the future of world trade policy if it is to follow government cooperation more critically in this area ; in terms of employment policy , this is very important .
It is my impression that at the national level , this area tends to get lost in the slipstream of debate on domestic policy .
Sir Leon Brittan , we really appreciate that you yourself have always been prepared to appear before the Committee on External Economic Relations to report on current development in the WTO .
However , what we need is formal Parliamentary participation in WTO matters ; we particularly need written annual reports on the activities of the Commission in this area .
That would be very much appreciated .
Mr President , the WTO ministerial conference in Geneva was no pièce de résistance !
Even a born optimist like Sir Leon Brittan could only describe it as " relatively successful ' .
Its reception in the press was even clearer .
The non-event in Geneva got to the heart of the matter : 50 years after the establishment of the GATT system , there is no reason to celebrate .
Global disparities have worsened .
The poor countries have become poorer , in many areas the environment is on the brink of collapse , advances in workers ' rights are being dismantled .
Instead of continuing to carry liberalization to extremes , it should principally be a question of evaluating the years that have gone by .
What has gone wrong when the developing countries are losing even more of their share of trade ?
What is wrong when WTO panels routinely rule contrary to the interests of the environment and humans ?
We do not need trade in genetically modified food to be liberalized ; we need some mechanism to protect us from it !
The WTO is in need of constitutional reform !
Trading in products manufactured under harmful conditions must no longer be forced through by a panel .
In concrete terms , Sir Leon Brittan , are you prepared to press for Article 20 of the GATT to be amended ?
There is another matter of great importance : we need transparency .
Today , the EU requires good government on the part of third countries before development aid can be granted . We are demanding good government of the WTO .
Very importantly - and also for the Greek government - we demand good government on the part of our own governments before we enter into a new round of negotiations .
Mr President , it is always argued that an increase in global trade engendered by the removal of trade barriers is a means of achieving greater prosperity and higher living standards for all .
Labour standards ought therefore to be our concern .
I wish to urge most strongly that the WTO collaborate in full with the International Labour Organization to ensure that core labour standards are observed as was recommended in the final declaration of the 1996 Singapore Summit .
Developing countries should implement the ILO Convention to achieve a level playing field and to carry on the struggle against world poverty .
The second issue I wish to raise is that of Cuba and the Helms-Burton Act .
I believe , despite the Commissioner 's assurance , that it was a mistake for the European Union to have agreed to the winding-up of the WTO panel which was established to deal with the objections to the Helms-Burton Act in return for the agreement of 18 May between the European Union and the USA , as it appears to accept an element of the extraterritorial validity of US law .
As I understand it , provided that there is a waiver of Titles 3 and 4 of the Helms-Burton Act , the European Union will cooperate in establishing a registry of alleged expropriated properties and will withhold public support from , and discourage investment in , such properties in future by its Member States or its citizens . It seems unlikely , despite the Commissioner 's optimism , that the United States Congress will agree to waivers of Titles 3 and 4 without any change of political control , if one takes into account the statements of Jesse Helms .
I welcome the Commissioner 's statement that we shall return to the WTO panel if necessary .
If , however , the waivers were agreed , would it really be compatible with the principles of the WTO for the European Union to accept the idea of withholding public support for investments in Cuba and discouraging companies from investing ?
Would an agreement to do this override agreements between Cuba and individual European Union Member States and be enforceable in the European Court ?
Is no account taken of the fact that unlike other states the United States has not attempted to reach an agreement on compensation for properties which were nationalized ?
And why should the European Union agree in these circumstances to abide by an agreement which in so far as it accepts the idea of withholding support for investment in expropriated properties goes along with an element of the Helms-Burton Act ?
By taking some action to secure a kind of out-of-court settlement , it seems that the European Union has made concessions not compatible with the principle of the WTO .
I would be most grateful if the Commissioner could comment on these issues and clarify the situation , particularly with regard to trade with Cuba .
Mr President , Commissioner , I certainly do not want to begin a discussion at this time on the fate of the World Trade Organization , but I would like everyone to know my opinion , which is not an enthusiastic opinion on this conference and on the function carried out by this body .
The idea was that by liberalizing trade we would overcome the damage caused by protectionism before the war , and this would bring prosperity and jobs .
It was no coincidence - I always point this out because it seems significant to me - that the title of the first conference in Havana was ' Trade and Employment ' : employment was one of the objectives .
Things did not turn out that way .
The Havana Charter never came into force because the United States never ratified it , and all the measures that had been provided for to accompany the liberalization of trade with the necessary measures for development were never adopted .
Today , all we have left is free trade which has produced serious tensions , including in Geneva .
We need only think , for example , of the malaise that pervades UNCTAD .
The liberalization of trade does not create free markets but often amplifies imbalances because it gives the strongest greater freedom to rule .
I think that we should give considerable thought to all these issues before the third millennium round gets under way .
I would like to make a final observation regarding the Helms-Burton law which , Commissioner , we have discussed many times .
I do not know whether the Americans will manage to stick to the commitments made , I have my doubts .
Already it seems to me that the Europeans have accepted commitments not to invest in nationalized property in Cuba - and virtually all property is - and these seem to be serious commitments to me .
You yourself , Commissioner , heard , like I did in Geneva , President Cardoso of Brazil complain because non-European countries are naturally excluded from all agreements .
I do not think it a very handsome sight to see Europe play a universal role , protecting its own firms and caring nothing about what happens to the firms of the rest of the world which have less bargaining power than we do .
Mr President , first of all , as Mr Elchlepp said , it is right that all issues have not been resolved at the meeting .
There was no possibility or intention to do so : the meeting was designed to provide a plan and a direction for the future and to identify the issues , and that is what it has done .
Many of the issues Mr Elchlepp mentioned will have to be worked on as we develop that way forward .
I much appreciate what he said about the European Union 's strong stance on the least-developed countries .
We will continue to press in that direction .
I agree with what he said about cooperation in the energy sector .
What Mr Kittelmann said about developing countries is also very important .
It is very important for those of us who have strong links with the developing countries to persuade them that it is in their interests to cooperate in discussions on matters such as trade and the environment ; to explain that we do not have protectionist intent in that direction and that we understand their feelings about our asking them to do what we can afford to do but which they feel they cannot afford to do .
We have to try to enter into a constructive dialogue on that subject .
I do not agree , of course , with the fundamental premise of Mr Kreissl-Dörfler .
But with regard to Article 20 , I think the possibility of getting some kind of further interpretation of that - if not an amendment - is a very real issue that needs to be discussed at the high-level meeting on trade and the environment - if we have it , as I hope we will .
I certainly agree with Mr Newens that there should be cooperation between the ILO and the WTO as agreed at Singapore .
But as far as Helms-Burton is concerned , there is absolutely nothing that is agreed which is incompatible with the WTO , which , as I said in my opening observations , positively sets up the system which is not designed to litigate issues to the bitter end and establish points , but to encourage the parties to settle their differences .
Of course , if they are settled , nobody gets everything they want .
But we have made it quite clear , first of all , that if the United States is unable to meet its commitments we have the right to go back to the WTO ; and , secondly , that it is not the case , as Mrs Castellina said , that we are committed to not investing in Cuba .
That is just not the case !
There is no restriction whatsoever on investment in Cuba : there is only a statement that , in the circumstances of the Americans ' compliance with the agreement , we are not going to give public support for investment , but that only applies to new investment in property that we consider has been expropriated contrary to international law .
So the question of whether that is so is something that would have to be determined on a case-by-case basis .
On this matter I have received the motion for a resolution B4-0666 / 98 , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , pursuant to rule 40 , paragraph 5 of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 00.35 a.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last meeting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , may I ask that in the Minutes under the point relating to the Fifth Framework Programme on Research I also be referred to as the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We shall arrange for that to be done , Mrs Schierhuber .
Madam President , my name is not on the list of Members present at the 9 a.m. vote , although I have notified the Bureau that I was present and voted in favour of an emergency debate on the Common Organization of the Market for olive oil .
I should therefore be grateful if the Minutes could be amended accordingly .
That will be noted and the Minutes corrected .
Madam President , looking at yesterday 's Minutes , it says that I voted in favour of Mr Berend 's Amendment No 4 , when I voted against .
Please could it be corrected .
The Minutes will be corrected .
Madam President , I should like the fact that I was here yesterday to be recorded .
That will also be done .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Madam President , I would like to ask if the Presidency has been duped , or if it is indeed aware of the content of the display outside Room 100 , on the Sudetenland Germans ?
It is a revanchist exhibition which coincides with an ongoing campaign by the German extreme right wing , particularly in Bavaria .
I think it is utterly intolerable that an exhibition which harks back nostalgically to the 1938 borders should be allowed to exist on these premises .
I therefore request an explanation regarding this matter .
Mr Wurtz , to my knowledge , a mistake was made in preparing for this exhibition , in that the organizers made use of old brochures in French and German from the 1980s .
You are quite right . It should not have happened .
But , when the matter came to light , it was put right immediately .
I myself was present at the opening of the exhibition yesterday .
Former President Hänsch made the following comment about the exhibition . He said that we look at this exhibition with the idea in mind that in a united Europe Germans and Czechs , too , will become friends again .
And I believe that in the same spirit we should accept the presence of this exhibition in our House .
I trust that you will accept this explanation and that we can now move on to today 's agenda .
Madame President , I also attended the opening of the exhibition yesterday , and I should like to emphasize that Mr Hänsch did not only make the comments which you have just reported .
He also quite clearly said something else which I think is far more important in the current discussion , namely that the debate on the Benes Decree cannot be used as some sort of precondition for the accession negotiations we are currently holding with the Czech Republic .
That seems to me to be the most important point in political terms !
Madam President , as the issue of exhibitions has been raised , perhaps I could ask , through you , that the College of Quaestors and the Bureau look at the whole way in which this Parliament , both here and in Brussels , is used for some of the most ridiculous exhibitions - commercial events which make us look more like a bazaar than a Parliament .
My group is regularly disrupted , not just by exhibitions right outside Room 100 , but by the accompanying noisy receptions .
Yesterday there were trumpets and trombones outside our meeting room .
The place is becoming a circus and it has to stop .
Although we have strict rules , they do , nevertheless , need to be reviewed .
I will pass your comments on and we will then examine whether new rules need to be introduced .
Madam President , another issue ; I would like to ask for your help , and through you for the help of Mr Gil-Robles .
In my country there has been a stir in the media about a false report concerning the European Parliament .
In the Dutch media a report is circulating suggesting that the European Parliament has proposed that its members should receive a monthly salary of between ECU 9 , 000 and 13 , 000 .
Last night Dutch television asked a large number of Members of the Lower Chamber for their opinion , and they said it was an absolute scandal that the European Parliament is demanding such a salary .
Madam President , we all know that our Parliament has made no such proposal and that no proposal whatsoever from any body exists .
I am extremely worried about the negative reporting in my country , which is not always based on adequately checked information .
I would like to ask you whether you could ask the President to issue an official denial , so that this type of extremely negative and damaging reporting will not occur in future .
I am grateful for your assistance .
Mr de Vries , I will pass your comments on .
Incidentally , you yourself said that they were not contained in the draft .

Following on from what Mr de Vries has said , a telex issued by the official Belgian press agency Belga mentions remuneration of between ECU 9 , 00 and 12 , 000 , in other words , 33 , 600 to 488 , 000 BF per month . This might be a possibility , according to a letter from the chairman of the working group to the President of this Parliament , José María GilRobles .
The contents of the letter were leaked before the Bureau was able to discuss the issue .
I call on you , Madam President , to ensure that the Bureau denies this report forthwith , and confirms that no decision whatsoever has been taken yet on this matter , that it merely appears in the report of the working group , and that the Bureau has not made any proposal in this respect .
Mr Martens , this matter appears on the agenda of this afternoon 's Bureau meeting .
I shall pass on your comments .
Madam President , you know very well , as do all the Members of the Bureau , that no decision has been taken and that no proposal has been submitted so far .
So these are all just rumours and nothing else .
Madam President , in principle I would like to endorse fully what Mr de Vries and Mr Martens have said .
But I would like to warn you about one thing .
Three days have elapsed between the leaking of this inaccurate report and the reaction of the Presidency .
For three days false reports have been circulating on Dutch television and in the Dutch media which can no longer be repudiated given today 's media circus .
This is our big problem .
To my mind Parliament 's Information Office should react instantly to such issues , and not let them run their course for a week , with the result that we are being hounded with all sorts of false insinuations .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that no decision has been taken within any European Parliament body on a statute for Members of the European Parliament , or on the issue of a possible salary .
But it does appear to be true , and in that sense the report from Belga was correct , that a covering letter exists which mentions a possible salary figure of between ECU 9 , 000 and 12 , 000 .
So this figure appears in a covering letter which was apparently leaked .
To that extent we have to make it very clear indeed that not one single decision has been taken .
Nevertheless , proposals have been made , and a covering letter exists which could give rise to this kind of interpretation .
Thank you very much , Mrs Green . In response , let me say the following .
Mrs Aelvoet said that Parliament has not yet reached a decision .
It has not yet reached a decision on the current matter . There is an old decision of Parliament to draw up a statute and there is also , as you are aware , a commitment in the Treaty of Amsterdam which has not yet been completely ratified .
A working group has been set up within the Bureau involving Members from various committees .
This working group has drafted a document which was submitted to the Bureau this week .
As yet no decisions have been taken and this draft document makes no reference to proposals of the sort mentioned in media reports , by which I mean salary levels .
There is really no reason to give the impression that this is the case .
The Bureau and , of course , the relevant committees and Parliament itself will take as much time as is required to prepare any new statute for Members of the European Parliament in the appropriate manner , that is to say on a sound basis .
The matter will not be rushed , it will be properly discussed .
I do not believe that there is anyone in the House who does not share the view that a uniform voting system , such as the one we will be agreeing upon in the next part-session in July , should go hand in hand with a uniform statute .
The leaking of information in advance of a vote , or the alleged quoting of facts from letters which were never in the letters in the first place ...
... unfortunately , that is the sort of thing that happens .
I shall report it at the Bureau meeting this afternoon , and I shall urge that we issue an appropriate statement clarifying the situation and clearing up any misunderstandings .
Calendar of part-sessions 1999
With regard to the calendar of 1999 part-sessions , I suggest that the vote should be adjourned until Thursday lunchtime , when as you know , since we discussed the matter yesterday , the Legal Service 's opinion on the admissibility of the amendments seeking to bring forward the July part-session will be available .
The plan is to bring forward the sitting by one week , but as it is a constituent meeting , we must first establish whether this is legally permissible .
Are there any objections to this proposal ?
( Parliament agreed to this proposal )
Middle East peace process
The next item is statements by the Council and the Commission on the peace process in the Middle East , followed by a debate .
Mr President , thank you for giving me the opportunity to open the debate on the Middle East peace process .
The European Union remains deeply concerned by the continuing stalemate in the Middle East peace process and by the threat to regional stability such deadlock poses . This is very much reflected in the conclusions of the Cardiff Summit which were finalized yesterday .
The sides must show courage and vision in the search for peace , based on the principles agreed at Madrid and Oslo , especially the essential principle of land for peace enshrined in the United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338 .
The Union remains committed to its positions of principle regarding the peace process , as set out in its previous declarations , particularly the call for peace in the Middle East , issued in Amsterdam in June 1997 .
These principles were reaffirmed in Luxembourg in December 1997 as the essential guidelines for a European Union policy aimed at facilitating progress and restoring confidence between the parties .
The European Union has intensified its efforts to help the sides overcome this stalemate by playing an increasingly substantive role in the peace process .
The British Prime Minister , as President of the European Council , was involved in talks between Prime Minister Netanyahu , President Arafat and Madeleine Albright in London in May .
The European Union participated in negotiations on interim economic issues before and during the Prime Minister 's visit to the region from 17 to 21 April .
The British Foreign Secretary , in his presidential capacity , also visited the region from 15 to 18 March .
The European Union has also concluded a joint declaration with the Palestinians on security cooperation and is implementing a counter-terror assistance programme to assist the Palestinians .
Our special envoy , Ambassador Moratinos , has played a key role in these efforts and is continuing efforts to close gaps and move the peace process forward .
The European Union has deepened its cooperation with the United States on the peace process .
It strongly supports the efforts of the United States to gain the agreement of the parties to a package of ideas which , if accepted , would open the way to the relaunch of final status talks .
The European Union has welcomed Palestinian acceptance of these proposals and called upon the government of Israel to give a clear and positive response .
The profound commitment of the Union to fostering peace in the region is reflected in the scale of its economic support for the peace process .
From 1993 to 1997 the Union and its Member States provided approximately ECU 1.68 billion in assistance to the Palestinians and to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees .
The Union 's Foreign Ministers agreed at the General Affairs Council meeting on 23 February to renew the European Community aid package to the Palestinians beyond its expiry at the end of this year .
The report on a new Council regulation to extend this assistance programme , drawn up by Mr Tomlinson , reflects an understanding of how important this assistance has been , and will continue to be , to sustaining the peace process .
It clarifies the legal basis for the various facets of the assistance and reflects the need to look at needs beyond the two years for which the assistance has been extended .
The Union has also worked hard , through its formal dialogue with Israel on the issue , to improve the Palestinian economy , especially freeing up the movement of goods and people .
The presidency and Ambassador Moratinos have taken the initiative to intensify this dialogue .
A recent communication from the European Commission proposing cumulation of origin between Israel and its neighbours , including the West Bank and Gaza , for manufacture exported to the European Union will bring economic benefits to all partners .
A second Commission communication regarding implementation of the European Union-Israel agreement has also been published .
It raises complex legal , political and technical issues , including the status of products from Israeli settlements .
These issues will be discussed with Israel and considered by the Council in coming weeks .
While our focus has been to move the Palestinian-Israeli track of the peace process forward , the European Union remains concerned at the lack of progress on the Syrian and Lebanese tracks as well .
There is a need for a continuing effort to reinvigorate them and sufficient flexibility on the part of the parties to allow the talks to resume , and that will be our main objective in the period ahead .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , despite the constant efforts of the United States and the European Union at all levels , the Middle East peace process has been in complete stalemate for almost a year and a half .
As Mr Henderson says , it is true that under the British Presidency the European Union has intensified its support for US efforts at mediation .
Despite sometimes taking different stances on certain important aspects of the peace process , the United States and the European Union agree about one substantial element : at these times of crisis , it is essential to work together in order to break the deadlock .
In this respect , the visit to the region in April by the British Prime Minister , Mr Blair , only served to confirm the serious nature of the crisis in the peace process .
One tangible result of that visit was the meeting in London on 4 and 5 May between Americans , Palestinians , Israelis and the EU presidency .
Unfortunately , that meeting did not manage to shift the stalemate as regards the outstanding technical questions : the Gaza airport and port , free movement between the West Bank and Gaza and , in short , the whole joint dialogue agenda with which this Parliament is so familiar .
As you know , the stalemate still persists , and after the London meeting President Clinton himself even had to call off the three party talks in Washington because of Israel 's unwillingness to accept the US compromise proposal .
In that sense , we fully share the point of view expressed by Mr Henderson .
It is impossible to make real , credible progress without complying with all the agreements which have been freely negotiated and signed by the parties , and without respecting the principles upon which the peace process is based - essentially the " land for peace ' principle .
The latest violent incidents and Israel 's recent initiatives , again involving the question of settlements , illustrate how volatile the situation is and how urgent it is for all sides to accept the US proposal , which in itself is a minimum proposal with regard to Israeli redeployment in the West Bank .
Despite having reservations , the Palestinian Authority has formally expressed agreement in principle with the US proposal .
In the Commission 's view , it is now up to Prime Minister Netanyahu to show the necessary flexibility in order to revitalize the peace process as soon as possible , by accepting the US proposal which , I repeat , is a minimum proposal but which , as things stand , is the only realistic proposal for further progress along the road to peace .
Lastly , the European position on the peace process has not changed . In the conclusions of the European Council in Cardiff , as you will be able to see when Parliament receives a copy of the resolution adopted by the heads of state and government , the Union has once more confirmed , point by point , as it could not fail to do , the position which has been traditional ever since Venice , Luxembourg and Amsterdam , and has now of course also been confirmed at the Cardiff Summit .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I should like to outline my group 's view on this difficult and delicate issue in 10 points .
One : We are fully in support of the Oslo peace process .
There is no way around it .
It must be respected and - as the President-in-Office of the Council has already mentioned - we would also like to see progress in relation to Syria and Lebanon and peace treaties with both of these countries .
Unfortunately the Israeli government , which had started to embrace a more peaceful attitude , in particular towards Lebanon , now seems to have lost the courage of its convictions .
Two : the European Union is part of the peace process .
We must not allow ourselves to be squeezed out of it . Our political , moral and economic commitment makes us a part of this peace process .
We do not want to enter into and fulfill this commitment in place of the USA , but rather with the USA as an indispensable partner in the peace process .
Three : Europe is sometimes reproached for interfering in matters which do not concern it .
But we are not interfering in someone else 's business , it is our business .
The breaking off of the peace process by the Israeli government disrupts the good neighbourly relations which exist between Europe and the other countries of the Mediterranean rim .
We are right to fight it , for the Barcelona process is a vitally important process for all the countries of the Mediterranean , including Europe , and must not be derailed .
Four : We recognize completely and without reservation Israel 's right to exist and to maximum security .
But we have no time for terrorism .
Terrorism must simply be fought at its political , economic and social roots and the issue of security must not be used as a pretext for not continuing the peace process .
On the contrary , we urge the Israeli government to do everything in its power to ensure that its attitude does not actually promote terrorist or radical movements in the Middle East .
Five : The European Union must continue its policy of strengthening the economic infrastructure of Palestinian areas .
The airport is ready and the Palestinian authorities have made an undertaking to involve Israel in their security plans .
It would be possible to plan the port , and it would be possible to start the building work soon .
This is absolutely essential , and Europe 's commitment on this point remains unshaken .
Six : We all want to support - primarily through financial aid , but also by giving political and moral backing - those people who are fighting for human rights in Palestine , those who are fighting to stop financial abuse and corruption , who are also advocating that good relations be forged with the Israeli population .
We want to give them our clear support .
That is a commitment which Europe has and must take on .
Similarly , and this is my seventh point , we also want to support all those peace-loving forces in Israel who want to build bridges to the Palestinian and Arab population , who recognize the rights of everyone in Israel - including the Arab population - and who , above all , are promoting religious tolerance .
On my last visit , I was particularly impressed by the people who are fighting for peace and making a stand against fanaticism and religious intolerance in their own country for Jewish religious reasons .
Eight : We know that Jerusalem is a particularly delicate issue .
We understand the emotion felt by many Israelis , but we also understand the emotions of the Arab population .
For this reason we are against any measures designed to change the ownership situation unilaterally prior to negotiations on Jerusalem .
For this reason we oppose all radical groups and the tolerance being shown by the Jerusalem city authorities and the Israeli government towards certain radical groups .
Nine : We are absolutely against the use of sanctions as a means of managing bilateral relations between the EU and Israel .
We are also absolutely and unequivocally in favour of adherence to binding agreements and support the Commission in its efforts to ensure that they are respected .
Ten : We recognize the right of the Palestinians to their own state and we hope that Israel will play a role in its founding , so that it can be founded with and not against Israel .
Time and again Simon Peres stressed that the existence of Israel requires the existence of an independent Palestinian state in peaceful co-existence and Europe should and must encourage this peaceful coexistence .
Madam President , the Israeli-Palestinian question , Middle East issues , are exceptionally complicated and therefore call for great care on our part when we discuss them .
They are complicated because of the relationship between Israel and the Palestinians ; both are able to claim rights , rights which sometimes stand in each other 's way .
Then there is the history of mediation by the United States , a process which in itself requires exceptional caution .
If we become another party to the process as well , we will have to do our best to speak with great wisdom .
Still , it is a good thing that the European Union is also involved , because - and I fully agree with Mr Swoboda - we have great historical as well as current responsibilities in this region .
That is something we cannot get out of .
We cannot say that the others should deal with it , that Europe is neutral .
That is why it is also important that we have someone , Mr Moraltinos , who has been mandated to go to the region to see what the European Union could do to help resolve the problems .
This obviously requires the Council to have a clear position , because the confused foreign policy decision making process in the Council , as we know all too well , merely leads to more grief .
Council decision making will also have to be subject to reasonable control by the people 's representatives .
Just on whose behalf are they speaking ?
Are they really speaking on behalf of the European citizen , or this unclear ?
Madam President , all too often we witness the governments of Member States taking independent action .
This has been the case in the recent past , and this trend is continuing now .
Of course , this is scarcely helpful when issues need to be resolved .
You cannot visit the region , and one moment speak from a French position , and the next from a French , Dutch or English position .
We will have to replace this with action on behalf of Europe .
Because , as things stand at the moment , each Member State can maintain its own double agenda in its relations with Israel and the Palestinians .
Sometimes it is better to keep your mouth shut , if you cannot really speak on behalf of Europe .
The complexity of the situation has of course grown out the fact that the political movement around Netanyahu has gained so much influence .
This will not have the desired effect for Israel , either .
The increased radicalism on all sides , both in Israel and amongst the Palestinians , might sometimes even tempt us to express ourselves in radical terms as well .
Prudence is called for at such times .
However , it is a great problem that the political commitments entered into by the previous government are not being honoured .
Madam President , the Group of the European People 's Party therefore supports the resolution wholeheartedly .
It is a good thing that Israel 's policy on colonization is being changed , given the frustration of economic development , and that it is being replaced by confidence-building behaviour which leaves room for the construction of a civil society on both sides and for person-to-person meetings in order to promote peace in the region .
Mr President , the peace process is at a dead end and every possible pressure is needed to get this process going again .
Tangible results are needed to reinject some dynamism into this peace process .
Further deterioration and lack of prospects for the Palestinians will not increase security for the state of Israel .
That is why it is in Prime Minister Netanyahu 's interest finally to enter into agreements about further withdrawal from the occupied territories .
American plans in this direction could break the impasse , and therefore deserve every support , but great vigilance is also required .
The threat made by Israeli representatives that the European role in the peace process should be conditional upon the solution of trade differences is unacceptable .
After all , under international law , the settlements do not belong to the state of Israel .
The Union should not give trade preferences to products from these settlements .
We must not put a premium on the unlawful enlargement of these settlements .
Netanyahu and Arafat must return to the dialogue .
A great deal has been achieved and we must not throw that away now .
In addition , our entire Barcelona process in relation to the Mediterranean stands or falls with this dialogue .
The Union must support the US in calling for the opening of the Gaza airport , the accumulation of the rules of origin regarding regional trade and promotion of social contacts between the countries .
I hope that the Austrian Presidency will display more tact than the British President-in-Office , Mr Cook .
Without an agreement about withdrawal from the occupied territories , there will never be a basis for the final status talks due to start in May next year .
I wish Mr Arafat , Mr Netanyahu , the Palestinians and the Israelis wisdom , political courage and vision .
Mr President , in recent years I have had the privilege of visiting the Palestinians in the Palestinian territories three times .
I have observed that enormous progress has been made ; there is better infrastructure , the general appearance of Gaza has changed and improved .
A rush of building is taking place on the West Bank . Recently , we also spoke with a Palestinian entrepreneur who has started to construct a big warehouse to give shape to the industrial zone on the border with Gaza .
So not everything is negative .
Yet I still sense an undercurrent of tension and dissatisfaction amongst the Palestinians , and rightly so . For the process is stagnating .
But I am also sensing an increasing dissatisfaction amongst the Palestinians with regard to the judicial process in their own territories . That is why I would have preferred it if our resolution , under point 4 , had not spoken about a joint EU-Palestinian security committee , but rather joint EU-Palestinian legal support .
The meeting with the Hamas leaders was not very promising .
They were not positive about the existence of Israel in the medium term .
I find that extremely difficult .
Nor has this paragraph been removed from the Palestinian Charter as yet .
We also visited the airport .
I thought it was encouraging to see that , architecturally , this airport fits well with Arab culture ; but there is a lack of equipment .
People are not able to do their work at the airport , and our resolution underlines this point .
But , in all honesty , Israel has a right to security .
The Palestinians have a right to progress .
In my view we need a whole package for the region .
If Israel makes progress with Syria and Lebanon , then this should also be possible with the Palestinians .
Let us insist above all that Lebanon and Syria make peace with Israel , then there might be some movement with the Palestinians .
I hope that the Social-Democrats in Israel will also make a positive contribution , because that is missing somewhat at the moment .
I find this a pity .
Madam President , I am convinced that if all Members of the European Parliament had an opportunity to visit the Palestinian territories , if they could see and hear what our delegation has just seen and heard , there would be widespread agreement amongst us that Europe 's current timid " wait-and-see ' attitude needs to change at a political level with regard to the Middle East peace process .
In my opinion , one thing is clear : since Madrid and Oslo , the dividing line no longer lies between Israelis and Palestinians , or Arabs in general , but between those who wish to support and those who wish to torpedo the peace process .
There are people who wish to torpedo the peace process on both sides , with one difference : since the tragic death of Yitzhak Rabin , these are the people who now hold power in Israel .
It is thus in the common interest of the peace-making forces on both sides , which are lastingly interdependent , to stop Mr Netanyahu and the extremists he relies on burying the vital principle of land for peace whilst there is still time .
It is in their common interest to rebel against all measures which destroy the atmosphere of trust essential to peaceful cohabitation , and even more essential to long-term cooperation .
I am thinking of the expulsions , the destruction of houses , the blockade of the territories and above all of the extension and multiplication of settlements , including in East Jerusalem .
Calling on Europe to use - as it has successfully done in the past on the initiative of this House - its economic , scientific and technical relations with the State of Israel to push for a revival of the peace process would not amount to sanctioning Israel but to supporting the weakening of Mr Netanyahu by those Israelis in favour of peace .
I might add that , far from embarrassing the United States in their role as sponsor of the process , this determined attitude on the part of Europe would create conditions more favourable to their intervention .
Madam President , the recent visit by the European Parliament 's delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council highlighted a truly dramatic situation .
We are faced with a serious deadlock in the peace process , and we were able to see that the settlement of new land was the response to the request put forward by the Oslo Accords , which was ' peace for land ' .
Instead of ' peace for land ' , we have learned that on 9 June the Israeli government decided on a new settlement of the Mount of Olives in the heart of East Jerusalem .
Given the context , the living conditions of the Palestinians are obviously dramatic , in particular because of the shortage of work , especially in Gaza .
The situation is characterized , on the one hand , by the Palestinian authorities ' preparedness to respect the Oslo Accords and , on the other hand , by the Netanyahu government 's intention not to stick to the commitments made .
In view of this situation , immediate steps must be taken at least to ensure that the systems of communication between the West Bank and Gaza are guaranteed , that the now completed airport is opened , and that work begins to build the port .
Obviously we must understand that a year from now , Arafat will have no choice but to declare Palestinian independence upon expiry of the Oslo Accords , even if he does so unilaterally .
It is therefore obvious that we must do all we can to make sure that the Palestinian National Authority is able to play its role and is in a position to continue its action , including in economic terms .
This is why it is very important that the Tomlinson report be approved .
I believe that in view of this impasse the extremist and intransigent fringes on both sides will inevitably grow and propose military solutions .
If we want to avoid this catastrophic solution , we must act as soon as possible to relaunch the peace process , using whatever form of pressure and diplomatic effort it takes .
We therefore go along with the statement by Commissioner Marín and with what the Council said , but we are calling for even more decisive action .
Madam President , there has been too much moaning about the fate of the people of the Occupied Territories at the hands of the Israeli army .
It is no longer the time for pity or hypocritical snivelling .
Let us now defend justice , the law and , above all , the resolutions voted for by the United Nations , and the documents which have been signed by common agreement by the parties present .
A code of conduct has been adopted , a timetable fixed .
These decisions , this timetable and this code of conduct must be respected .
Although they are not completely disregarded at the moment , the peace agreements are certainly being damaged and the peace process seems to be on its last legs .
There is clearly a reason for the procrastination , delaying tactics and indirect remarks of the Israeli authorities .
Extremists on both sides are opposed to the renewal of serious negotiations .
First and foremost amongst these are the religious fundamentalists , whose interpretations of the Koran and the Torah are , to say the least , questionable .
With regard to the pressure these extremists can exert on the authorities , it is clear that the Israeli government is still extremely vulnerable .
The sensational declarations regarding an " eternal capital ' and the thundering arrival of armed settlers in the Occupied Territories , the withdrawal of residence permits in Jerusalem , the fact that Arab citizens of that city find even their right to live there challenged , the blockade of Ashdool with regard to equipment which would enable the opening of Gaza airport : these are so many factors which quite seriously compromise any further progress .
But we also have to consider the problems of security and terrorism .
It is true that in this respect , nobody is safe , neither Israel nor , unfortunately , perhaps in the short-term , Palestine .
In any case , terrorism can come from any quarter and Israel itself lost its Prime Minister in this way .
The fight against terrorism , and against those who incite it , is clearly a necessity .
We must make sure that the American diplomatic effort is supported , for without it nothing will be possible .
To date , and for a number of years , American diplomats have displayed a wealth of inventiveness and ingenuity .
We have an important role to play in ensuring respect for previous agreements and , in relation to this , the Commission 's proposal regarding products coming from Israeli settlements outside Israel should be welcomed .
By giving these products - which have clearly come from Arab territories - the advantages reserved for Israel , we are making a gesture which , although it is clearly not going to ruin the Israeli economy , will nevertheless have a precise political significance .
You only have to see the reception given to this proposal in the Israeli press and by Israeli government circles in general to understand that the demand for respect of the agreements , in this case Article 38 , is there , which is perhaps an indication of the direction we should be taking in the future .
Madam President , the potential impact of the European Union on the Middle East peace process is primarily indirect , and it could be both positive and negative .
It looks as if it will chiefly be negative .
How can the Union promote peace when it denounces the policy of one party whilst acting anything but diplomatically ?
A particularly striking example is the Commission initiative to exclude products from Jewish settlements from the preferential trade conditions applying to Israel .
The Commission 's thinking is that the settlements on the West Bank do not belong to Israel .
The Commission also wants to subject the goods imported from Israel to special controls , because the country is alleged to tamper with certificates of origin , and is also exporting goods from Palestinian territory under the description " Made in Israel ' .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office whether he is behind the Commission 's stance .
Is this stance not extremely unwise in view of the current negotiations ?
If Parliament should conclude that Israel is not respecting the peace agreements , this would be both flawed and premature .
The Oslo accords are also being violated by the Palestinians , thus they are not respecting them either .
In addition it is debatable if we can already pass judgement on whether the accords are being met or not , whilst the term which has been set in them has not yet expired .
The Oslo Accords and the interim accord request a regrouping in three stages according to unilateral decisions by Israel .
By regrouping its troops somewhat , the government of the country has in any case acted formally in accordance with accords , which make no mention of the relationship between these three phases .
Pedantic statements will not bring peace any closer .
Instead of wanting to play the leading part in the Middle East , the European Union could follow the example of the United States , which just recognizes the peace process and tries to support it .
Madam President , peace is something which cannot be relinquished and it risks remaining a petitio principii if governments , public opinion and the international community do not make the necessary efforts .
As far as peace in the Middle East is concerned , we must honestly ask ourselves whether the European Union has done all that was essential to help restart the interrupted process .
When an agreement falls apart , when an accord disintegrates , no one side alone is responsible .
There is a series of contributory causes that fuel the political dialectic , which in turn risks radicalizing positions and undoing the efforts of men of goodwill who on both sides are trying to rebalance the situation so that dialogue may resume .
For this is the crucial point of the tension between Israel and Palestine ; whatever the direct cause of the interruption of the process , there is no doubt that the resumption of dialogue would bring tension back into the right proportion and make it possible to assess the situation of the opposing sides , with our eyes cast to the future .
A people decimated by the holocaust cannot continue to live for generations in a permanent state of tension : peace is its foremost interest , a vital interest .
To help Israel find peace again also means helping the Palestinian people and preparing a liveable future for the entire region which is in need of economic and social development .
Many of the European Union 's efforts are frustrated by the absence of a political union , of a common foreign policy .
A short while ago we were talking about funds earmarked for the Palestinians .
Well , we would like to know why then we see poor and desperate people on television .
Where has this money gone ?
And when we are working in this House on rather bureaucratic and unimportant matters , I would also like us to remember the faces of those Israeli children who sing as they leave school despite the fact that they are being watched over by people armed to defend them against another massacre and another tragedy .
Let 's remember that the European Union has a role to play quite apart from just being a bureaucratic or economic union : there is also a moral choice to which we must return .
Madam President , I must say that , after repeated visits by our delegation these past four years , we have recently found a situation more difficult than in the past .
For the first time since the Oslo process began , there is a general loss of hope : this is very dangerous and we must unfortunately consider negative developments possible .
None of the difficulties has been overcome , from the corridor between Gaza and the West Bank to the blocking of the settlements , from the prisoners that are still in jails to the veto on the Gaza port and now completed airport capable of operating , to the consolidation of the Israeli presence in East Jerusalem , etcetera .
Regarding the second phase of the Oslo Accords , the proposal by the United States of a partial withdrawal from 13 % of the territory , accepted by the Palestinians - although they do not agree with this - is still , after much delay , awaiting a reply from Israel .
As time passes , all the extreme components of Israeli and Palestinian society are growing stronger .
Arafat especially is in extreme difficulty and whoever thinks that a weaker Arafat would help matters is totally wrong !
What can we do ?
There is little time left before the Palestinian side issues a unilateral declaration of independence , according to the timetable of the Oslo Accords , and this dictates a political horizon to all the forces that are pro-peace .
The Union must step up its political presence in the area with a series of initiatives .
First of all , it must insist so that the United States makes its proposal official in order to obtain an answer from Israel .
We can no longer wait for and avoid this necessary moment , and it is no use skipping it now and proposing a peace conference , as was recently done .
Yes , we must propose a peace conference if the reply to the United States ' plan of withdrawal is no , so as not to leave a dangerous political vacuum .
Then the promoter of this conference will have to be the Union , not an individual European state but the Union , and as such it must be the full-fledged promoter with the United States and other partners .
Now is premature !
Secondly , the Union must ensure funds for Palestine .
We cannot now cut off support which is essential in maintaining Palestinian autonomy .
Thirdly , the Union must endorse - I mean the Council and Parliament , and the latter is doing this with a compromise resolution we are voting on today - the Commission 's two initiatives to implement the association agreement with Israel and to introduce mixed origins for the region 's products ; it is not a technical matter , it is a proposal based on international law and on the association agreements and it is also very important politically .
Fourthly , the Union must encourage and further develop Euro-Mediterranean policy and the MEDA programme .
In Palermo , the Euro-Mediterranean council gave renewed usefulness and credibility to Barcelona ; it was a process in crisis .
There is the will to go forward , the new regional and interregional developments have been defined and the choice has again been made to earmark a global figure for funding equal to the previous figure .
All this is to be decided in Stuttgart in April .
This , too , is a fundamental contribution of the Union to maintain hope and ways of finding peace .
Finally , I must mention the initiative launched by the European Parliament : in Malta .
It was decided with the parliaments of the Mediterranean to set up a forum of parliaments of the Mediterranean in Brussels in October .
This , too , I think is useful .
The Euro-Mediterranean council in Palermo considered it positive .
It is part of the work of this Parliament , and the aim is to develop the people-to-people relationship , if we can call it that , at various levels .
We have promoted and will continue to promote meetings and dialogue between Israeli parliamentarians and the elected officials of the Palestinian Legislative Council . We are trying to initiate contact between the mayors of Israeli towns and Palestinian towns and encourage cooperation and collaboration between them .
I believe that this forum of Mediterranean parliaments is useful too .
This is what Parliament can do , and I believe that it would be a good idea for it , too , to step up its action .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that today 's debate shows that we all agree that our problem is no longer what is happening in the region . It is not what recommendations have been made and must be made , but it is how existing recommendations , and the initiatives that have already been taken , will be implemented and bring about a result .
I would particularly like to address the Council , which I thank because it has in fact done a great deal , when I say that the key to the affair seems to be for us to change the presence of Europe in the Middle East .
At present we have a mediator , a great many governments and a Commission office , and that is the first issue we must tackle .
It would be much more effective if , instead of mediators , instead of a multiplicity of opinions , we set about creating one body , in which all the institutions could participate and which would be headed by an individual with a proven knowledge of foreign policy and of the problems of the region .
We would then get far more results .
The vast majority of economic issues have to a certain extent been tackled .
The Commission has done an excellent job of work though , of course , some additions are necessary , especially concerning the availability and management of resources .
What remains of significance are the prerequisites for a solution .
The prerequisites for a solution and for peace are both political and military and are not simply a question of relations between Israel and Palestine .
They extend much further than that , especially in the wake of the new political realities .
I am referring not only to nuclear tests , but to countries such as Iran , because although we quite rightly talk a lot about Syria and the Lebanon , there are other countries such as Iran which influence or try to influence the situation .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I think we have arrived at a point where we have no room for manoeuvre .
It is therefore important that , over and above the recommendations , the ideas and the initiatives , which are all extremely important , we start out from the institutions .
To achieve a satisfactory outcome , we need a new framework which will secure the continued presence of Europe in the region and which will also ensure actions in concert with the United States , though I would go as far as to say that there may be other powers in the world who will take an interest .
Madam President , during the past 16 months , little or no progress has been made in the Middle East peace process .
Fortunately , since last week there appears to be some movement in the negotiations following the latest American proposals .
We must conclude that the European Union has , in the recent past , once again failed to play a leading or convincing role in this issue which is so important to us .
The initiative and the direction of the present talks are entirely in the hands of the Americans .
The European Union 's weak political role is out of balance with our major financial contribution , our economic interests and our security .
The balance must be restored as a matter of urgency .
Europe should no longer be merely a provider of funds , the biggest donor in the world , but more than ever must make a political contribution to a solution involving lasting peace .
This is clearly why the Union must be able to speak with one voice to the outside world and to pursue a single line of European diplomacy .
And now to the European Parliament .
I believe that the European Parliament can certainly help improve the mutual understanding between the Israelis and Palestinians ; not by means of dictates , resolutions or threats , but by supporting so-called people-to-people projects , and especially by making a contribution to the dialogue between the people from both sides .
Real peace starts with the people , the people in the region itself who live amongst each other on a daily basis , including children and students .
Real peace does not start at the top , but at a country 's grass roots .
This is where we have to nurture mutual respect and build a strong foundation for a hopeful and peaceful future .
That is where our role as the European Parliament lies .
Madam President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must ensure that this Parliament does not just act like a notary , in other words , that it should not merely record how the situation stands .
First of all , I dispute the fact that the peace process is stalled ; instead , it is my view that the peace process in the Middle East is moving backwards , clearly and extremely dangerously backwards .
Therefore , it is not true that we are stalled : the situation is growing considerably worse .
There is radicalization that can be seen now on both sides - Israeli and Palestinian - and this is making it extremely difficult for those who still believe that peace is the only instrument , the only basis , the only sure way for effectively bringing about development , and therefore cooperation , between Israel and the Palestinians .
It goes without saying that Arafat is the one who risks the most and the responsibility of a definitive collapse of this peace process would inevitably end up benefiting those who believe in religious extremism , fundamentalism ; it would thus sweep aside those who have worked for peace , beginning with Arafat himself .
But I see that Netanyahu , on the other hand , also has the same problem : his radical extremists from the religious parties are preventing any progress in the peace process .
It should be said , however , that this is an excuse on the part of the Israelis .
Personally , I consider it unacceptable that Israel has not yet given a reply to the American proposal , which was in itself a compromise , for a partial , a very partial withdrawal - the famous 12 % or 13 % or 11 % - from the Occupied Territories .
It has also been said in this sitting that Europe has been absent .
I also dispute this .
Unfortunately , Europe has not been absent , in the sense that it has sewn further confusion : the Middle East peace process is the mirror of Europe 's impotence and incapacity .
Chirac went along one day and said something ; another day Cook went along and said something else ; then Kinkel went and said something different again : this is the sign and signal that Europe not only does not have a role , but at this moment has a negative role .
We continue to be 15 political dwarfs unable to have a single voice in any peace process , in any foreign policy process currently under way in the world .
Madam President , once again we are debating the crisis in the Middle East .
Once again , the Israeli Prime Minister , Mr Netanyahu , is failing to comply with the agreements which were freely accepted and ratified by his parliament .
Furthermore , he is blocking any attempt at negotiation , as was seen at the meeting of 4 and 5 May in London .
Even the US attempt to initiate new negotiations with a minimum proposal has also been blocked by Israel , as Mr Marín has confirmed .
Obviously , Israel does not want to comply with the agreements .
Israel is not withdrawing from the territories , but is continuing to occupy them and keep thousands of Palestinians in prison .
The United States has lost its role as mediator , and the European Union should put pressure on Israel by subjecting its agreements with that country to certain conditions .
Compliance with the international agreements is the only solution , and the European Union and its envoy should play a key role .
We in the Union should block our existing agreements with Israel and promote all efforts to help the Palestinian National Authority .
The Gaza port and airport and the recovery of the territories are demands which cannot be withdrawn .
If Mr Netanyahu wants security , he must understand that security is only possible through the agreements .
Madam President , we all know that the Israelis could not care less whether we speak with one voice , fifteen voices or a hundred voices .
The important thing is whether we talk or whether we act .
The Israelis said right up until Camp David : ' We want nothing but peace . '
Since then they have had peace with Egypt , with the PLO and with Jordan .
They could also have had peace with Syria and Lebanon if they had kept to what they said : ' We want nothing but peace . '
But we know that for 31 years they have built new settlements , have killed children who threw stones , have ignored UN resolutions and ignored treaties they have entered into .
They are building ' Greater Israel ' in line with the intentions pronounced by Netanyahu 's mentor , Jabotinsky , as long ago as the 1920s .
We all know this .
We know that they ignore talk and resolutions .
So why are we not prepared to move from words to deeds ?
Today there is an interesting article in Libération which asks just that question .
Why act and intervene only in Kosovo ?
Do only European massacres get the European Union to move from words to deeds ?
I do not mean that we should send troops to Israel - of course not .
However , people say that the EU is an economic giant , but a political dwarf .
Let us make use of the fact that the EU is an economic giant .
Let us use that economic power .
Let us move from words to deeds and actually apply proper economic sanctions .
I am convinced that that would be able to influence Israel .
If we do nothing , I am absolutely sure that the 1990s will see a war in the Middle East , just like every other decade .
On this occasion the EU should at least do something and move from words to deeds through peaceful , non-violent , yet powerful sanctions against Israel , which is in breach of all international laws .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the lands of the divine revelation of the Decalogue and the Gospel have rarely known peace , even more rarely have they known respect for dignity and the rights of all communities who have lived together there for centuries .
As the end of the 20th century approaches , it is everybody 's wish that a true peace process may be initiated and concluded .
This will be difficult to achieve . The conditions are , however , clear .
Israel must once and for all have the right to peace secured via guaranteed borders , whilst the rights , dignity and freedom of the Palestinians must be respected .
It is an abomination to continue to coop them up in unacceptable apartheid-like " townships ' and it would be an illusion to believe that this can continue without further conflict of unpredictable extent .
Historically speaking it is the Palestinians ' home as much as it is the home of the Jews ; they have the right to a free , independent and sovereign State .
But Syria and Lebanon are also going through a peace process .
Lebanon has suffered from the presence of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians on its soil who were thrown out by Israel and who quickly evolved from welcome refugees into revolutionary conquerors of the host country .
This is the reality which my movement has been contemplating , for the National Front does not fight immigration through some form of racism but , on the contrary , in order to avoid an irreversible situation similar to that in Lebanon , Bosnia or Kosovo occurring in France in the future .
Of course Israel must withdraw from Lebanon , but so must Syria , for whilst Israel occupies the south of the so-called security zone , Syria occupies the rest and , what is worse , has the Lebanese State held under some kind of protectorate where political skill combines with military presence and police terror .
Jacques Chirac 's most recent comments in Lebanon are regrettable , for they seem to be directed only against the Israeli presence .
How can it be accepted that the leader of the Lebanese forces in Beirut , Samir Geagea , has been held for more than four years - truly forgotten - in a Ministry of Defence basement , because he neither wanted to leave Lebanon nor accept a ministerial position within a puppet government following the veritable trials of Moscow !
But is there not sometimes a sort of subtle and objective complicity between Hafez el-Assad 's Syria and Israel to keep up a war on Lebanese soil , which both regimes perhaps have need of , in order to assure their domestic stability or to request ever more international military aid .
Jews hold the power , Muslims are in the majority .
But the Christians of the Middle East remain in this state of dhimmi which the great Israeli historian Bat Yeor described in his remarkable work " Christians of the Middle East - between jihad and dhimmitude ' .
Lebanese Christians must restore their country 's independence , they must be able to find once more the role that was theirs , regain their freedom within their own lands where , according to the expression of Béchir Gémayel , the bells must be able to ring unhindered in the country which guarantees not only their own people the right to government , but also offers other Christian communities of the Middle East assistance , solidarity , and even a safe haven .

Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , everyone has the same feeling : this morning , as we discuss for the umpteenth time the situation in the Middle East , in the presence of four members of the Knesset whom I would like to welcome , this morning we are at a turning point , a time when anything could happen , for better or worse .
I have always been a friend of Israel .
Like many , I was a friend nearly forty years ago when it was fashionable to be so in Europe and I remain so today , even if it is no longer the fashion .
I was their friend when Israel was composed of only a handful of survivors determined to exist . I still am today now that Israel has become a great power .
The layman that I am was a friend of Israel when it was establishing its kibbutzim , to the sound of joyous secularism .
I remain so despite what I hear of sometimes violent debates which arise within the very heart of Israeli society .
I have been president of the Europe-Israel delegation for five years .
Within this delegation , my colleagues and I have worked , and continue to work , for peace and friendship between Israel and Europe .
We have worked in all subject areas : economic , social , cultural and research and technology .
We have woven ties which we mend when they become frayed .
We supported Yitzhak Rabin , we mourned him and , since the last elections , we have worked with the new team in power , which was the product of democratic elections .
Ladies and gentlemen , I mention all of this in order to be able to say clearly to you , in the name of my friendship , of our friendship with Israel , that we are very worried at the sight of the dangers and internal and external demons which are threatening Israel and the region .
And if I remind you of all this , it is also in order to say clearly , on a personal level , that I largely approve of the joint resolution which is being proposed to us .
For once the text is short , clear and readable .
The message is a strong one , without being aggressive .
In certain respects , however , I would have wished greater detail .
In my opinion , in Point 3 of the resolution there is insufficient emphasis on Syria 's serious responsibility in the field of security , both towards and from Lebanon .
We have also forgotten the countries of the region which finance fundamentalist terrorism , and we do not place sufficient emphasis on the fundamental role of our envoy , Mr Moratinos .
With regard to Point 9 of the Interim Agreement , first of all it has to be regretted that the contract of association properly speaking has yet to be ratified , and that this is down to France and Belgium . Above all it must be confirmed that although we can discuss the terms of implementation via the debate on the origin of products , this should not be a roundabout way of influencing the ongoing negotiations , even of sanctioning Israel .
In conclusion , I understand and approve of Israel 's need for security and the Palestinians ' desire for recognition .
In order to reconcile the two , a just peace is required . This will be achieved through negotiations assuring the security and coexistence of Israel and the Palestinians .
To mention this today is also a way for me to pay homage to Yitzhak Rabin , the soldier , the pioneer , the builder of Israel , subsequently the initiator of and the first Israeli signatory to the Oslo agreement with the Palestinians .
To remember him is to continue his work .
Mr President , it is appropriate that we are debating this matter this morning in the presence of the Israeli delegation from the Knesset .
It is probably rather galling for them to hear many of the speakers this morning calling for concessions from the Israeli Government .
But I rather agree with the President-in-Office when he called for courage and vision .
That is the right approach that we require at the present time and not perhaps the other things that he could have mentioned : confrontation and confusion .
We need to resolve the blockage that we have and the hardening of positions that seem to be adopted on both sides .
The President-in-Office quite correctly said that it was necessary to understand that the presidency had taken initiatives in calling Mr Netanyahu and Mr Arafat together in London .

But that was necessary - if we are blunt about it - because of the ineptitude of the President-in-Office when he tried to visit Har Homa and created a very definite hardening of positions and opinions within Israel and within Palestine .
There is a reference in the resolution which I completely support which asks the Council presidency to urge Member States to refrain from individual initiatives and , instead , to work through appropriate European Union mechanisms .
Surely , colleagues - and I support completely what Mr Caccavale said - it is not helpful for individual ministers to try their own solutions in a situation like this .
We need courage and vision .
And I believe we need new initiatives from the European Union , along with the United States , to try to come to some decent solution with the Syrians , the Lebanese , the Israelis , and the Palestinians .
Let us include also in that area the Egyptians , the Jordanians and , hopefully , even the Iranians and the Iraqis .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a recurring theme which combines cultural , emotional and political elements of relevance to all Europeans .
I want to underline here , as was pointed out by both the Council and the Commission , that our involvement in the Middle East peace process was a forerunner to the elaboration of a common foreign policy .
From Venice to Oslo , passing through Madrid , there has been a rare unanimity within the Union , I would say , in spite of everything .
At this moment , during the British Presidency , I should like to acknowledge the efforts of the Prime Minister , Mr Blair , and also the Foreign Secretary , Mr Cook , whom I do not think was treated properly on his visit to Jerusalem .
But the point at issue is not so much a matter of historical reflection or explaining the situation .
The diagnosis has been dealt with at length today .
The question is how we can help to break the current agonizing and dramatic deadlock in the peace process .
And I think , besides suggesting brilliant or not so brilliant ideas , we have to see to what extent we in Parliament can make a positive contribution .
There is one aspect which has not been mentioned here this morning , and I should like to do so , in the presence of the members of the delegation from the Knesset . It is that Israel has a greater moral responsibility , in that the fiftieth anniversary of the creation of the State of Israel has just been celebrated .
Israel is a strong , vigorous democracy at the heart of the Middle East . That gives Israel a superior strength and responsibility .
I had the opportunity , in my capacity as President of the European Parliament , to explain our view to the Knesset at a much more promising moment - on the very day of the start of the Madrid process . I am also an old friend of both Jews and Arabs .
In my youth I had the opportunity to work on a kibbutz . And I believe we must persevere with this dialogue , even with people who can maintain tougher positions .
We have proof of that in the recent visit of the chairman of the Knesset , with whom we held a critical discussion . And we have to recognize that positive experiences in the field of peace , not just those of the late lamented Prime Minister Rabin , but also those of Prime Minister Begin , with the Camp David agreements , show that peace tends to be forged precisely between people who do not agree with each other .
I believe we must appeal to our Israeli friends and tell them that the Masada syndrome and creating a Bantustan are no solution to the problems of the Middle East .
And I would add two further elements , apart from promoting that critical dialogue : support for the Commission proposal , and joint action with the United States , bearing in mind the key role which should be played by our envoy , Mr Moratinos .
Mr President , I want to make one or two remarks in response to the debate we have had this morning .
The debate has clearly shown that there is widespread concern about the situation in the Middle East and the failure in the recent past to make further progress .
All of us feel terrible frustration every time we think there is about to be a breakthrough and then something happens which means that the situation does not move much further forward .
I very much agree with the point made by one of the contributors to our debate that what we need is not more proposals to try to tackle the difficult issues before us , it is implementation of some of the existing proposals based on the Oslo commitments .
The Council 's position is that we strongly support the Commission 's initiatives to try to ' engineer ' steps toward the negotiating table , where possible trying to use economic measures as well as political ones .
We strongly believe there is a need to follow on from London , where there was a hope that there would be progress , and to get down to dealing with the situation in the way offered by the American proposal .
It has been clear in the debate that this view is supported on many sides of this House .
That is the clear priority in the time ahead of us .
We will also be asking our envoy , Mr Moratinos , to do what he can to try to persuade the various parties to take up the American offer to move the proposals further forward .
That position is enshrined in the conclusions which were agreed at Cardiff yesterday ; if they have not already been circulated they will be very shortly .
I have received seven motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
Financial and technical cooperation with the Occupied Territories
The next item is the report ( A4-0180 / 98 ) by Mr Tomlinson , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1734 / 94 of 11 July 1994 on financial and technical cooperation with the Occupied Territories ( COM ( 97 ) 0552 - C4-0048 / 98-97 / 0316 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , first of all I would like to welcome the President-in-Office 's remarks on my report in the last debate .
He identified very clearly my intentions and those of the Committee on Budgets , on whose behalf I present this report .
The peace process is important and needs proper resources .
That is essentially what we are about .
The Commission proposal for a Council Regulation amending the Council Regulation of 11 July 1994 must address two questions : the question of the legal base and the question of the duration of the regulation .
The present Council Regulation must therefore be amended . There we agree with the Commission but we believe that the current Commission proposal is too modest and is , in a number of respects , therefore inadequate .
The existing problem is that there is no legal base for either the recurrent costs of the Palestinian authority or for the EIB activities .
This is serious in any event but more so in the light of the Court of Justice ruling last week .
The present proposal from the Commission , on which my report is based , overcomes this but only for the remainder of 1998 .
It leaves us with identical problems for next year and beyond .
Parliament 's amendments , as drafted and approved unanimously by the Committee on Budgets , seek to resolve this and do other things , at least for the years 1999 and 2000 . Thus their whole intention is to help the Commission establish a longer-term strategy for what we are all agreed is an imperative - proper involvement and financing of the European Union contribution to the Middle East peace process .
The amendments of the Committee on Budgetary Control are clear . I will just go through them very briefly .
Amendments 1 , 3 and 4 are proposed to simplify the recitals and to include a mention of the duration of the regulation .
Amendments 5 and 6 cite the Council decision , which expires in the year 2000 and in Amendment 5 gives justification to the subsequent Amendment 6 .
That latter amendment proposes a change in terminology to be used in this measure .
We can all agree that the term ' Occupied Territories ' is outdated , given the developments since 1994 , and West Bank and Gaza Strip would appear a more appropriate phrase to use throughout the regulation .
However , we also have to note that the financial and technical cooperation could be concentrated through the Palestinian Authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and so it might be that this more extensive phrase is appropriate .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy has also considered this aspect .
What is clear is that the words ' Occupied Territories ' are now outdated .
Amendments 2 , 7 and 8 incorporate fully in the text of the Tomlinson report the amendments that were proposed by the Committee on Foreign Affairs which clarify the objectives and modalities of the action , underlining its contribution to consolidation of the peace process .
Amendments 9 and 10 deal with areas where we perhaps understand that the Commission might have a marginally different view to Parliament because these concern the requisite level of information from the Commission to the budgetary authority and comitology ; the detail is fully explained in the explanatory statement .
Amendment 11 and the draft amendment to the draft legislative proposal call on the Commission for a new , single , consolidated , legislative proposal for continuation of assistance to the peace process after 2000 .
They seek to do two things : clarify the confused legal base in the present proposal and give greater consistency and transparency in future .
I think that all those amendments are designed to assist the Commission in what it is seeking to do on behalf of the European Union in the Occupied Territories .
I say ' I think ' because regrettably communication with the Commission services , excluding the Commissioner , has been less than satisfactory during this process .
In fact I would go so far as to say that they have behaved badly in relation to the European Parliament .
When I was appointed rapporteur on behalf of Parliament , I asked to see the appropriate representative of the Commission .
In response to my request he came to see me on 2 March and I raised specific questions .
At the Committee on Budgets discussions on 17 March , 21 April and 30 April I re-emphasized all the questions that I had raised with the Commission representative and on which I had not received a reply .
I had a very helpful and fruitful meeting with Commissioner Marín on other matters and I mentioned to his Cabinet on 5 May that I was still awaiting replies to questions I had asked on 2 March .
Following that , various people got in touch with me : the first group to ask what the original questions were , despite the fact that they had been published in my draft report that went to the Committee on Budgets weeks earlier .
Finally , I received a reply on 8 June , i.e. Monday of last week .
I raise this , not because I want to chastise anybody , but to show the difficulties that occur when Parliament is trying to help the Commission .
For example , we wanted to know how the Commission had fulfilled its obligations to report to the budget authority and I quote these two sentences from a reply I received .
' I am aware that the Commission has not reported pursuant to the wording of Article 6 ( 1 ) ' says the Director-General , Mr Cioffi , and then he goes on not to apologize but to say : ' Due to political implications and the sensitivity of the matter , the Commission has considered the above as adequate . '
Neither I nor any Member of this House considers that to be adequate .
We have not had the fruitful dialogue that we would have liked and yet , despite that , we produced amendments which improve your proposal and help the Commission , Council and the whole European Union to do what we all want - to make a meaningful and constructive financial and political contribution to the resolution of the Middle East process .
Therefore I commend all 12 amendments to the House .
Mr President , it would be difficult not to agree with the Commission 's proposals on granting financial assistance to the administration of the Palestinian Territories which we propose calling from now on the West Bank and Gaza .
It would be difficult , because in the given situation it is natural that a considerable chunk of the financial assistance goes into running the administrative machinery .
That is all that is possible in this situation where the economic development of these territories is being hampered ; not even the proposal for the port and the airport which should be the most basic and simple of matters have got off the ground .
Obviously under these circumstances , we must , like in the case with the other proposal on subsidising interest on loans granted by the EIB , give a legal base to a de facto situation like the one we have seen until now , meaning we must grant financial assistance to the administration too .
Furthermore , the Commission is proposing a few changes to the regulation : that is , it is underlining the fact that financial and technical cooperation is fundamental to the development of the peace process and stressing the importance that civil society has for the democratic development of this area .
Another fundamental point seems to us to be the request that the Commission make an annual report to Parliament on the effects of cooperation .
Having said this in very brief but rather specific terms , please allow me , Mr President , to add a few observations to the debate that we have had so far , stressing , in particular , how impossible it is for the European Union to do much more with the means that it has at its disposal .
The European Union is unfortunately doing what it can , I would say what it knows how to do , that is , to provide financial assistance , because it would have difficulty doing more , being an economic rather than a political entity .
I say this not to play down the importance of the efforts that the Commissioners and President-in-Office are making in this direction , but to underscore a political and an institutional fact , that of a European Union that does not have a political entity in a position to act .
What is more , even the United States , as important as they may have been thus far in the Middle East , are capable of little more than fumbling around with a peace process that has become bogged down .
Please allow me therefore , Mr President , to conclude with a remark , with the agonising memory of the political intelligence and the capacities of a Prime Minister like Yitzhak Rabin in Israel .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it had already been said with great clarity and at some considerable length that the Commission 's proposals are a step in the right direction and that the amendments on which Mr Tomlinson , in particular , has put in a very great deal of work , have improved and where appropriate modified them .
Mr Tomlinson had made some criticisms , directed in part at those working for the Commission .
I , however , in a sort of positive amendment of my own , would like to single out two representatives of the Commission and their colleagues for praise because they are doing excellent work . They are the European Commission 's representatives in Tel Aviv and in Jerusalem .
On two visits I have noticed that a huge commitment is being made to represent Europe well .
It is for this very reason that the Tomlinson Report is so important today , because it should provide the appropriate financial and other backing required to ensure that the European Commission really can use the money it is spending and its political and moral commitment to best effect .
Both here and in other areas - as we have already discussed in another context - our representatives are hampered by the fact that many decisions are too cumbersome and too time consuming . Parliament itself is sometimes guilty , that I admit , but we must succeed in making our decision-making process quicker and less bureaucratic , particularly when it comes to financial aid .
A second point . You , Mr Commissioner , still hold the view - and I and my group support you fully - that we must not allow ourselves to be squeezed out of the peace process or our commitment .
That is quite right .
But perhaps we could see things in a more positive light .
We are a part of the peace process and there is nothing anyone can do to change that !
We are part of it by dint of our political , moral and financial commitment .
Perhaps what we should be doing is improving the visibility of our efforts and activities .
We are doing so much not only for the economic infrastructure , but also for democracy and human rights , that we really should also be increasing the visibility of what we are doing if we want to build bridges , to create the infrastructure . The Commission 's representatives have made some appropriate suggestions in this respect .
If we spent just part of the money on demonstrating what we want to achieve with it , namely that we have a European obligation to peace , not only in the interests of our identity as a group , but also more generally for our public image and our image in Israel and Palestine , then our aid would be much more efficient .
I would urge you , Commissioner , to continue with your policy , but to examine how we can better present the policy we are operating , particularly in critical phases , particularly in countries where the official propaganda perhaps presents our work in a somewhat more critical light than the population at large sees it .
Mr President , the point I wish to make follows on from the point just made by Mr Swoboda .


On Easter Saturday 1997 I had the pleasure of visiting the European Hospital in Gaza on the very last day before the workmen finally left - a hospital that has been under construction since 1990 .
As a nurse I have to say I was extremely impressed by the hospital .
In fact never have I seen a better-equipped hospital , in a country that desperately needs health care .
I returned again this year on Good Friday , and that hospital has not received one single patient , has not received one single trainee , nurse or medical assistant .
It lies there , a graphic symbol , perhaps , of our sterile role in the Middle East process .
Mr Swoboda has called for more obvious public perception of our role in the area .
If this is the public perception I think it is outrageous .
There is a situation I remember in Yes Minister , a British television programme which many us have often enjoyed , in which Sir Humphrey announces that although they have the hospital they cannot afford to have any patients .
That , I am afraid , is exactly what is happening in Gaza .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for his long answer to my question , dated 16 March , in which he tells me about the kind of money that has been spent on this hospital : over ECU 50 million , and not a single patient treated in the hospital .
The construction company that dealt with it is still waiting for quite a considerable amount of money , and since it is a small construction company from Northern Ireland , the long delay in payment is also causing problems there .
Most important of all , are we to see nothing but white elephants as our contribution to the Middle East peace process ?
We have excellent ambassadors there but they simply do not have the structures to make the necessary impact on the political situation .
We are looking at practically the largest concentration of people in the world in the Gaza Strip , where they go for their medical treatment to dusty little clinics , many of which I visited when I was there , where heroic doctors do their best to cope under extremely difficult circumstances , while down the road this hospital is lying completely empty .
The gates were locked .
I believe it is costing about US $ 100 , 000 a month just in security to maintain the hospital ; but as I have said , not a single patient has been treated there and it is now fifteen months since the workers left .
I know that we have sent out a tender for an international management team , but we are fiddling while Rome burns .
The standard of health in the Gaza Strip is very low .
The maternity care services are appalling .
I have been to that hospital as well , and when I was there they had to remove a cat from one of the babies ' cots when we were doing the tour in the outer part of that hospital .
Since we are discussing the budget and our contribution , we have to look into our souls , and I very much hope that the Commissioner will give us an adequate response to the concerns I am expressing about this issue .
Many speakers this morning have spoken about their concerns in relation to the desperate situation in the Middle East .
Friends of both Israel and the Palestinians return more and more depressed from that area , as I did myself after my visit there a couple of months ago .
We unfortunately count for virtually nothing there , because we have not put the structures in place in that part of the world to maximize our contribution to the area .
Mr President , I would like to speak in support of both Mr Tomlinson 's report and the principle of European Union aid to the peace process , whilst formulating a few critical reflections on the way this aid is received and , I would say , perceived .
What is its purpose ?
It is a question of contributing to the development of peaceful co-existence between Jews and Arabs in the Middle East .
Owing to circumstances , this aid is increasingly concentrated on the development of support structures for the Palestinian Authority which , unfortunately , is interpreted as a sort of anticipation of the peace process and consequent recognition of a still doubtful State whose borders remain , at the very least , to be defined .
The result is that this political anticipation which underlies the aid is perceived , especially in Israel , as unilateral encouragement of one side rather than both .
It is all the more worrying since , although there exists in Israel a group in favour of peace and co-existence , one wonders if a similar group for peace and Jewish-Arab co-existence also exists on the Palestinian side .
The model for reconciliation which Europe has represented and must continue to represent for the Middle East is an excellent thing .
Franco-German reconciliation worked because there were people in favour of peace on both sides , in both countries .
It would be desirable for European Union aid to place greater emphasis on the establishment of parties for peace on both sides of the dividing line .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have listened to Mr Tomlinson 's comments with a great deal of interest and on the whole we support his report .
Indeed , I think it is a good idea to stop talking about the Occupied Territories . But why replace this expression with the West Bank and Gaza Strip ?
No , I think the role of the European Parliament is precisely to go further than this ; to anticipate peace and use the word " Palestine ' . I think this would move things on .
We must talk of European Union aid to Palestine .
Palestine must be built and I think that we should not lose faith in the Palestinians .
There are a great number of Palestinians in favour of peace , just as there were a great number of people in favour of peace in the homelands during apartheid in South Africa .
But it is not by maintaining these homelands , by maintaining this apartheid , that peace will be built .
We have to contribute financially to the construction of Palestine , but we also have to contribute to it politically .
I think this is precisely one of the points on which the countries of the European Union are agreed .
They are all agreed on making things move in the direction of recognition of the fundamental rights of a people .
The United States are currently monopolizing all of the so-called " Western ' influence , with a partiality which is constantly in favour of the State of Israel .
This partiality must no longer be accepted .
We have to come to a more balanced vision of things .
This is how peace will be built .
Mr President , Council Regulation EC 1734 / 94 lays down the terms of financial and technical cooperation between the European Union and the Occupied Territories with a view to promoting the process of development in these areas and creating conditions favourable to a positive outcome of the peace process , which unfortunately is not the case right now .
We are convinced , as the National Alliance delegation , that financial and technical cooperation between the Gaza Strip and the West Bank makes a fundamental contribution to the consolidation of the peace process .
However , we must admit that the impact of the Union 's financial assistance in this area has so far not come up to expectations , despite the tremendous efforts made .
The causes are many : the difficult progression of the peace process that has not created the conditions of stability necessary for development ; the blocking of the Occupied Territories on and off by the Israeli authorities in retaliation for terrorist acts ; and a certain incapacity to manage on the part of the Palestinian Authority combined with the suspicion of illegal practices .
Amendments to the proposal for a regulation would therefore be helpful in order to better clarify the objectives and the terms of action , stressing the need to consolidate the peace process and coming up with a more detailed definition of the legal basis of this financial cooperation .
The fundamental role of financial and technical cooperation in developing the peace process and consequently in developing a civil society must be reaffirmed , the democratic development of these territories being hindered if a civil society fails to be created .
I have one final remark , and that is that we consider it appropriate that the Commission send Parliament a written report each year on the effects of cooperation .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the Committee on Budgets , especially the rapporteur , Mr Tomlinson , for their excellent , meticulous work , and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy for their valuable opinion .
The importance which Members attach to the future of the Palestinians and the peace process gives me confidence that the European Union will manage to adopt a common approach to tackle the region 's problems .
To be able to undertake positive work in the future , and for the sake of the credibility of the Union , it is essential for us really to share a common strategy , and I should like briefly to remind you of the context of this Commission proposal .
As you are well aware , the current regulation on assistance to the Palestinians was adopted on the basis of the declaration of principles signed by Israel and the Palestinians in September 1993 , and was followed by the international donors ' conference in Washington .
Unfortunately , the deterioration in the political climate in the Middle East and the successive crises in the peace process have seriously affected our aid programme .
In particular , the difficult political situation has caused serious budgetary problems both for the Palestinian Authority and for other Palestinian public institutions .
So the international donors - including the European Union , which is the most important - have been obliged to devote a large part of the project funds to recurrent costs and budget support .
Again and again , and each time at the request of the Council , the Commission has had to adapt to these circumstances in order simply to guarantee the survival of the Palestinian Authority and the peace process itself . We have never denied that during our appearances before this Parliament .
It is true that the Community cannot help , or does not usually help , to fund the recurrent costs of this sort of institution . That is why the 1994 regulation - the first one presented by the Commission - did not envisage this type of budgetary support .
And in that sense , I can tell you that at the time the regulation for the special Palestinian programme was established not even I , who witnessed the meetings in Washington and Cairo , could have foreseen that with time the peace process would come to experience the difficulties it has suffered , or that it would be necessary , especially at the time of the first border blockades , to begin to pay a series of administrative or recurrent costs which , I repeat , were not included in the programme .
So the aim of the proposal under discussion today is , if you like , to enable recurrent costs to be financed from Community funds .
And there is no hiding the fact that it is also due to the Court of Auditors having decided , quite rightly , that certain financial payments made to the Palestinian Authority during the peace process do not have an adequate legal base , and furthermore are being used for other objectives of an administrative or recurrent nature which are not covered by the regulation .
That is absolutely true and cannot be denied but , I repeat , we have had to do it because of the political circumstances .
As for the proposal to allow interest rate subsidies on lending by the European Investment Bank , that is also aimed at allowing this institution to fulfil its political mandate .
So these two amendments constitute the main changes the Commission has made to the regulation in question .
In that respect , I am pleased to note that we are in agreement with the amendments which , I repeat , form the essence of this proposal .
Nevertheless , I have something important to say to Parliament , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy . The Commission finds itself in a paradoxical situation at the moment .
The Commission fully shares the objectives set out in the amendments tabled by Mr Tomlinson and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , which refer to the future of assistance to the Palestinians .
However , we have a problem with the timing . The Commission will have no problem accepting these amendments , their essence and their stance at a later date .
I say that because the Commission is about to present a new regulation , in accordance with the instructions given by the Council of Ministers in February . We have to present it before the end of the British Presidency , probably at the Council of 29 June .
That new regulation comprehensively addresses all the aspects relating to the overall analysis of the future of the Union , in terms of political and economic conditions .
So I hope you will understand this paradoxical position .
We would simply ask both Mr Tomlinson and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy that a decision on these amendments should be deferred until after the Commission has presented the new regulation to the Council of Ministers .
Once it has been presented there will be a common legal base : Article 130w . There will be a whole set of political conditions , an exercise in globalization and a vision of the future with respect to this regulation .
So , I repeat , I hope you can understand this paradox . I would point out once again that we will have no difficulty accepting Parliament 's suggestions and the suggestions contained in the amendments .
Moreover , we also openly recognize , without any problem , that it is an excellent idea to present a two year deferment in order to conclude the financial perspectives and to extend them by a further five years .
We think it is an excellent idea to have an overall view .
But as things stand , the Commission has a problem of an institutional nature . We have to present a regulation to the Council of Ministers , because that was decided by the Council of Ministers in February .
Secondly , we have another problem I hope you will understand .
We are also interested in Mr Tomlinson 's amendments insofar as they represent a clever way of getting away from that heavy cross we have to bear , known as comitology .
But again , I have to say that following the European Council in Cardiff , the Commission is going to present a communication to try to change the comitology involved not just in the Palestine regulation , but in the whole system as it currently exists , derived from the Maastricht Treaty .
So the Commission thinks it is very important to adopt a comprehensive approach to all the legal bases in the budget .
That is why the Commission has taken the initiative of presenting a plan for overall reform .
And the plan under consideration today is a good example to demonstrate that the current comitology is a heavy burden , which helps neither Parliament , the Council of Ministers nor the Commission .
I should now like to address the problems raised by Mr Swoboda , for example , on the European Union 's participation in the international donors ' agreement .
You know that we are making an effort to ensure that the European Union plays an essential role in the donors ' conference .
That point is also going to be included in the new regulation , and is a question which Parliament and the Council of Ministers will have to resolve .
That is why we want to base this regulation on Article 130W , so it can have a global vision , and that is why we would ask you to delay all these questions just until October .
Then , in October , when we have the general debate on this new regulation - I hope Parliament and the Council will approve it , because for me that point is essential , Mr Tomlinson - then , with Mr Tomlinson 's amendments and the Commission 's new regulation , a very simple conundrum will have to be solved .
Will the Council accept your amendments ?
Will the Council accept my regulation ?
That is the political problem , because I am asking for a lot of money , and Mr Tomlinson is asking for a lot of money .
So I would ask that we have that global vision in October , because we are asking for ECU 1.6 billion .
And after what happened in Cardiff , the European Parliament and the Commission have no choice but to implement , with your amendments or my new regulation , what the Council is going to say .
So we are in favour of waiting until October , once the Council gives us the margin for political manoeuvre .
That is what we think .
I shall now turn to a few other questions . Mrs Banotti , the European Commission has made an enormous effort with the hospital in Gaza .
The thing is , you have to render unto Caesar what belongs to Caesar , and render unto the Commission what belongs to the Commission .
In other words , we are working with UNRRA and so all I can do is tell you how much we have paid , how much work we have done , what we want to do in the hospital , and the difficulties that exist in knowing whether or not sick people and refugees can be treated .
But is it the Commission 's fault if the Gaza hospital is not open ?
Go and visit the airport .
It has been completed .
The control tower is there , and all the electronic equipment .
I have spent ECU 15 million on it .
I knew it was useless .
Is it my fault that the airport is not open ?
You place me in an impossible situation .
Of course the airport is closed , and of course I have paid many millions of ecus .
But is it my fault that the Israeli authorities do not want to authorize it to open ?
Please direct your criticism at the people responsible .
You tell me : " Spend the money ' . I spend the money .
Then it unfortunately turns out that the airport , port , hospital , television station , radio or whatever cannot open .
Then you ask me to explain politically to you why it cannot be done . Please understand that I am in an impossible situation .
I am not the one who gives permission .
That permission is granted by the Israeli authorities .
In short , I am really sorry .
No doubt my credibility is non-existent but , believe me , the Commission and this Commissioner have spent a year and a half suffering real agonies over this situation , for which we do not feel responsible because , obviously , what the Commission cannot do when faced with this sort of difficulty is decide to stop paying , because that would be a bureaucratic solution .
If there is no legal base and I do not pay , you would accuse me of being a bureaucrat .
If there is no legal base , but the Council makes political decisions and I pay , you would say : " You are irresponsible because you pay when there is no legal base ' .
Thirdly , when work has been done - the hospital , the airport and so on - the Israeli authorities say : " That is not going to open ' .
There are questions in Parliament and you ask : " But why did you spend the money on that ? '
Please , show a little solidarity with the Commission .
You have to back us up , otherwise in the end nobody is going to want to be responsible for the situation .
In short , Mr President , this is a very complicated situation .
Mr Henderson knows that because he is on the Council .
Mr Tomlinson knows it , so does Mr Swoboda , and so does Mrs Banotti because she has been there .
I would like nothing better than for the hospital to be working .
But how can we convince the Prime Minister , Mr Netanyahu , that it should also take refugees ?
Tell me how to do that .
Mr President , my conclusion is this .
The Commission does not deny the intelligence and the value of Mr Tomlinson 's amendments , which are quite right , or Parliament 's contribution .
In February the Council asked the Commission to produce a new regulation to combine all the separate decisions which have been made during the last three years .
Some of them have no legal base .
The Commission 's position is that it will present the regulation to the Council on 29 June .
I hope the Council will give us the political and financial margin , and once we have that I shall have no difficulty accepting Mr Tomlinson 's amendments , when they are presented in the European Parliament in October , under the Austrian Presidency .
But at the moment I cannot do so , for legal and institutional reasons , and I beg you , please be as understanding as you can of the Commission 's position .
Welcome
It is my great pleasure , on behalf of the House , to welcome a delegation from the Israeli Knesset , who are seated in the official gallery , headed by Mr Zeev Boïm , member of the Knesset .
They are here for the 23rd interparliamentary meeting with the relevant delegation from this Parliament .
It is my hope that this 23rd meeting , which is taking place at a difficult moment in the peace process , will mark a further stage in the necessary rapprochement between the countries and peoples we represent , with a view to peaceful and fruitful cohabitation around the Mediterranean which , as in former times , is a privileged and incontestable point of contact .
May I wish the Israeli delegation fruitful meetings and a very pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
I would also like to welcome the representative of the Palestinian Authority to the European Union , and a delegation of ambassadors from the Arab States .
( Applause )
Financial and technical cooperation with the Occupied Territories ( continuation )
Mr President , I welcome the remarks of Commissioner Marín .
It is very helpful that he has been quite so fulsome towards Parliament 's views and quite so welcoming of them .
But he said in his remarks that we had to understand the paradoxical problem of Mr Marín .
Well I do .
But I hope he understands the paradox that he is posing for Parliament .
What Mr Marín seemed to say was that he agreed with the amendments of the Committee on Budgets .
What he went on to say was that he shares the goals of Mr Tomlinson 's report .
He went on to say ' we have no problem with them ' - no problem in accepting these amendments or the thrust of them .
And then those fateful four words , ' at a later date ' .
This seems like a kid who is waiting for Christmas .
He has been through all the preparation and suddenly somebody comes along and hijacks Father Christmas 's bag of toys and says ' but you can have them next year ' .
Parliament is not in a great mood for procrastination .
So there is a paradoxical problem of Marín , but there is a paradox that you present for Tomlinson .
Perhaps , some time , we should sit down and share paradoxical experiences .
I merely give you notice , Commissioner Marín , that I really welcome the spirit of what you have said .
I will cut the words out of the Rainbow and make sure we keep them as a reference point for the future .
But equally , when we come to the vote on this report later , I will ask you quite explicitly at the end of the votes on the amendments , whether you can accept them .
Then we will take our decisions based on what you say then .
At the moment I thank you for your comments but , quite clearly , you will have to understand that Parliament also has its own position to take into account as well as being understanding of the positions of other institutions .
Mr Tomlinson , I would like to explain the Commission 's position now , so that Members are aware of it straight away , without me having to comment at the time of the vote .
As I said , the Commission will have no problem in accepting the spirit and the content of your amendments once we have presented the regulation to the Council of Ministers .
At the moment we cannot do so .
We are simply asking Parliament to be flexible and wait another three or four months .
Since August is taken up with holidays , I do not think it is asking much to wait until September or October to hold a general debate under the Austrian Presidency , because we have a lot of problems and we would prefer to have a general debate in October .
That is our opinion .
Thank you , Commissioner .
This exchange thus brings our debate to a close .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

Votes
Mr President , Amendment No 41 is different to Amendments Nos 42 and 43 .
Amendment No 41 , with the date 2002 , was not supported in committee .
The date 2005 was supported , thereby giving the producers a longer period to settle into a new regime .
The period we should support is 2005 , not 2002 .
Mr Thomas , I have made a note of your comment and I will see to it that a check is carried out by the Parliamentary language service to ensure that the rendering is correct , as you request .
Do you want a separate vote on Amendment No 41 ?
Yes , Mr President , I want a separate vote for Amendment No 41 as it is different .
I wish to ask the rapporteur , just for clarification , whether it would not be easier , in the circumstances , to withdraw the amendment and leave the original Commission text .
I am quite happy to do that .
But it is an amendment by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Yes , there has been a mistake .
I have checked with the services .
The committee voted to support 2005 and not 2002 .
Therefore , if the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is agreeable , this amendment should be withdrawn .
Mr President , there is indeed a problem .
I would simply remind the rapporteur that , in the recitals , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted 2005 .
But Amendment No 41 was also voted for by the Committee on Agriculture .
On the one hand , in the recital , 2005 was agreed on , whilst in the body of the text , it was considered to be 2002 .
I therefore think that there is no reason now to remove the amendment relating to 2002 .
This must go to a vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
We shall now proceed to the election of a Parliamentary Vice-President .
We have received nominations for Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz and Mr Gerard Collins .
Four scrutineers will be appointed for the election .
( Mr Mohamed Ali , Mr Parodi , Mrs Marinucci and Mr Frischenschlager are chosen by lots as scrutineers )
Mr President , I would like to clarify our position on this vote .
Our group has always supported the correct application of what we consider a fundamental rule for this Parliament , namely the proportional distribution of members of the Bureau , President , Vice-Presidents and Quaestors .
During the present legislature there was an agreement between the most important groups , the Group of European Socialists and ours .
This worked well at the beginning , but during the second vote this did not work well as far as the election of Quaestors was concerned .
We see the above rule as a fundamental rule for our Parliament .
The position of our Parliament remains extremely fragile .
Only this morning we were talking about the attacks which are launched almost daily against our Parliament .
We therefore think we should maintain this rule .
According to the calculations of the d 'Hondt system , the Union for Europe Group is obviously entitled to a Vice-Presidency .
Since Mr Podestà joined our group , we have the number of VicePresidents that we need .
That is why we withdrew the candidature of Mr Cunha , out of deep respect for what we consider to be a fundamental rule of this Parliament .
I should like to pay tribute to Mr Cunha for agreeing to the withdrawal of his candidature .
I understand that the major groups in this Parliament are prepared to respect this rule , the d 'Hondt system .
We were assured that this was the case , and under these circumstances we have therefore withdrawn the candidature of Mr Cunha .
It was our intention that the Union for Europe Group , which is entitled to the seat of Vice-President , would obtain it , despite the fact that we were disadvantaged during the previous vote where the Quaestors were concerned .
Mr President , just a word to underline what Mr Martens has said .
For myself , speaking personally , I had no hesitation in withdrawing my candidature , because I consider that we should follow the rules which have always governed the work of Parliament , that is to say the d 'Hondt method .
Mr President , I would like to point out that it is , of course , the right of any Member to present his candidacy for the post of Vice President .
It is also the democratic right of the Groups in this House to propose Vice-Presidents .
Mr Martens has already pointed out that although internal agreements do exist - between the large groups , as you said , but , of course , there are other groups in the House , too - there are also agreements which are not necessarily supported by this House as the election of Mr Killilea as Quaestor has already shown .
Here the House , in its great wisdom , has made a decision which is different to that which the " arrangement ' might have dictated .
For this reason it is our democratic right to present to the House a candidate from the Green Group in the European Parliament , in the belief , incidentally , that it is entirely appropriate to consider whether , in a committee such as the Bureau of the European Parliament , it would not be right , proper and democratic if all groups were to be represented , rather than having the present situation in which three groups have no representation at all .
Three groups in this House are entirely unrepresented in the Bureau , as are the independents .
For this reason , this candidacy is a candidacy which will bring a little more democracy into this House at a time when the Bureau is holding very important debates .
( Applause )
Welcome
I would like to inform the House of the presence among us , in the officials ' gallery , of the President of the Greek New Democracy Party and leader of the official opposition in Greece , Kostas Karamanlis .
Mr Karamanlis has been visiting the European Parliament since yesterday for talks with the President of the Parliament and the chairmen of the political groups .
We hope he will have a pleasant stay in Strasbourg .
Votes ( continuation )
Mr President , due to the uncertainties which have appeared in my own group as a result of the vote change , I am trying to make it clear to them that we are going to vote on recital B first , and that after that we will return to recital A.
Mr van Velzen , we will clarify it with an electronic check so that there is no confusion .
We have already voted on A and it has been adopted .
You really cannot go back and check it now that the following vote has been taken .
That is absolutely unacceptable .
Mrs Green , you are right in the following sense : indeed we did vote on A and indeed the majority was for .
An electronic check was requested and there was confusion between A and B and so I repeated both votes .
I can repeat the electronic check .
Mr President , you had declared that vote and moved on to B. You then took the recorded vote on B. It is absolutely unacceptable .
That is absolutely true , Mrs Green , but I have been asked to make a check on A.
Mr President , it is against every rule on voting that I have ever heard of to accept a check on a vote that has been declared , after you have taken the next vote .
It is completely unacceptable practice .
They made a mistake with their votes .
It is unacceptable to recall it .
Mr President , as usual you acted very quickly .
Immediately after recital A we requested a check on the vote , and at that point you moved on to recital B. I believe that this vote is perfectly legitimate ; we have now voted on A.
Mr President , even if the other side of the House does have a relative majority for Recital A , in this case a qualified majority is required .
If a large group is against it , we simply need to check whether the others obtain 314 votes .
That is , after all , what we want to know .
Mr President , I can accept that if one of the majority groups in this House is against something on a qualified majority , then it will be lost .
But you declared the vote adopted and moved on .
It is unacceptable for them to realize they made a mistake and to ask you to go back .
We cannot accept that .
Once you begin to do that , anarchy will reign in this House .
Mr President , I can well understand the anxiety which some people have on this issue , and I quite understand Mrs Green 's position .
But let there be no doubt that there were clear calls for a check on Recital A immediately the vote was taken .
Unfortunately , we moved on rather quickly to take the vote on B , when there were still calls for a check .
Looking around the House , I believe the calls were absolutely justified , and I call on you , Mr President , to make a check on Recital A as you are duty-bound to do .
We can then re-vote on Recital B in due course .
We will make an electronic check on Recital B , as requested .
Mr President , with respect for your management of proceedings , Mr Provan has described quite clearly exactly what happened during the vote on Recital A. You called for the vote on Recital A , and the first calls of " check ' were heard immediately afterwards .
However , you proceeded to Recital B immediately .
You then decided , quite rightly in my view , to allow another vote on Recital A by way of a check . As I see it , you then allowed yourself to be dissuaded from holding this vote by the argument put forward very vociferously by the other side of the House .
That cannot be right .
As a result , I did not take part in the subsequent vote and would now request that this matter be cleared up once and for all .
Mr Rack , it is laid out very clearly in the Rules of Procedure .
I have the French text :
' After the result of the vote by show of hands has been declared , verification may be requested through the electronic voting system ' .
I moved on , I took the vote on the first , announced the result and at that time I was not asked to make a check .
I moved on to B and at that moment Mr Ferber and other Members called out to me that there was some confusion and requested an electronic check .
I made the check on B. I was then asked to make a check on A. If there had been no objection I would also have made one on A , even though it had been requested rather late on .
Since there was an objection I could not do it .
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) We will now examine the annex to the draft resolution .
After the vote on the resolution
Most certainly , Mr President , you should have a look at the text .
We just voted on paragraph 1 © under your chairmanship . In paragraph 1 © the second point which was voted on , there is the phrase : " takes account in this connection of the attached text ' .
This text has been rejected .
It is therefore completely absurd to start voting on an annex which we have removed from the legislative resolution .
We have therefore completed the vote .
Mr van Velzen , the President 's officials have explained to me that we are not obliged to put a reference to the vote which says : " Taking into consideration the text which is attached in Annex ... ' .
It is taken as read that the text in the Annex is also taken into consideration .
It is superfluous and that is why it was not put to a vote .
Mr President , as the rapporteur may I perhaps say a few words about this important vote ?
We have obviously now removed the phrase which requires the Commission to take into consideration the attached text .
But at the same time we also voted to take a decision on the basis of Article 38 b of the Treaty and Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure - and these make a direct reference to a Parliament initiative and not to any statement .
If you do not agree to this now , then you yourself will effectively be making your previous decisions , that is Article 38 b and Rule 50 , look ridiculous .
What the Commission will make of that is its business , whether or not we agree to this .
The Commission , too , can read , in all 11 languages !
I insist that a vote be taken on this annex now in accordance with procedure .
Mr President , to save the Chamber 's time and in order to take the rapporteur , Mr Linkohr 's , wishes into account , I propose a single vote on the annex and we will thus know immediately where we are , for this annex also requires a qualified majority .
Mr Herman , there are votes in sections .
How is it therefore possible for me to take a general vote on the whole Annex ?
Mr President , if you will allow me , I will try to inject a bit of common sense into this debate .
And I do so because of my interest in renewable energies , which is well known to Mr Linkohr and others in this House .
The reason my group wants to reject Recital A is very simple . By mistake , Recital A says there is " no Community legislation on feeding in electricity from renewable sources of energy ' .
I say that is a mistake because the directive on the electricity market published in January 1997 - on which , as I said in the debate yesterday , this Parliament did a great deal of work , mostly thanks to Mr Desama - contains two references to renewable energy , in a recital and an article .
So it would have been acceptable to say there was inadequate or little legislation , but not that there is none .
As Mr Linkohr said earlier , that is why we cannot accept that text .
What is going to happen now , Mr President , is very simple .
The majority of our group is going to vote against , and that means there will not be a qualified majority , and the whole document will not be approved .
It would be better for the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy to study it again , because we believe it is possible to improve the text and , at a later date , submit to the House a text which everybody could approve .
That is what I suggest .
Mr Robles Piquer , if I have understood correctly , you are requesting referral back to the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Fair enough , you can request it .
Are there any objections ?
Mr President , we had sufficient time to deal with this in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
The other side of the House also tabled amendments , which were adopted almost without exception .
Until a moment ago I also had the impression that there was broad agreement on this report , as , incidentally , we have always had broad agreement on renewables in the past .
I cannot understand why the Group of the European People 's Party has suddenly had a change of opinion , but everyone has a right to do so .
Anyone can make a mistake , but I do not believe that we will make any progress if we go back to committee now .
We have been in this situation before and we are not learning from our mistakes .
Please , let us vote on it now .
Then we will know where we stand .
Mr Linkohr , you are opposed .
As a result , we have heard one for and one against .
Mr President , I would like to argue in favour particularly because we , in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , have been trying for a long time to change the aid models found in Mr Linkohr 's report , which are extremely dirigiste .
We did not succeed , and I therefore think it would be useful to refer it back for further consideration .
Mr President , first of all , two Members have spoken in favour of this report , so at least two might be allowed to speak against it .
Incidentally , I should like to point out that have we never started referring things back to committee in the middle of a vote before .
Strictly speaking , this amendment should have been tabled in advance .
I should also like to point out that we discussed this matter long and hard in the Committee on Research , Technical Development and Energy , and that we have always said quite openly - on this side of the House at least - that we need to find a route towards renewable energies , and this lays the foundations for it .
If you want to destroy those foundations , all well and good , but that is not what you have been saying until now .
I will not go as far as to say that you have been lying , but this sort of thing cannot be allowed to go on .
As soon as you realize you are losing , you want to send the whole thing back to the committee stage .
If that is to be the case , then our work here in the future will be like that of a nursery school and we will never make any progress .
Mr President , please let the vote continue in order , as it usually would .
The proposal for referral back to committee will now be put to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the proposal )
Mr President , I rise to draw the attention of the House and yourself to the fact that an interview has been taking place in the public gallery .
I am not at all sure that conducting television interviews while a vote is taking place is a proper use of the public gallery .
Could you please take action to prevent this happening ?
Mr Collins , instructions have been given .
Mr President , could I support Mr Herman 's proposal ?
It appears that voting is always carried out in the same way and that every time it is impossible to gain a majority .
Mr Herman 's proposal for a general vote seems perfectly reasonable and we would have avoided spending a great deal of time only to arrive at the same result .
I would like to ask the House to bear in mind that the political groups that have tabled amendments must withdraw their amendments in order to allow this general vote to take place .
I personally have no objection , and if the political groups are in agreement and we can take a general vote , then let us do so .
Mr President , we do not agree with that .
There are amendments where we have asked for roll-call votes .
We want the stance of the party opposite to be made public in those roll-call votes and we want them voted on one by one .
( Applause from the left ) - After the vote
Mr President , we are , nevertheless , still faced with the problem that we are referring back to committee an annex which we have now rejected .
What we are supposed to do in this situation , I do not know .
But I leave it to your wisdom to decide whether you want to take the vote again or not .
It would certainly be a unique event in the history of Parliament .
Mr President , in addition to an error in the voting list , I fear you may have committed an error in the voting procedure .
The final vote can clearly not take place before the annex has been voted on .
You first of all put to the vote , at the request of one group , the second part of paragraph 1 c ) separately , which required the annex to be considered .
You then proceeded to the final vote , then to the vote on the annex .
And even before proceeding to the vote on the annex , but after the final vote had taken place , you agreed to put to the vote a procedural motion requesting referral back to committee , when in accordance with Article 129 it is clear that referral to committee cannot be requested after the final vote .
I think that , in reality , the final vote to which you proceeded earlier was not handled correctly .
We cannot proceed to a final vote before having completed the voting on the text , that is , the text and its annex .
I therefore think that you must put the text to a final vote , one which could not take place earlier .
I am sorry , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , but I do not agree with your interpretation .
The first part of the vote was clearly separate from the vote on the annex .
This has already given rise to some discussion and has been clarified .
We could have two votes , as has been done , one on the motion for a resolution , the other a separate one , on the annex .
We have completed the first , and nothing further needs to be done now with regard to the annex .
I am not going to put the annex to a final vote . That is an end to the matter .
Before suspending voting time , I will announce the explanations of vote and I wish you all a good lunch .
It is our view that there is no need for a quota system for bananas , especially not with regard to imports from third countries .
This system is unnecessary .
We want a free market for the banana trade .
In other respects we are , of course , very positive towards helping ACP countries in various ways to get the chance to develop trade in their own products on the world market .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of an amendment on common organization of the market in bananas .
A change in market organization is necessary because the EU has lost a WTO case .
The Commission 's proposal is a reasonable attempt to strike a balance between the various considerations .
We must respect our WTO and Lomé obligations , while also assuring consumers of good , inexpensive bananas .
Many of the amendments by the European Parliament upset this balance .
Thus , we have voted against a reduction in the dollar banana quota because it is at odds with WTO provisions .
We have voted against an increase in duties , because that would make bananas too expensive .
We have also voted against raising duties on non-traditional bananas because it would be obscene to add to duty on bananas from some of the poorest countries in the world .
We have voted in favour of the report because it contains a proposal for a fair trade banana system .
Supporting a changeover to production of fair trade bananas is an excellent way of helping smaller producers to become competitive in the face of dollar bananas .
The report paves the way for two different systems - one for fair trade bananas and one for organic bananas .
However , there should only be the one system , meeting both environmental and social requirements .
It is unrealistic to imagine that ACP producers will be able to do without pesticides altogether .
Thus , a definition of fair trade must be worked out between producers and consumers .
The system must include support for a changeover in production , support for consumer information and a system of labelling and monitoring so that consumers can be sure of what they are getting for their money .
It emerged once again last week that the American banana company Chiquita is deliberately flouting employee rights and environmental considerations in its banana plantations in Latin America .
For many countries , ACP or otherwise , banana production is a crucial source of foreign currency , and a large number of people are financially dependent upon these exports .
But as the Chiquita affair reveals , banana production also puts third world plantation workers seriously at risk , both socially and in terms of health .
We have supported those amendments proposed by the committee and other members of the European Parliament that require the common organization of the market to take account of and actively promote the production and import of so-called fair trade bananas .
We would have preferred to see a special fair trade quota being set up , but that would fly in the face of current WTO regulations .
When the next round of WTO negotiations begins , the EU must have the clear objective of bringing about such a quota .
Until then , we must ensure that fair trade organizations have easy import access .
We have abstained from voting on the actual report on the common organization of the market because the proposal indiscriminately gives traditional ACP countries an advantage .
There are countries outside this circle equally dependent upon banana production , and we have no guarantee that plantation workers in ACP countries are treated any better than their colleagues in Latin America .
Moreover , the present proposal does nothing to safeguard small-scale banana producers .
The World Bank has calculated that only about 12 % of the additional price European consumers pay for bananas actually goes to the producers - the remainder goes to the importers , and with the existing proposal , there is no guarantee that the future will be any different .
Banana imports to the EU are surrounded by a mass of regulations , duties , quotas and penalty duties .
The EU itself must set a good example and reduce the amount of regulation , follow the WTO ruling and increase the focus on free trade .
This proposal , which follows a decision of the World Trade Organization , is particularly symbolic and important and , if approved in the form submitted by the Commission , will seriously change the present situation for the worse as regards the common organization of the market in bananas .
Symbolic because the Commission 's proposals would entail an intolerable acceptance of the universal predominance of the WTO - and the interests of the USA - with the inevitable sacrifice of the traditional privileged relations between the EU and the ACP countries , for bananas now , and extended to other areas later .
Serious changes for the worse , because by substantially increasing the quota of imports from third countries ( another 353 million tonnes ) - particularly for the benefit of the ' banana-dollar zone ' - it would affect levels of imports from the ACP countries and also the amount of room on the market for Community products , especially those from Madeira .
We therefore consider the amendments by the Committee on Agriculture to be helpful .
They are in fact designed to ensure that Community producers ' interests are safeguarded and to maintain the essential aspects of our preferential agreements with the ACP countries .
This is what is happening with the reduction of the extraordinary quota to 100 thousand tonnes .
And it is also happening with the fixing of a quota of 57 , 500 tonnes for Portugal , 7 , 500 tonnes more than at present .
There is still one fundamental matter : we must revise some of the WTO 's mechanisms .
The EU must not be held prisoner by them .
That is the purpose of our amendment to the Thomas report .
I welcome this report as an effort to go as far as possible in assisting ACP countries within the constraints of the WTO ruling .
Of course , the WTO ruling means that we cannot help those ACP countries as much as previously but this report , in line with the Commission proposals is the next best option .
Banana reform is an area where the modern organization of world trade seems to have little regard for traditional ties between countries .
We , in the UK , have long-standing links with Caribbean countries in particular .
It is a shame that the WTO does not seem to recognize such links .
The UK , of course , is not the only Member State which recognizes its obligations to traditional producer countries .
I share the rapporteur 's concern that the abolition of the licences for individual producer countries could undermine the position of some countries in the EU market .
Additional support measures to balance this are clearly necessary .
In the broader context , the long running controversy makes the point that greater flexibility is needed in the WTO if jobs are to be protected in less well off societies .
The COM in bananas is of particular importance because banana production directly concerns both a number of European regions - particularly the ultra-peripheral areas like the French overseas departments - and a large number of third countries with whom we have longstanding and special links within the framework of the Lomé Convention .
In the face of this geostrategic and economic issue , both at European and ACP level , we must have a COM which clearly implements the Community preference and which is in accordance with the special agreements which link us to the ACP countries .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations supports the Thomas report as amended by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Nevertheless , we tabled eight amendments aimed at strengthening ACP and Community production , and the marketing of bananas whose production is in line with certain social , environmental and health standards .
With regard to the ACP agreements , they must be protected as an integral whole .
At the time of the signing of the GATT agreements , we raised the problem of our traditional links with these countries and the reply was that these specific interests would be protected .
The result of the WTO panel shows us that our fears were not in unfounded .
In actual fact , the WTO does not recognize our special agreements with the ACP countries .
The question is now one of knowing if and how the serious error of negotiation committed by the Commission can be corrected , particularly in relation to the next " Clinton Round ' .
With regard to Community production , production quotas must be maintained at a level which permits the protection , even the development , of the ultra-peripheral production zones .
We all know that these areas are particularly sensitive and incur specific costs due to their distance from continental Europe .
This is why we tabled an amendment which protects the guarantee of distribution and sale of Community products on the European market , along with an increase in the collection of customs duties for bananas coming from non-traditional ACP countries and a 20 % readjustment in the amount of the flat-rate reference income which had not been increased since 1991 .
Within the framework of the WTO , it is absolutely necessary to introduce social , environmental and health clauses .
As we have often said , the globalization of trade can only function harmoniously on condition that fair social , environmental and health standards are applied to all .
In this instance , we would like every Member State to be opposed to bananas imported from third countries where such clauses are not respected .
Our group thus supports Mr Thomas ' report as amended by the Committee on Agriculture , which is in the common interest of European producers and producers from the so-called " traditional ' ACP countries .
The European Union signed the Lomé agreements , thus taking on international contractual obligations whose legal force is no less than that resulting from the commitments undertaken within the framework of the Marrakech agreements .
It is thus absolutely necessary that the European Union and Member States respect the obligations of the Lomé Convention .
Like many people in Britain who are keen to help the Caribbean countries earn a decent living from their principal export crop , I was dismayed when the World Trade Organization ruled that favourable EU trade rules with these island nations were against international trade laws .
So I am glad that the Commission 's experts have quickly drawn up proposals which should meet our international agreements but at the same time continue to allow Caribbean farmers to sell their bananas into the European market .
I understand that these changes to the import licence system will add to the cost of EU aid to the banana-growing countries .
However I feel that this is a small price to pay compared to the risk that poor farmers would be tempted to grow drugs instead of bananas and merely add to the drugs problems our own countries are facing .
Europe profited from its many colonies in such countries in the past , so it is only right that today 's Europe give a hand-up to people in the poorest parts of the world who want to earn an honest living .
Since the start of the EU , this House has been concerned with the interests of the traditional banana producers , both Community - 20 % of bananas consumed in the Union come from Martinique , Guadeloupe , Madeira and the Canaries - and ACP .
Various protocols , especially Protocol 5 of the IVth Lomé Convention , preceded the Common Organization of the Market ( COM ) which came into force in 1993 .
This was the result of a difficult compromise with the aim of enabling the distribution and sale , on the internal market , of bananas produced within the Community and bananas coming from the ACP countries , at prices which were fair both for producers and consumers , without however , undermining imports of bananas from other third countries .
Following the actions inspired by the Chiquita multinational and brought by the United States , Guatemala , Honduras , Ecuador and Mexico , the World Trade Organization demanded that the EU should modify its COM in bananas as from 1 January 1999 .
I would like to congratulate Mr Thomas on his report , which was adopted virtually unanimously within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
He has tried hard to find a compromise which is compatible with the WTO rules , by accepting the idea of an global quota which maintains the ACP preferences provided for by Lomé , protects Union producers and guarantees consumers a reasonable price .
When the COM in bananas was established , the Community committed itself to ensuring that European and ACP producers are never put in a less favourable situation than in the past .
The reform of the COM must be guided by the same principle .
It is for this reason that I support the Committee on Agriculture 's position and this is why I voted in favour of its tabled amendments .
Valdivielso de Cué report ( A4-0223 / 98 )
I believe the proposal to tighten border checks on counterfeit goods will prove to be a positive measure by strengthening the pre-existing 1994 regulation concerning the suspension of customs operations for suspected pirated or counterfeit goods .
While the original regulation covered trademarks and design rights , the extension of customs protection to patented inventions , as recommended by this proposal , could go a long way in enhancing the security of intellectual property .
Furthermore , the proposed increase in the scope of customs authority to goods in free zones or goods already in customs supervision will extend the sphere of protection given to patents , trademarks and the like .
Ireland is one of the leading countries in software development in the EU .
Cracking down on piracy and counterfeiting offences , including intellectual property rights violation , is therefore not only in the interests of the EU , but particularly of Ireland , where it will ensure the preservation of jobs in the software industry .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have elected to vote in favour of the report .
The purpose of current EU arrangements is that following an application by the holder of a right , it is possible to suspend customs operations where goods are suspected of being counterfeit or pirated goods covered by an intellectual property right ( brand or trade mark , design right , copyright or neighbouring right ) .
We support this proposal , which means in practice , inter alia , the seizure and destruction of counterfeit or pirated goods .
Aelvoet report ( A4-0194 / 98 )
To break off trade and relations with a State is always an important decision . It can never be taken lightly , nor without conclusive and decisive justification .
All the more so when it relates to aid to a country , and thus a population .
Article 336b of the IVth Lomé Convention , which provides for the possibility of a partial or full suspension of cooperation due to serious human rights abuses is no exception to this rule .
Any decision to suspend or resume cooperation is obviously a serious matter , in which Parliament should be fully involved .
I therefore think it is clear that Parliament cannot be satisfied with merely being informed .
Like my colleagues in the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I do not consider it desirable for the Council alone to decide on a suspension or resumption , either full or partial , of cooperation .
In the absence of assent , I consider that Parliament must at the very least be consulted regarding every case , in order to increase public awareness and to put the State in question progressively under pressure .
I consequently subscribe fully to the demand for the immediate opening of a conciliation procedure with the Council , so that the procedure for consulting Parliament may as rapidly as possible be defined by mutual agreement .
Berger recommendation ( A4-0215 / 98 )
The proposal submitted to us is aimed at amending the directive on access to the occupation of road transport operator .
It aims to make the current rules stricter in order to achieve a more thorough harmonization of the transport sector .
This proposal for amendment , which has the strong support of only a few countries , is aimed at reducing certain disparities between Member States ' legislation , which risk causing distortions in competitiveness and unequal access to the road transport market .
I personally would like to insist on the need to harmonize not only the conditions of access but also the working conditions for road transport operators .
Some countries of the Union have been experiencing serious strikes by lorry drivers recently .
Everyone can still remember the inconvenience these actions have caused .
But they have also revealed the deep-rooted malaise of the road haulage operators .
These strikes have also brought to light great disparities in working conditions between Member States .
I therefore think it is necessary to embark upon a serious consideration of the harmonization of social legislation within the Union .
It would put transport operators , whose duties to employees vary substantially from country to country , on an equal footing .
Quisthoudt-Rowohl recommendation ( A4-0226 / 98 )
Mrs Quisthoudt-Rowohl 's proposal is a serious and well-founded one .
Indeed , for several months all the institutions of the European Union have been talking at every possible opportunity of the need to have a research programme which lives up to our ambitions .
It is clear that what is being proposed to us falls far short of what is needed .
Everyone is aware of the eminently strategic role of research and development for the future of our competitiveness on a world scale , but many seem unwilling to accept responsibility for the financial allocations required to innovate and adapt ourselves to world challenges .
Let me give just one example as an illustration : that of shipbuilding .
The European Council decided to end aid to this industry after the year 2000 , recommending efforts at competitiveness through recourse to new technology .
At the same time , the Commission proposed merging " inland transport ' projects and " marine technology ' projects , this merger being accompanied by a reduction in appropriations .
What are we to think ?
As a Member of the European Parliament , I can no longer content myself with the fine long speeches of some leaders who are completely out of touch with the reality of the decisions .
We will not be able to hide indefinitely behind Community technocracy .
We will not be able to say " white ' one day in Paris , Berlin and London , only to demand " black ' in Brussels .
Unfortunately , recent statements from some people do not encourage optimism .
In the coming months , many of us will have to defend the idea of Europe and also to state a number of home truths , even if this means touching on some sore points .
The coming years will be crucial , the political issues major ones .
It will be up to the European Parliament to make its political and , I hope , its decision-making character prevail .
Since I have some knowledge of the scientific community , I can say that , unfortunately , the EU 's research programme only creates a lot of unnecessary diversions for the scientific community .
I think research should be based on voluntary international cooperation and not on artificial cooperation rules , such as that there should be scientists from three countries involved or whatever .
I do not think research programmes belong in the area of EU cooperation .
International scientific cooperation can still be arranged - it has been in the past .
I would like at this point to state my regret and criticism regarding the fact that the Union 's research policy ( and that of its Member States and of the research association , Eureka ) has not yet been discussed seriously as a key factor in the strategy of transition to a new development model .
It is probable that this is simply not possible if we continue with our usual procedure .
I would therefore like to suggest even at this stage that for the Sixth Framework Programme on Research and Development we start a broad dialogue with civil society , both at European level and in the individual Member States , concerning the contribution which research policy can make to a transitional strategy with a view to an ecologically compatible and socially coherent development model in Europe and beyond .
In this way , particular importance will be given to including critical groups and opinions .
Linkohr report ( A4-0199 / 98 )
Mr President , as this explanation of vote begins , please allow me to point out that the way in which today 's voting has been handled is somewhat surprising and I would ask you to pass this observation on to the Bureau : when the President of any Member State visits us , you do not interrupt the session and allow the Members to leave , making him speak to a House which is three quarters empty in comparison with voting time .
I would like to make two remarks concerning procedure with regard to Mr Linkohr 's report .
Indeed , the European Parliament has surrendered to a veritable perversion of procedure , through the vote of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
In fact , we already have a directive .
A report has been proposed to us , which is an own-initiative report on the same subject , and it is proposed to incorporate into this report an annex which , on closer analysis , is in actual fact a legislative proposal on the part of the European Parliament .
This practice naturally seems to us contrary to the texts which govern the functioning of the European Parliament , and contrary to normal practice .
It is not for Parliament to set itself up as a legislator .
My second comment refers back to the procedural incident earlier .
I regret not having requested submission of the case to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities at the time , but I am sure they would confirm that if a report has an annex , the final vote cannot be taken before the vote on the said annex .
It is absolute nonsense to consider that a final vote can be followed by other votes .
The first vote we were asked to give an opinion on related to whether the Commission should take into consideration the text given in the annex .
So , it should clearly have been necessary to vote on the annex before proceeding to the final vote , since it formed an integral part of the motion for a resolution .
Above all , Mr President , I believe that if the vote had been better prepared , we could have avoided this incident , because it would immediately have been noted that the annex had not obtained the approval of an absolute majority of Members of Parliament and thus the required qualified majority was not achieved .
It thus clearly follows that the final vote on the report as a whole would probably have been negative .
By proposing to the Members of this House a vote on the annex after the final vote , by proceeding to a vote on a motion for referral back to committee when the final vote had taken place , I believe that a procedural error has been committed . It would be appropriate for the Committee on the Rules of Procedure once more to give an opinion on this , in order to avoid its happening again in the future .
But basically , I come back to the fact that it is not normal to have implemented such a procedure , which comes down to giving Parliament the possibility of legislative initiative , which it does not possess .
The report contains some good proposals for an increase in the proportion of renewable energy through the use of biomass , solar energy , wind power and geothermal energy .
Community rules on the feed-in model could also contribute to this development .
The implementation of energy policy should in principle be a national issue and be managed by each Member State by applying of its own national rules .
The Linkohr report has one essential merit , which is that it raises the important question of the promotion of renewable energy sources .
It is clearly the duty of elected representatives and governments , especially in my country , to think about the future of energy in our nations .
A future which takes into consideration environmental protection , diversification of production methods , the needs of consumers , both industrial and individual , and also the security of supplies and a reduced dependence on the outside world .
Renewable energy sources , those we know of and those yet to be invented , have an important role to play in defining this future policy .
But in spite of this , can we accept an ultra-statist directive , drawn up in an extremely vague legal style - and in particular in flagrant contradiction with the Rothe report - which does not respect the principle of subsidiarity , which completely ignores the specific needs of States and their energy requirements and which considers hydro-electric power as a renewable energy source only worthy of attention below a certain production threshold .
We cannot , and this is why we will abstain .
It is for the Member States , in collaboration with but independent of Community structures , to set their objectives , to commit themselves to keeping to them and defining , at national level , suitable means of achieving them .
Energy is too serious and strategic a sector to leave in the hands of the Commission 's technocrats or in the hands of the obsessive federalists in this House .
The report proposes that the EU should draw up a new directive on the feeding in of electricity from renewable sources of energy .
We are opposed to this .
We think this type of issue is better dealt with at national level .
We are also opposed to the EU drawing up a detailed common energy policy .
This point of view is based both on democratic reasons and on the fact that national circumstances in this area vary greatly .
We have therefore voted against the request for a new directive and abstained from all part votes on the shape of the proposed directive .
Like Helmut Kohl and Jacques Chirac , I think that too many decisions that could have been taken at national level have been transferred to EU level .
Just like them , I think that the principle of subsidiarity should be given real substance .
This report calls for the drafting of legislation on the feeding in of electricity from renewable energy sources into the electricity network .
The objective of this proposal may be very good , but if you look sensibly at the debate this leads to about funds , special funds , investors , network operators , autoproducers , independent energy producers and so forth , it is incomprehensible that such matters have to be decided at EU level .
In think decisions concerning energy policy should be taken at national level .
There is nothing to gain by making energy policy supranational .
I am therefore voting against this report .
Since there has been a lot of debate on the subject , I would simply like to say that I too had a few concerns about whether we should split the vote on the proposal and the annex .
I am not personally convinced that it was the most proper way .
I still have my doubts .
But in any case once we adopted this procedure I , at least tried to dissociate the one section from the other .
And so there was no problem with the two votes .
The first section - the proposal , separate from the annex - could remain as a proposal , as it in fact did .
Furthermore , I must also comment that we were under a great deal of pressure concerning the votes .
We have recently been adopting the procedure of adjourning the voting on Wednesday when an address is given by a head of state .
This has been debated in the Bureau and at the Conference of Presidents .
I can understand the reservations .
It is very difficult for us to start a vote , to adjourn it , to wait until Members reassemble and so on , but I do not think this is the right time for us to revisit this issue .
However , I will pass on Mr Fabre-Aubrespy 's comment to the President .
The third point is of course that when we move on rapidly , Members following the votes have to be quick-witted .
It is no good if they realize ten minutes later that they have voted wrongly on a point .
This leads to the sort of problem that we have experienced .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.45 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Situation in Kosovo
The next item is statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Kosovo .
When I last addressed Parliament on the subject of Kosovo in one of our previous debates , news was then emerging of the agreement by President Milosevic to meet the leader of the Kosovo Albanians , Dr Rugova .
As Members of this House will recall , the international community then welcomed the news as an important first step on the road towards a peaceful resolution of the crisis .
We were all therefore dismayed that instead of this resulting in a reduction in the fighting in Kosovo , we witnessed a significant stepping-up of the violence with indisputable evidence of indiscriminate attacks on entire villages by the Serbian security forces and the Yugoslav army causing widespread destruction with all the hallmarks of a new campaign of ethnic cleansing .
Belgrade 's insistence that it is simply carrying out legitimate counter-terrorist activity is not credible .
The reports of attacks on innocent civilians and the systematic burning of houses are wholly unacceptable .
As the European Council made clear on 15 June , no state which uses brutal military repression against its own citizens can expect to find a place in the modern Europe .
The growing stream of refugees into neighbouring Albania and Montenegro speaks for itself and illustrates the serious threat posed to regional security by the continuing conflict .
It is particularly important that the European Union remains in close touch with the aid agencies who are working in northern Albania .
I welcome assurances from the Commission that its humanitarian office is in regular contact with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees .
The humanitarian crisis will put a huge strain on Albania , a country which is still struggling to cope with its own grave economic and social problems , as I think we are all aware .
We must continue to work with the Albanian Government ; to encourage them to maintain their constructive line on Kosovo .
And we must think of ways to step up our assistance both to enable them to cope with the immediate crisis of the refugees and to help them to begin to tackle their own wider problems .
President Milosevic bears a personal responsibility for the actions of his security forces in Kosovo .
He should be left in no doubt that the international community will not be taken in by talk of peace when the reality on the ground is ever greater repression .
There have been expectations of the dialogue which took place in Moscow earlier this week between President Yeltsin and President Milosevic .
We welcome President Yeltsin 's efforts to secure a political settlement .
Some of the commitments on the humanitarian side represent a step forward , provided they are implemented .
But some key aspects of what President Milosevic has offered fall far short of the requirements of the European Union as set out in the Cardiff Declaration .
In particular , he has given no clear commitment to the withdrawal of security forces which are engaged in repression .
The European Union will now be working further with the Russians , the Americans and others to maintain pressure on President Milosevic to do all that is required of him - and work is continuing in New York on a draft United Nations Security Council resolution .
As we have learned over Bosnia , we cannot afford to rely on President Milosevic 's word .
I hope that the dialogue that took place in Moscow will lead to a changed situation , a better situation , a situation where the repression ends .
I can say to President Milosevic that if that is not the case and if the dialogue results in no major change in the situation then the European Union 's view is unchanged - we will continue to seek to put pressure on President Milosevic , ruling out no action in order to try to bring about a peaceful situation and a solution to the problems in Kosovo .
Mr President , I think the European Union can say that it has assessed the situation in Kosovo rightly to date , and is not , as before , simply awaiting developments without taking the necessary measures and without preparing for the worst , as was the case during the tragedy in Bosnia .
The best way to try to prevent the violence and massacres in Kosovo is to make it unequivocally clear to President Milosevic that the international community is prepared to intervene to rectify such a state of affairs , or to give the necessary protection to innocent citizens -men , women and childrenwho are being shelled in their villages with artillery or other weaponry .
I feel strongly about this , knowing how many debates have preceded this one , and knowing that , in this regard , the European Union has opted for a straight line policy in close consultation with the other members of the Contact Group . During the past few days , the Cardiff European Summit has in fact confirmed the line being taken .
We now have the first results from the dialogue between President Yeltsin and President Milosevic .
Along with Mr Henderson , I say , of course , that this dialogue is welcome , but at the same time I reiterate what he said , that it has been shown in the past that President Milosevic 's word cannot be relied upon .
Actions are what matter , and in that sense it is disturbing that one of the most significant of the four conditions which the international community had dictated to President Milosevic has not been met . I am referring to the withdrawal of security forces from the area .
This means that , day after day , the people in the region are afraid that they will be attacked again , just as we saw in the past in Sarajevo .
At the same time it means that the international community is once again being challenged to make it clear that this all-important demand must be met , and that it would intervene if excessive violence were to break out again .
As far as that is concerned , this will not be the last debate we are having here about Kosovo .
It will be one of many , and some time will have passed before we will be able to say that peace and stability has returned to the region .
I also agree with the British Presidency , that we must use our influence to support Dr Rugova and especially those who surround him , so that he is able to maintain his moderate line .
Obviously , some Albanians have become considerably more radical , making it more difficult to have a dialogue without extreme demands .
It should be obvious that the international community has taken a clear political stand in this matter and , for good and well-founded reasons , has opted for a solution within the borders of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
On this point , too , the international community must remain consistent .
The European Commission has provided the necessary emergency help via its humanitarian organization , ECHO . It recently made ECU 1.5 million available , and is naturally prepared to allocate more where necessary .
In this respect as well , it is crucial that President Milosevic 's commitment is verified , that the international aid organizations be given free access to the area . Incidentally , according to his promises to President Yeltsin , this should also apply to accredited diplomats of governments and other international organizations such the OSCE .
It is of the utmost importance that the number of observers in the region be increased considerably . The Cardiff European Council made a decision to do this , so that we are also continually able to get a good picture of the developments on the ground .
Up to now we have lacked accurate information due to the absence of opportunities for access to the region .
You know that there may be tens of thousands of refugees , or displaced people . President Milosevic 's promise that these people can return to their homes will have to be carefully verified too .
I conclude by saying that there is a gleam of hope that the dialogue may be continued , that serious negotiations can take place . But I should immediately add that we should understand clearly that the greatest possible vigilance is needed to prevent the process from sliding back into in the bloody violence which plagued the region before .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , I should like to make a few remarks expressing my fundamental support , and that of my group , for the current policy , together with a few critical observations .
One : I think you are absolutely right to make it quite clear that the Kosovo Albanians will not be abandoned , that they have our support and that we will not allow them to become a second Bosnia .
Two : I also think we are right to maintain a critical or pessimistic view of Milosevic , and that we must therefore support all the available alternatives both within the country itself and in neighbouring countries .
Though there is little hope in Serbia , there is some in Montenegro and in Republica Srpska - even if they are not all angels - but we must support alternatives to Milosevic .
Three : We must help its neighbours to stand firm in this crisis and stop them from tending towards extreme attitudes .
Here I have in mind Albania and Macedonia .
We must also tell the Macedonians that despite , or perhaps even because of the crisis , they must pay greater attention to the minority rights of their Albanian population and make progress in this area .
Despite their effort , it is not enough .
Four : I think that NATO is right to hold manoeuvres .
Unfortunately , and I have to say this , although I am an anti-militarist , in certain circumstances it is necessary to engage in a little sabre rattling .
Five : I also believe we are right to prepare for military intervention if Milosevic does not give way , and therefore I also believe that we must do everything possible to ensure that NATO makes all the necessary preparations for such intervention .
Six : I should like to appeal to Russia - and I assume that both the Council and the Commission are making this clear and unambiguous - to shoulder its responsibilities .
If Russia wants to play a significant and increasing role in overall European security policy - and I think it would be good if Russia were to do so - now is its opportunity to show it .
Because for those who are friendly with Serbia or with Milosevic as the President of Yugoslavia , now is the time to put this friendship to the test , by speaking up for peace .
My seventh and last point , Commissioner , is the following . You have said that the EU is doing everything it can .
And it may well be true that it is doing everything it can at the moment , but - as we have already mentioned on a number of occasions - this is a crisis which we undoubtedly saw coming . We know that Milosevic needed just such a crisis .
Looking at the outcome of the Cardiff summit , Mr President-in-Office , and reading Point 47 which states that progress has been made and further resolutions will be passed at the Vienna summit , then in truth I have to say that I find the whole thing rather weak .
Rapid progress is essential on the planning unit in particular , so as to prepare for an active foreign policy .
We will only be able to prevent a second or a third Bosnia or a second Kosovo if we have a strong foreign and security policy .
So , to conclude , Mr President , I fully support the principle of subsidiarity .
But we should consider where we need a stronger EU .
We need a stronger European Union in foreign and security policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are now experiencing a fatal sense of déjà vu , because the results of the events that took place in Moscow amidst great media excitement are really only minimal , not to say non-existent . The promises made by Mr Yeltsin were promises he had already made to the Americans .
He had even been praised for them .
They were the very reason the sanctions were lifted . I , for one , am not surprised that things have turned out this way .
At the time I found no cause for celebration because I knew all too well that Milosevic had not changed .
Perhaps at that age you just cannot change .
But if that is the case , we must take note , because he behaved the same way in Bosnia , and it is how he is behaving now .
He agrees to hold meetings , but without an international mediator , and at the same time - just as he did in Bosnia - he is sanctioning murder and pillaging .
The fact is that there are once again concentration camps and even mass graves in Kosovo .
We were all aware of it , we all saw it coming , yet we failed to act .
By we , I mean the European Union .
Unfortunately , Parliament cannot act , we can only suggest possible courses of action .
If Milosevic now refuses to withdraw the Yugoslavian army and his police troops on the grounds that the Albanians must first stop their terrorist attacks , he is confusing cause and effect .
It is really he who is responsible for this whole affair .
For eight years now the Albanians have endured an apartheid regime with great forbearance .
Who then is surprised that after eight years of such an apartheid regime the young men are saying , we just are not going to put up with that any more .
We are not going to let our wives and children be murdered .
We are not going to be driven out .
So we need to exert much greater political and military pressure on Belgrade .
We need UN troops between Serbia and Kosovo , because that is the source of the evil .
Milosevic is playing with the West .
He is leading us around by the nose .
And we know it .
He knows all too well that the West places far greater importance on the implications in terms of international law of possible NATO intervention than on actually putting an end to the aggression .
The UN Charter was written in 1945 , at a very different time , and is now out of date in this respect .
We really must make sure that intra-ethnic conflicts do not have to be played out before the international community in this manner .
If we had acted in Sarajevo as NATO wanted us to , Sarajevo would not have remained surrounded , fewer than those hundreds of thousands of people would have been driven out , fewer would have died , and we would not now be faced with the never-ending costs which we are all having to pay .
The problem is that Milosevic knows what he wants and is doing exactly what he wants .
And we 're letting him do it .
That is our problem .
Now he can see a new Dayton on the horizon , and because he can see this new Dayton , we are seeing ethnic cleansing in north west Kosovo .
He is driving out the Albanians who live there because , allegedly , it is the cradle of the Serbian nation and because it is rich in natural resources .
And when he has driven them all out , and only then will he be forced to look for a solution , which we will propose .
This is why we should act now and not leave the people of Kosovo in the lurch .
Mr President , Commissioner , on this occasion I , too , am unable to share our view that Europe has acted in a timely manner .
This time no one can honestly pretend that we did not know something of this sort would happen .
And it is the case that military terror is being used for ethnic cleansing .
It is a fact .
And we reacted too late . For years Albanian resistance in Kosovo was based on non-violence .
We failed to use this time to exert pressure on Milosevic through sanctions , to find a solution .
Shamefully , this time was squandered .
Now there is one point which I believe to be particularly important . We must not only exert this pressure , we must maintain it until one basic right has been accepted by everyone , including the Serbian leadership - the right to return .
He cannot drive out as many Albanians as he will have to allow to return .
We must get this through , it is a really crucial point .
How is it that Milosevic is able to act in this way ?
Because he controls the media like a dictator .
It is my view that the European Union should consider what it can do for the Serbs , for the population of Serbia , to show our sympathy and our regret .
Our policy should be directed against the leadership but , of course , not against the Serbian people .
But they have become hostages because they do not know what is going on .
I wonder whether there is not some instrument we could use to tackle the situation , for example by creating an alternative stream of public opinion in Serbia .
I am thinking of a model such as the Radio Free Europe of the past , by which we could give the population of Serbia access to accurate information .
Then I believe that the leadership in Belgrade would not be able to act in the way it is doing now and we would be nearer to achieving our goal of achieving peace , democracy and human rights for everyone in the area - for Albanians and Serbians alike .
Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner van den Broek , ladies and gentlemen , the Commissioner said that Milosevic 's words in the past were not enough : a wonderful euphemism for what in Italy is known as a tall story .
Milosevic could be compared to the personality we in Italy call Pinocchio , meaning a liar , an out and out liar , as occurred in the past .
Commissioner , let us call a spade a spade !
This morning I heard Milosevic himself say in English that civilians had not been harmed , that the special forces only intervened against terrorists .
Here is further proof of how Milosevic is Pinocchio , that is to say , a liar , Commissioner !
It is not just what you said , that Milosevic 's words are not enough : Milosevic 's words are worthless !
You also told us that there is a condition which has not been observed .
And what condition is that ?
Only the most important , the immediate withdrawal of the special forces .
The very fragile compromise reached between Milosevic and Yeltsin does not consider the most important point : the withdrawal of the special forces .
The truth is that Milosevic wants to buy time , with the acquiescence - if not with the approval - of the international community , as has occurred in the past .
We treated him like Bosnia 's best negotiator , the torturer and dictator Milosevic ; well , now we tell him that it is also alright to keep the special forces to continue the deportation and ethnic cleansing of Albanians , but with all this the poor Albanian community is yearning for the old unforgotten Marshal Tito : need I say more !
Mr President , both of the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner made some interesting points .
I think that we must not move away from two fundamental principles : on the Serbian side there is the question of the independence of Kosovo and democratic rights , which goes beyond the national issue , the issue of the borders of Yugoslavia . On the Albanian side there is the question of respect for borders by the European Union , Russia , the United States and by both communities .
On the basis of these two principles , boundaries can clearly established by the international community and the two sides can be reconciled .
I too believe that the discussions taking place in Russia are sending out a positive message that could be taken on board .
However , I wish to make three points .
The first point is that we must pay particular attention to what is happening in the Balkans .
We cannot set up borders in the Balkans which reflect the nationality of each community that lives there . The reasons for this are , firstly , because this very nationality is in doubt and , secondly , because the borders are so short , and the situation so fragmented , that we will turn the Balkans into a sieve .
Are we to set up borders for Kosovo and then erect borders around the Serbian minority living in Kosovo ?
That is the first issue .
We must understand the Balkans and their special place within Europe .
The second issue is that we have heard a lot about Milosevic - with which I agree .
We have heard about Milosevic , and about Tudjman and about Izetbekovic and the International Court .
But tell me one political power in Serbia that holds a different position .
Even Tzuganovic in Montenegro does not put forward an alternative position in Kosovo .
This is important for us to understand the whole issue as a problem for the Serbian people itself and for us to deal with anxieties and problems .
The third point is that , with the measures against Yugoslavia , there is a danger , and I am addressing this comment to Mr van den Broek , that some of the refugees from Crna and elsewhere , who are now in Yugoslavia , will leave for the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and then we will have more enormous problems .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if there is one thing practically everyone in this Parliament agrees on , it is that the behaviour of the regime in Belgrade is so shameless and repressive that effective international action must be taken .
We therefore fully support the international pressure that is being applied to the regime , in as far as diplomatic , political and economic initiatives are concerned . However , if the international community believes that there are situations - and this is most definitely the case here - where military action must be considered , this must take place with the utmost care .
In this context , ladies and gentlemen , I have two serious difficulties with our joint resolution .
The first problem is that the resolution contains no reference whatsoever to the institutional framework within which a solution , a political solution , has to be found for Kosovo .
In particular , it does not say that a solution must be sought within the existing Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
The arguments which have been developed in the direction of the right to self-determination for nations , or in the direction of " we must leave everything to the negotiations ' , are dangerous and not at all convincing . They create the impression towards both sides that almost everything is possible , and that no matter what happens or what solutions are aimed for , we will always be behind the Albanians .
It seems to me beyond dispute that the Albanians should have a right to self-determination , but not in every conceivable context .
My second major problem is that a possible military intervention is not made subject to a Security Council decision .
Ladies and gentlemen , this creates a dangerous precedent .
If the UN Security Council does not give its assent , and countries start acting autonomously towards others , then this is , first of all , a clear violation of the UN manifesto . In this situation you would , in fact , have a kind of indirect declaration of war .
Secondly , you should also look at what you would achieve with military intervention .
As far as we are concerned , we absolutely believe that all forms of military action are possible , but only as a conditio sine qua non within the UN framework .
In conclusion , we welcome the Russian initiative .
However , we are not naive : we are aware of the fact that if the pressure is not maintained , it could easily lead to nothing .
Mr President , the situation in Kosovo is untenable and unacceptable .
The so-called willingness of the regime in Belgrade to start talking to the Albanians may sound beautiful in Moscow , but the hard reality is one of brutal repression and ethnic cleansing .
Milosevic is still not prepared to withdraw his troops from Kosovo , and under the pretext of combating violent terrorists , the entire population is being attacked , with streams of refugees as a deliberate result .
Incidentally , this strengthens separatism rather than weakens it .
The regime in Belgrade seems indifferent to international pressure .
Sanctions do not stop it from continuing its violent actions , despite the rhetoric on political settlements .
More pressure is needed whereby , as far as we are concerned , military intervention should not be ruled out .
NATO has rightly sounded a first military warning this week .
We support the preparations for possible further action .
The results from the Moscow dialogue are no reason to abandon this strategy as yet . The objective of this strategy should not only be to ensure the cessation of violence , but also to bring about real negotiations , where , as mentioned before , the special units must be withdrawn from Kosovo as a precondition .
I also think that the international observers must be allowed into the region to see what has really been happening , and also to make contact with the people .
The European Council - and I think this is an important aspect of our policy on Kosovo - has made clear what the objective of such negotiations and talks should be : the restoration of Kosovo 's autonomy , or to put it more precisely , a special status with a large degree of autonomy .
This sends a clear message to the parties concerned , and to the separatists too .
The independence of Kosovo is not on the agenda , as far we are concerned .
This will lead to quite a discussion in Kosovo itself , because I have the impression that many Albanians who live in Kosovo have come much closer to the idea of independence as a result of the hostilities than they were a few months ago .
There is another important point - and this is the last point I want to raise - and that is the discussion on a mandate for possible military action in the context of NATO .
Some people think that this does not require the involvement of the UN , others believe it to be an absolute precondition .
In any case , my group wants to see the UN involved .
We would prefer it if the UN legitimized a possible military action , and this should therefore be advanced as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , what is missing so far in this discussion is a clear expression of how admirable the Albanian people in Kosovo have been and still are today .
For years and years - going back to a period far beyond the one we are currently dealing with - they have endured with incredible patience - I would say an almost Ghandi-like patience - whatever their oppressors have thrown at them .
This has been the pattern for years .
Statements are now being made criticizing the fact that young Albanians have quite simply lost their heads and reacted in military fashion , but we really have no grounds for criticism when we consider Albanians ' past record .
That is my first important point .
My second point is the fact that all too little is being said about the most essential aspect of the problem .
The real crimes are being committed by the so-called voluntary units of the Arkan and others which were previously responsible for killings first in Croatia and then in Bosnia and are now all in Kosovo .
This is a second factor which we must stress .
It is simply not enough that Moscow has now said some may be sent back .
In fact , Yeltsin has yet to give his authorization .
We must once and for all call for these so-called guerillas , the Chechniks , to leave .
They are one of the major evils in the whole business .
Today we are discussing the future of Kosovo .
There is , however , one thing I should like to emphasize . We are democrats and it is time we finally gave the inhabitants of Kosovo the chance to determine their own future .
It is something they have been unable to do for decades and , like other peoples , they are entitled to say how they want to live .
So we must have the courage to speak openly and to demand that dramatic action should be taken at last , for I believe this is a situation which could become just as bad as Bosnia .
Mr President , let me protest once again .
The Commission , Commissioner van den Broek in particular , decides halfway through the debate on a matter as important as Kosovo to walk out and leave the question half-finished .
This is a disgraceful attitude showing great disrespect for this Parliament .
Mr President , I do of course understand that the Members are unhappy that the Commissioner responsible cannot remain until the end of the debate .
It is understandable .
On the other hand , we would ask you to understand that the dates of trips made by Commission members have to be set before Parliament 's agenda is finalized .
Mr van den Broek accepted an invitation to Slovakia and so he has had to leave now .
He spoke earlier and expressed the Commission 's views on this matter .
I am here , I admit , simply as a representative of the Commission and I do not intend to take part in the discussion .
I would , however , ask you to understand that the Commission also has to work in difficult conditions .
Mr President , I also wanted to tell my colleague how , immediately after the vote , Mr van den Broek expressed his regret that the debate was postponed due to his appointment in Bratislava .
I understand what Mr Caccavale is saying , but we must still have some understanding for the work the Commissioner does .
It is not that I , by definition , want to defend him , but the Commissioner has a very real job to do , and was simply unable to cancel the appointment in Bratislava .
Ladies and gentlemen , neither the Bureau nor this House is responsible for the way in which the Commission is organized .
That is the Commission 's own prerogative .
Let us simply note that fact and continue the debate .
Mr President , there is a war going on in Kosovo .
It is based , among other things , on the Serbian national romantic image of Kosovo as some kind of ancient homeland .
On these grounds , Serbia maintains its absolute sovereignty over the area , in spite of the fact that more than 90 % of the population of Kosovo are Kosovo Albanians .
That is why it cannot be ruled out that one of Milosevic 's aims is to get the Kosovo people to flee .
But he must not be allowed to succeed .
To prevent this , the EU and NATO must get Milosevic to realize that continued Serbian aggression will not be tolerated . In this regard I appreciate Mr Henderson 's decisiveness .
However , it will not be easy .
Milosevic has shown several times in the past that he carefully watches the other players ' hands , and that he does not negotiate until he has lost the military battle .
After the meeting with President Yeltsin , Milosevic said he was willing to negotiate .
But negotiations have never before prevented Milosevic from stepping up his military efforts .
Even if a Russian veto blocks the Security Council , the EU and NATO can station troops on the borders of Kosovo .
But what would we gain by that ?
With good refugee camps you counteract destabilization , but at the same time you risk encouraging people to leave Kosovo .
Those who flee know that they will get protection , food and shelter in the camps they go to .
Another task could be to try to prevent the smuggling of weapons to the Kosovo Liberation Army .
That would just be playing into Milosevic 's hands and be parallel to the arms blockade which for a long time kept the Bosnian Muslims at a military disadvantage .
My conclusion therefore is that not much of value would be achieved by border controls alone .
Perhaps Moscow 's position on the Security Council is primarily aimed at gaining advantages for Russia in exchange for Russian consent .
But the EU and NATO cannot accept having their hands tied under any circumstances .
The attacks on Kosovo must be stopped .
If Milosevic succeeds in crushing all resistance and opposition there , all negotiations on Kosovo 's future status will be meaningless .
What the citizens of Europe expect of the EU and NATO is that no country in Europe should be allowed to restrict freedom in any area of our part of the world .
Mr President , as this will be my last opportunity I would like first to congratulate the British presidency .
You have run a great presidency .
Well done !
The fact that it has not been possible to deliver humanitarian aid in any structured manner to people in the Kosovo region does not reflect very well on us in this House .
I am a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , which was assured by the Commission that early warning systems had been put in place by the European Union to deal with humanitarian aid missions of this sort .
Clearly this has not been the case and must be viewed as an abject failure for the so-called humanitarian aid programmes the EU is supposed to operate on occasions like this .
From an Irish perspective , we should assist in humanitarian missions to the region .
We should not have to wait for the United Nations in New York to give us the go-ahead on this issue .
This is a European problem on the borders of the European Union and , if the integrity of the European Union is to remain intact , it must be resolved by the Member States of the Union .
There can be no neutrality when we are confronted with a brutal genocidal dictator such as Slobodan Milosevic .
He must be forced to observe the Dayton Peace Agreement and international law in practice as well as in theory .
We must not stand on the sidelines in a disjointed and idle fashion and allow Slobodan Milosevic to run rings around the 15 Member States as he has done in the past .
Ireland must be prepared to play a constructive and positive role within the framework of the European Union to assist in solving the crisis in Kosovo and in guaranteeing that Slobodan Milosevic does not achieve his aim of bringing about the genocide of the native Albanians in Kosovo .
We in this House watched murder and rape in Bosnia .
We appear to be doing the same in Kosovo .
It is a shame on this House that we do so .
Mr President , the people responsible for the conflict in Kosovo are quite clearly the Yugoslav regime and Milosevic .
It is not particularly surprising that after years of severe oppression people should finally take up arms to fight for their cultural and democratic rights .
What we now see is a scenario which is disturbingly like the one we witnessed in Bosnia . The civilian population is being driven out , people are being herded together in prison camps in certain places , and gangs of criminal thugs are being let loose to terrorize the civilian population .
That is , of course , why every pressure must be brought to bear on the Yugoslav regime .
Ultimately , it is impossible to rule out the need also to use military means , although that is , of course , always the last resort .
What I think is important in that case is that there should be a clear UN mandate .
I think taking military action without a mandate from the UN could be a very dangerous development for two reasons . Firstly , of course , there is the reason of principle , namely that it is doubtful whether it is right to authorize others to take militarily action in other conflicts .
Secondly , the really great risk with this conflict is that it will spread to other areas in the Balkans , to neighbouring countries .
The risk of it spreading would probably be much greater if anyone acted without the support of the UN .
That is why , in spite of all the difficulties , we must now seek a clear UN mandate .
That is our main task .
Furthermore , I think the preferred option should be the restoration of democratic rights and the rights of the Albanian people within the framework of a Federal Republic of Yugoslavia with restored autonomy for Kosovo .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , much has been said in this debate , but some of it represents a real challenge .
If it is true that the people of Kosovo cannot easily be afforded the right of self determination because of the overall situation in the region , then a second conclusion also has to be drawn .
As long as Milosevic stays in power it is , of course , extremely difficult to tell the Albanians that they must continue to live under the yoke of Milosevic .
That is the problem .
It means that if we take ourselves seriously we must do everything we can to get rid of Milosevic .
As long as Milosevic stays in power the Albanians will want to leave .
That is only to be expected .
The problem is that our objectives can only be achieved once Milosevic and his terrorism have been removed .
That is my first point .
My second point , Doris , with all due respect , is that if we do not accept that we are bound by international law we can do nothing .
In other words , we must do everything in our power to show Russia and China that they cannot simply say , " Oh , you know , what is happening in Kosovo is not really so bad . It is what we did in Chechnya . '
Or in the case of China , " It is not so bad , it is what we are doing in Tibet . '
We must tell them quite clearly that there will be no economic cooperation and no support for Russia if they support Milosevic .
In other words , we must secure a UN resolution which permits military intervention and there must be no doubt about it .
We have to do this through the UN because we cannot allow what has happened in Chechnya , in Tibet or in Bosnia to happen in Kosovo .
The only way to proceed is through the UN .
But we must give ourselves the means to be able to say to the Russians and the Chinese , " Enough is enough . '
Mr President , we must not lose sight of the fact that we are not just debating Kosovo here , because , of course , Milosevic has been using these hostilities as an opportunity to tighten his grip at home and to withdraw freedoms from the Serbian people .
Clearly , our approach to Kosovo has to be part of a consistent long-term strategy for dealing with former Yugoslavia . If we allow Milosevic to get away with what he is getting away with in Kosovo , he will also endeavour to do that closer to Belgrade .
Equally , Tudjman will do the same in Croatia .
So it has to be part of a longer-term strategy .
Having said that , we must be aware that , if there is military intervention in Kosovo , it will mean NATO declaring war on a European state .
We have to avoid that at all costs , if at all possible .
The consequences are too horrific to contemplate .
So , first of all , our strategy has to be to keep the international community together to ensure that we all speak with one voice .
The experiences of 1914-1918 have shown the folly of trying to divide international opinion and , in particular , we do not want a proxy war between NATO and Russia .
Equally , we must ensure that all the states talk honestly in their approach to Kosovo .
It is not enough to demand military action if you are not prepared to provide the necessary forces , because we will have to have effective burden-sharing in any military action .
Some countries which talk hawkishly are not prepared to support their words with actions .
Secondly , we must not undermine the message : ' autonomy but not independence ' .
Any other talk is irresponsible folly : it will only worsen the situation and cause bloodshed , not stop it .
Equally , as part of that , we must recognize in Kosovo that we have to guarantee the rights of the Serbs as well as the Albanians , because while fear dominates Kosovo , it will be impossible to find a solution .
In addition to demanding that the KLA withdraw , we must also demand that the security forces withdraw , but it has to be both .
We must talk tough and act tough with the KLA as much as with the security forces .
We must also give greater support to Albania and Montenegro .
Because their governments have been supporting this we must guarantee their borders .
Our first objective - and I support the conclusions of the Cardiff Summit - must be a cessation of hostilities to allow international observers into Kosovo to view the situation for themselves .
But we must not lose an even-handed approach , because it will achieve naught if we make the Serbs in Kosovo fear for their future as much as the Albanians .
Mr President , it would be rather easy if Parliament could count on the will of the protagonists to find a solution to the problem .
Unfortunately , we cannot count on the will of the protagonists and we do not even have the adequate means to impose our will on the protagonists .
It is on this basis that we must rationally begin .
And then we are forced to rely on the talks .
It is true that Milosevic is not very trustworthy , it is true that he did not agree to withdraw the security forces , but if it were possible to implement what has been granted , the presence of the international observers and the Red Cross and the existing means would probably be enough to calm the situation and enable a solution to be found .
This is , in my view , the only attitude possible , the only rational view that we can take : spes contra spem , someone said .
The least we can do , therefore , is to pursue this objective through negotiation .
There is no other way for the European Union than to rely on NATO for military pressure and on the UN for pressure from the international community .
We must keep these two points of reference and try to urge , to pressure the parties so that the negotiations are real , genuine and internationally guaranteed .
Europe can do no more than that and it cannot go about it in any other way , because it does not have a political lead .
Where is the European mediation ?
Where is the initiative taken by Europe , where is González ?
I don 't mean González as a person , I mean where is Europe through González .
There is not one , it does not exist .
So we must rely on the UN , we must rely on international pressure , we must rely on negotiation , bearing in mind , unfortunately , what is a depressing fact for us : our paltry means to influence this situation .
Mr President , in less than three month , the sanctions against Serbia have been lifted and reinstated again ; this is a sad state of affairs .
The KLA is meanwhile accusing Dr Rugova of being a traitor to the national Albanian cause , and is taking advantage of the resulting confusion .
In Albania , the mafia is raiding arms depots under the patronage of the dubious Berisha , and is supplying weapons to the KLA .
The political wing of the KLA is doing everything it can to undermine the image of the moderate Rugova in order to qualify itself for the negotiating table , at which it will arrive with an extreme demand : independence , or perhaps a Greater Albania .
It should not be allowed to get as far as this because we would then be heading towards a Balkan war .
I have a number of specific questions for the Council .
Does the Council share the opinion that Serbia will only be prepared to negotiate once it has certainty regarding its borders , including Kosovo , and the elimination of the KLA ?
Can the Council confirm that it also intends to weaken the KLA and strengthen the position of Rugova ?
Mr van den Broek was very clear about this .
Does the Council believe that the recent NATO actions have contributed to this objective ?
In March , in this very place , I asked Mr Henderson to send military observers to the border between Albania and Kosovo .
He did not respond at that time .
Is the Council now prepared to send strict observers to the area into which the KLA is smuggling weapons and provoking conflicts ?
A great deal more could be said about this subject , but I will confine myself to these questions .
Mr President , in a climate of anti-Serbian feeling running at fever pitch , proclaiming the mistakes made by Milosevic - and he has made mistakes , criminal mistakes - it is impossible to deal calmly and prudently , as called for by Mr van den Broek , with the horrific crisis which is smouldering in Kosovo .
We need to look at it with a clear head .
There are forces inside Kosovo , outside Kosovo , outside Europe , who have threatened military intervention as intimidation and blackmail , or have threatened to carry out military intervention which would dismember present-day Yugoslavia , with repercussions throughout the Balkans , in order to create puppet states that will play their game and serve their interests .
This is not what the people of Europe , the people in the Balkans , or the Albanians in Kosovo , want .
They all want a peaceful settlement , which means respect for the borders that were established as a result of wars and were guaranteed by the map of the UN , just as they are guaranteed by the Helsinki agreements .
They want a peaceful settlement with respect for all minorities ' rights , and they want with independence without separation , because otherwise we will never find a lasting settlement in Europe .
Finally , it strikes me that no-one seems to be aware that conditions are currently being imposed on Serbia , on Milosevic , which , by definition , are unacceptable .
Where is he to withdraw his forces from ?
From Kosovo .
But Kosovo is an integral part of the Yugoslavian Federation .
What state , what government would accept not being allowed to have an army in one of its component parts ?
This condition cannot , by definition , be complied with .
It has been imposed on purpose to give a pretext for intervention .
We are categorically opposed to any form of military intervention because it would have horrendous consequences .
This Parliament has the power to throw all its political weight behind a peaceful settlement .
Only then will it be fulfilling its mandate ...
( The President makes the speaker stand down )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is the time to send two clear messages .
The first is a message to the Council because , for the first time , in one week there has been a Council of Ministers , on Monday , which adopted a common position ; a meeting of the contact group ; a meeting of the NATO Council of Defence Ministers ; and a meeting of the Council of Europe .
And whereas we have always complained - rightly , I believe - that decisions were never taken quickly enough , on this occasion we can say that everybody was in tune and there is a definite will to say : " Things have got to this stage and they cannot be allowed to go any further ' . I think that fact has to be welcomed because it will help us to develop our common foreign and security policy , which is so important .
And it is linked with the second message . I think the second message essentially has to be addressed to Mr Milosevic .
People here have been asking what has happened to our Mr González .
I have to say - not in defence of Felipe González , who has told me of his interest in this resolution - that the problem for the EU and OSCE envoy is that Milosevic does not want to see him .
Why does he not want to see him ?
Because when he was in Belgrade , just after the rigged Yugoslav elections , he managed to get a complaint made and Milosevic had to back down .
Those are the reasons why Milosevic will not accept , but they are not reasons for saying that we do not have a presence .
I think there is an important difference , apart from our extreme fondness for severe self-criticism .
I think Milosevic needs to be told very clearly that a dictator - who has changed from the previous communist terminology to nationalist terminology - has no authority to kill his own fellow citizens , quite apart from the fact that he is already exploiting them in all sorts of ways . He has no such right either in international law or in human law .
He has to be told that this is his last chance , and that it is not the fault of the Serbian people , but that the political responsibility rests squarely with him .
I think we have to encourage the Council and the Commission to carry on down the path we have started on .
Mr President , first of all I must congratulate the British presidency on the very complete and comprehensive Cardiff declaration .
I think that all those currently involved in Kosovo , especially the Serbs , must realize that this Summit decision has the unanimous backing of the fifteen Member States . They must also realize that the political will exists to implement the measures decided upon by the fifteen in Cardiff .
The leaders in Belgrade need reflect on their heavy responsibilities towards the muchafflicted Serbian people and to consider where the imprudent policy of armed confrontation , the responsibility for which lies in the political and military regime of present-day Yugoslavia , is leading the Serbian people and the people of Montenegro .
We all hope that yesterday 's Moscow pact will be put into practice .
Both Europe and NATO , however , are determined to take whatever steps may be necessary against anyone undermining the pact .
We have learned the lessons of Bosnia .
Turning now to the people of Kosovo , I wish to emphasize the importance of the European call for self-restraint and for support for Dr Rugova .
I also wish to give equal prominence to the common and unanimous position of Cardiff , which is that the European Union remains steadfastly opposed to the idea of independence and that it will continue to support a special regime for Kosovo , which will provide for broad autonomy within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Finally , we must understand that both Albania and FYROM need substantial support , especially FYROM , as an attempt to get closer to FYROM is being made by Yugoslavia , which is exploiting the problems this state is having with the Albanian minority in the Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia .
Mr President , I accept that the mandate is a problem .
But if what is happening today in Kosovo was happening just across the border in Bosnia , we would not be hesitating to use military force .
We have to be absolutely clear in our own minds that what we now call Yugoslavia is a fiction .
What we are really talking about is Serbia and a province , absorbed by Serbia in dubious circumstances , that is 92 % Albanian .
We have to be clear and find a quick resolution to that mandate problem because otherwise every month we spend debating the nature of our moral right to intervene , there is a blood price paid by the people of Kosovo .
Therefore the key is to regard this , as Mr Titley indicated , as a problem of Serbia and of the regime .
The one thing which has been clear in the whole crisis of former Yugoslavia is that Belgrade has regularly made assessments of Europe 's willingness to act and concluded that we would always act late and weakly .
This House should state very clearly to Belgrade : ' Do not believe that we are incapable of learning ; do not believe that we cannot tell the difference between a regime and the Serbian people ; and do not believe that at the end of the day we will not be prepared to intervene ' .
It would be helpful if this House now or on some later occasion cut through the diplomatic language which is necessary for the Council and Commission with a view to action of a qualitatively different kind .
The international community will intervene .
What we mean is that if this goes on Europe will fight and Europe will be right , even if that means the death of our own soldiers in former Yugoslavia .
Mr Milosevic and the Serbs need to understand that and if we fail to make it clear , the blood price for our indecision will be paid in Kosovo by innocent people as it was paid in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Mr President , I have taken note with great interest of the statement from the Cardiff Council , in particular the four demands .
I find the order in which they were put extremely important .
I would like to ask Mr Henderson whether he wants to keep this order , because we will have to ensure , first of all , that Serbia withdraws its troops to Belgrade before we can invite Dr Rugova to resume the negotiations .
If we want to destroy Dr Rugova 's reputation completely , we must force him to enter into negotiations now , without conditions and despite the fact that the troops are still there .
Then we will destroy Dr Rugova 's reputation completely .
I think we have to be extremely careful that these conditions , as formulated by the Council and rightly mentioned in this order , will be maintained .
Mr President , dialogue with President Yeltsin was mentioned .
The question is whether this will lead to further Russian cooperation .
The President-in-Office gave the impression that this would be the case .
Is it true that after the failure of Russia to make a real contribution to the talks with Milosevic , they will be willing to agree to military intervention , if necessary ?
This strikes me as a good thing , but a little more clarity would be in order here .
In any case , I also agree that assent from the UN Security Council is needed , but not on the backs of hundreds of thousands of victims .
We can say that it is wonderful that we will always respect the Chinese veto , but surely we do not wish to sacrifice huge numbers of human lives to this principle .
This would be a little too theoretical .
I am very interested in what people are thinking when they say that the Kosovo Liberation Army should withdraw .
I think this almost qualifies for the " remark of the month ' prize .
Where should these troops withdraw to ?
They do not come from Albania ; perhaps they come from Western Europe , but mostly they come from the region itself .
Surely you cannot in all seriousness believe that this is consistent ?
The withdrawal of the Liberation Army and the withdrawal of the troops ?
Mr President , I would like to advise the President-in-Office to consider his predecessor Douglas Hurd as a frightening example .
I hope he will not use Realpolitik the way Mr Hurd did .
In this respect , please do not listen to my colleague Mr Titley , who deserves the " Douglas Hurd prize ' for Realpolitik .
Mr President , the situation in Kosovo represents a security problem of the first order for Europe .
The tragedy has proceeded according to the familiar pattern of Serbian politics we have already seen played out in Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina : targeted displacement of the population and massive streams of refugees shifting the crisis to neighbouring countries in the region .
So far the NATO manoeuvres have been purely symbolic in nature .
The flying ban imposed on the Yugoslavian Airline JAT , and confirmed by the Council of Europe , is a feeble gesture .
The fact that in Cardiff the European Council left open the carefully circumscribed possibility of a military option demonstrates the extent of the international community 's paralysis is in relation to the crisis in Kosovo .
This crisis management is an embarrassing reminder of our reactions to Iraq and Saddam Hussein .
By waiting for the Security Council 's green light on military intervention we have effectively provided Russia with a means of preventing NATO 's involvement and , at the same time , we have given the Serbian leadership additional time by allowing the meetings between Yeltsin and Milosevic .
The withdrawal of the Serbian Special Police from Kosovo was made conditional upon the actions of the Albanian underground organization , the UCK .
The conflict within the EU on whether military intervention by NATO should take place with or without a mandate from the Security Council has given Milosevic more time in which to continue his policy of expulsions unhindered .
In these circumstances , the call to the international community to use every means at its disposal to put an end to the attacks against the civilian population is in danger of remaining completely unheeded .
The start of negotiations between Belgrade and representatives of the Kosovo Albanians should be made conditional upon a moratorium on the fighting .
The statements made by the European Parliament are a feeble substitute for the lack of political will being shown by the EU Member States to avoid another tragedy in the Balkans .
Mr President , I am not pleading for border changes either .
I would like to make it quite clear that much of what has been said here is historically and legally incorrect .
If what Mr Ephremedis has said were true , then today the Ottoman Crescent would still be fluttering over the Acropolis .
We must be quite clear that there have always been changes , throughout history , and that under current international law peaceful changes are quite permissible .
In 1878 , exactly 120 years ago , in Prizrem in present day Kosovo the Albanians founded the Prizrem League in a bid to reassert themselves as the oldest civilized nation in Europe in the face of the crimes of the Ottoman Empire .
At the Berlin Congress , which documented the failure of the Europe of the day , they were simply swept under the carpet .
Their right of self determination and their very existence were ignored .
They were not discovered again until the Balkan wars , when they became useful as pawns in a game of chess .
That is how the borders we are discussing today were fixed , and so Mr Cohn-Bendit is right .
We must make sure that the regime in Serbia changes and that Mr Milosevic disappears , because it is impossible to persuade a family in which several members have been murdered to carry on living under the same roof as the murderer .
It is a quite absurd idea and one which could only have taken shape in the mind of a politician or a bureaucrat .
I must say this quite unequivocally .
We must see things as they really are .
People are being systematically murdered and expelled and it has been happening for eight years .
The situation has indeed deteriorated now , but this campaign against the majority population in Kosovo has been going on for eight years .
If Mrs van Bladel keeps saying that our first priority must be to counter the resistance movement in Kosovo - and I myself am no supporter of violence either - I must remind her that having turned our backs on Mr Rugova and his peaceful resistance for many years it is now somewhat hypocritical of us to attack people who are simply trying to save their own lives .
I have to inform you that I have received six draft amendments , submitted pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon tomorrow .
Mr President , I would just like to ask whether it is now common practice in discussions with the Council for the Council merely to issue a prepared statement at the start , to continue to be present during the debate , which we welcome , but then to leave the Chamber without making a further statement , or any further involvement in the debate ?
It is completely pointless !
Mr Posselt , you know as well as I do that it is for the Council to decide whether or not it wishes to speak at the end of a debate .
If the Council shows no inclination to speak , we can only note that fact .
In vitro diagnosis
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0225 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive on in vitro diagnostic medical devices ( C4-0178 / 98-95 / 0013 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Pompidou ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the suggestion of the European Parliament the Council has made a whole range of important improvements to the original European Commission text .
This is very welcome , for this is a very important matter .
However , there are two points I would like to raise which my group believes to be of particular importance and which are still missing from the text , although we introduced them at the first reading .
The first , Commissioner , relates to an ongoing dispute with you , and that is the issue of labelling in the broadest sense of the term .
It is imperative that the instructions for medical products to be used by individual members of the public be translated into the languages of the various Member States in which the products are to be marketed .
This is absolutely imperative since these products have to be used in a very precise way .
Faulty diagnoses which might result from incorrect use must be prevented at all costs , so it is vital that all possible sources of error are eliminated .
And this naturally includes making sure that the public can read , in their own language , the instructions on how to use these products and the consequences of using them incorrectly .
The second point I would like to raise here is , in fact , the last point which was discussed in the presence of Mr Pompidou .
In vitro diagnostics use very special materials , tissues , cells and other substances of human origin .
The nature of this material obviously requires that it be handled with particular care and particular precautions .
I am delighted that this option is available .
The amendment tabled by the Greens will provide a guarantee of data protection and guard against the type of discrimination which might result from knowledge which could be gained from these diagnostic methods and tests , in terms of the fundamental genetic characteristics and predispositions of the individuals involved .
For this reason it is very important indeed for us to make this improvement in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the current phase of European integration , and particularly now with the Cardiff summit , the talk is once again of much greater subsidiarity .
Subsidiarity means , for example , that general economic conditions should primarily be regulated by individual Member States .
It also means , of course , that although these arrangements are not standardized , they must be mutually recognized by all parties involved .
For if this were not the case , our most important goal , the single market , would quite simply not function .
To this extent , the principle of complete technical harmonization which formed the basis for the corresponding 1985 directive is now obsolete .
This is something which Mr Donnelly from the Socialist Group emphasized quite specifically in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
In terms of technical legislation , the " new approach ' is gaining considerable ground .
All it means is subsidiarity .
The single market should not be hampered , but it should not be over-regulated either .
However , if it proves impossible for a matter to be regulated or to be regulated adequately at Member State level , then we must proceed jointly to regulate in a uniform way at least the essential elements , only the essential elements in fact , at European level .
In vitro diagnostics is one such matter .
This draft directive represents a further step towards the completion of the single market , in particular for medical products .
But it is proving to be an area fraught with tensions .
On the one hand , we must allow producers free access to the European domestic market , but on the other we have to take into account health protection , particularly with regard to the use of these medical tests by individuals .
Nevertheless , this must not be allowed to become a pretext for setting up market barriers and anticompetitive measures .
During the very lengthy period it took to formulate this common position in the Council , we had to acknowledge that there was an increasing trend in some Member States towards excluding in vitro diagnostics from the single market .
In our view , that is the main reason for adopting this directive , and thereby creating a single market for these medical products , as quickly as possible .
We know that the manufacturers are waiting eagerly for free access to the market .
For this reason it is important that the amendments which have been submitted are also accepted by the Council and that the directive should be formally ratified , perhaps even before the summer recess .
The Council has already accommodated us on several points .
At any rate 36 of the 50 amendments submitted following the first reading have been accepted .
Nevertheless , we would like to stress that there is still room for improvement in the basic approach .
For this reason I , too , submitted several amendments to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , designed to dismantle the bureaucratic devices which are so costly to business .
The most important thing is that statistical requirements should not become preconditions for the introduction of the products themselves .
But this addition in Article 10 ( 2 ) must also apply in a consistent and logical manner to the provisions of Article 21 ( 2 ) .
What we are dealing with here , however , is a fundamental phenomenon .
Discussions on disputed single market guidelines often last a very long time .
When the matter comes before Parliament , therefore , we often have to reach our decisions very quickly if we want to make the internal market a reality for the citizens of Europe .
This should also be taken into account in any future reform of the Treaty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in his recommendation for second reading , Mr Pompidou proposes that we give an opinion on six amendments , amendments which , I would remind you , were adopted virtually unanimously by the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on 3 June .
The measures , which consist mainly of providing specific rules for in vitro diagnostic medical devices , in other words the examination , for medical purposes , of tissues or substances from the human body should , I feel , attract broad approval .
Whilst the Commission 's directive seemed extremely technical , we must applaud the rapporteur who has tried hard , on the one hand , to use common sense - a rare quality - and on the other to protect human dignity in an area of utmost importance , that of public health .
Having sought , and obtained , a wide consensus at first reading , Mr Pompidou contents himself with amending a few details of the common position , with the aim of completing the process so that the directive can be implemented as quickly as possible and this is an aim which we share .
We thus support the six amendments proposed by the rapporteur , insofar as it seems to us necessary to notify the relevant authorities regarding the introduction of all new products onto the market as this thus enables some form of product monitoring , and also necessary to fight against pirating and copying of products or medical procedures , thus giving a guarantee of quality and safety to the users .
The need for rapid legislation in the area of medical devices manufactured utilizing products derived from human tissues or cells is clear if we want to avoid the risk of misuse .
With regard to the devices covered by Annex 2 and those designed for self-testing , the possibility for Member States to ask to be informed of the data allowing identification and directions for use should not be a prior condition for a product to be put on the market and / or put into service .
This would cause a doubling up of work and would mean an administrative overload with regard to the decision to conform to the directive .
It would seem to us wise to leave the decision regarding the translation of instructions to the Member States , except with regard to self-testing .
Although testing is generally the role of doctors , in view of the development of self-testing , it is appropriate to ensure that care is taken by requiring that all users can read the instructions in their own language so that they clearly understand what they are doing , aware that any error could prove to be catastrophic .
In view of the tragedy a baby carrying the trisomy 21 gene represents , it is appropriate to add to the Annex 2 list the procedures enabling the detection of all risk of this illness .
In conclusion , Mr Pompidou 's approach , which consisted in seeking a balance between the objectives of freedom of movement and those of the protection of public health seems to us well-founded and impeccably implemented , which encourages us to give him our unreserved support .
Mr President , this report has followed a rather arduous course , but it has at long last reached the final straight , thanks amongst other things to the determination of the rapporteur .
The European Parliament introduced a series of amendments to the initial proposal to specify the rules for in vitro diagnostic medical devices to allow their marketing ; in the past these devices were excluded .
In Italy , in particular , we have problems with HIV , HAA , and HCV , which are the markers of hepatitis and AIDS .
In the common position , the Council took on board nearly all of our amendments , which is why we can say that we are partially satisfied .
Now we must rapidly conclude the legislative procedure , because the use of these devices is essential in diagnosing diseases and the predisposition to certain genetic disorders , and in evaluating the patient 's state of health .
This equipment is , therefore , very important in avoiding diagnostic errors and in putting into effect the health protection programme in the sector of in vitro diagnostic devices .
Madam President , the vastly important contribution of medical devices to the quality of public health service provision has been acknowledged here . Nevertheless , in order to demonstrate the importance of such devices , I would like to mention , for example , the devices we use in blood groups and blood sub-groups for transfusions , the control of drug compatibility , the contribution of laboratory diagnosis , such as for AIDS and hepatitis .
With very few exceptions , there is no system of controls and regulations in the Member States of the European Union .
As a result , the directive we are debating covers this field and will without doubt contribute to the needs of those industries which produce these devices .
To start with , the proposal was considered constructive , not only as it would have been useful for the reasons I have mentioned , but also as it contained many elements which would have contributed to a better qualitative control of in vitro diagnostic devices .
There were weaknesses in the directive which have been significantly improved in the common position both through Mr Pompidou 's amendments and through my own amendments and those of others . Today there have been other amendments which make it even better .
Firstly , some ill-defined aspects of the Directive have been clarified , as has its relation to other related directives .
Next , the devices of human origin which are used in in-vitro diagnostic methods have been clearly defined , and the number of reagents which are classed under Annex 2 has increased , given that the reagents in this Annex are subject to considerable control .
Moreover , special importance has been attached to reagents used in the home , given that their users are not people with special knowledge and that instruction must therefore be clear and in the user 's mother tongue .
Finally , safety regulations concerning diagnostic devices have become more stringent , as regards both their preparation and use , in order to safeguard the user against various dangers and against certain reagents .
I foresee that this field will increase significantly in the future .
That is why this Directive is of benefit both to the industries that produce the devices and to users , who will be able to use them with confidence .
Madam President , we would have liked to be able to express our thanks to Mr Pompidou in person because working with him was not only a very pleasant , but also a very productive experience , considering the outcome .
But for understandable reasons he cannot be present today .
With an eye on the previous debate , I would wish that Parliament , which in fact laid the foundation stone which prevented Mr Pompidou from presenting this report himself , would sometimes show a little more understanding for members of the Commission who are also subject to these parliamentary vagaries without having a hand in them .
But that is simply a remark which I make with complete confidence in the wisdom of those who set the agenda .
We have a directive in front of us - and I should like to say this to Mr Rübig to prevent any misunderstanding - which sets out the minimum standards that all parties really must adhere to .
This is not , in essence , the old approach of harmonization but , if you like , the new approach whereby Community legislation is used to lay down minimum requirements after which , in the course of reciprocal recognition , other issues can also play a role .
It is , however , absolutely necessary because , we quite clearly cannot work on reciprocal recognition until at least the general rules for the Community have been laid down .
But there is still a long way to go in defining subsidiarity .
The Commission was particularly pleased that in the Council discussions at the Cardiff summit we were able to point to several issues where we believe subsidiarity would have produced a different outcome .
For example , we believe , in contrast to Parliament and the Council , that conditions for animals in zoos should be regulated at national level .
It is not a matter which calls for European regulation .
However , subsidiarity allows of some splendid arguments .
The future directive on in vitro diagnostics , however , will both guarantee the safety and reliability of these products in relation to their application in medicine and strengthen the single market through the standardized requirements which it stipulates .
We welcome the fact that - having already accepted a whole range of amendments submitted by Parliament at first reading which improved the text - we are now also able to accept all the amendments suggested now - although some will still probably have to be improved orally .
These amendments contain clarifications and additions to the directive which are very welcome .
In applying the directive we must bear in mind the pace of technological development .
In any case , we will start by setting out a series of framework conditions within which the industry can work .
But it is impossible to rule out the possibility that we might have to revisit the matter .
Therefore , in implementing the directive , the monitoring of the market by the Member States will have a very important role to play .
We hope that the setting up of a European database , which also springs from a suggestion made by Parliament , will contribute towards this .
In any case , we shall make every effort , in conjunction with the Member States , to set up this database before the directive comes into force .
Rather than going into all the amendments in detail , I should like to mention one in particular , namely Amendment No 2 , which illustrates particularly well how the manufacture of medical products using substances of human origin has to be harmonized at community level .
Naturally , like Parliament , we hope - and according to the information we have , we are almost certain - to be able to convince the Council as soon as possible that these latest amendments are justified , so that we can then complete the legislative process as quickly as possible . I say this because the implementation of these directives is not only in the interests of the single market , but , first and foremost , in the interests of health protection .
Many thanks , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Harmful tax competition
The next item is the report ( A4-0228 / 98 ) by Mr Secchi , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission ' A package to tackle harmful tax competition in the European Union ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0564 - C4-0333 / 98 ) .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , my job is to illustrate a proposal for a resolution on the topic that has been stated , that is , a package of measures aimed at fighting harmful tax competition , a package that has been approved by a large majority of our Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
This committee was able - due , amongst other things , to the work that has been going on for a long time now - to find a solid basis of common ground with regard to the major principles of the new approach that the Commission has proposed in the matter . This has also been possible because of the opportunity that we have had to be in constant touch with Commissioner Monti , and the opportunity of being so involved in defining an extremely delicate matter as it progresses .
Indeed this matter not only closely concerns economic entities but also all citizens and is increasingly gaining in importance as the full effects of Economic and Monetary Union are being felt .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will remember that about a year ago Parliament approved by an overwhelming majority the first resolution on the matter in which there was full endorsement of the idea of elaborating a code of conduct on various tax issues and in particular on the taxation of company profits , a code that has since been created and is already operational , as I will explain in a moment .

Since the proposal of the new approach two years ago by the informal Ecofin Council in Verona in April 1996 , tremendous progress has been made .
I think we can say that the problem has now been clearly brought into focus and that there is agreement on all the procedures that are being proposed to tackle the problem with any hope of success .
Even the European Council in Cardiff that has just ended underlined these concepts in the spirit of encouraging the active continuation of work on the matter .
The package that we are dealing with in today 's debate and in tomorrow 's vote and that is the subject of this resolution was put together last year and presented to the Ecofin Council of 1 December which approved it and gave the green light for its implementation .
Our committee - and not Parliament unfortunately , because of the limited time - has succeeded in giving a favourable opinion to endorse , encourage and support this package .
Today , we are here to comment on its main content with reference first of all to the approach , to the philosophy followed and , secondly , to one of the three parts that comprise it , that is to say the code of conduct for the taxing of company business , a code that is already operational and that now has all that is needed to begin producing its initial effects .
The other two provisions are the proposal for a directive to avoid double taxation on royalties paid between associated companies in various Member States , a proposal that is already being examined by our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy ; finally , the passage of the third part of the package will begin , the draft directive on the taxation of savings or , better , on a common approach to the taxation of financial income paid to natural persons who do not reside in the various Member States .
The nature of these three provisions in itself illustrates one of the fundamental aspects of the new approach , which is that of following soft procedures - if I can use that term - adapted to each of the specific matters without claiming to have found the solution to all the problems by way of the harmonizing directives .
Secondly , it is a coordinated approach whereby , through the package technique , it is possible to bring together various interests and find the necessary consensus .
I think that we can but agree on this .
It is one of the reasons why I am not in favour of the amendments that have been presented and that - apart from those that repeat concepts already contained in the report - have a certain tendency to harden the approach proposed , something that I do not consider appropriate at this stage .
I would now like to turn my attention to a fundamental aspect , that of always clearly making the distinction between harmful tax competition , which calls for Community-wide action in order to eliminate the effects that in the end are negative for everyone , and the opposite concept of positive tax competition which is beneficial and is stimulated by competition within the single market and monetary union , and that we could also say is an answer to the requirements of international competitiveness which the Union is having to face in the globalized economy .
This report concludes by giving support to the Commission and encouraging it to continue along the same line , taking on other issues that so far have not been tackled for very obvious reasons , like those listed in paragraph 7 .
I will conclude , Madam President , by pointing out to the Members of this House that paragraph 28 suffers from the fact that it was written before the draft directive on the taxation of savings was tabled .
This proposal is at our disposal and , as I said , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy will commit itself to proceed quickly with this .
Madam President , Commissioner , the report presented by the rapporteur represents a real step forward , just as the package of measures put forward by the Commission has finally succeeded in stirring up the tax debate at European level .
And it is timely , because the internal market will quite simply never be completed unless we put an end to harmful tax competition in the European Union and make further progress in the areas of tax alignment and tax coordination .
This must therefore be followed , with the start of economic and monetary union , by a real coordination of tax policies which goes beyond the narrow alignment of economic policies .
And this package of measures represents a step in the right direction , as Mr Secchi has underlined in his important report .
In a world of globalized markets , the international competitiveness of locations is determined by their infrastructure and , therefore , also by their tax systems and tax scales .
Corporate taxation , in particular , is increasingly becoming a factor in competition .
There are certain Member States which are attracting inward investment through tax avoidance and tax exemption measures or tax reductions and thereby taking these resources from other EU Member Sates .
This constitutes anti-community tax competition in the form of tax dumping and is harmful to all the states in the European Union .
There is a conflict of aims between the wish of Member States to protect their fiscal sovereignty and the wish to structure corporate and capital taxation in such a way that they are neutral rather than restrictive to competition .
It is impossible to solve this problem by free competition and market forces alone .
It is a fact that tax competition in the European Union is unfair , and that income tax payers are making an ever greater contribution to the tax revenue of Member States and mobile resources an ever smaller one .
As the Commission has very rightly outlined , the burden on income tax payers has increased by roughly 10 % , while that on capital factors and corporate taxation has dropped by some 20 % .
This change in the basis of taxation has made the performance of public functions considerably more onerous and could also lead to tax erosion .
The development is dramatic because in the long run no state can avoid the pressure to reduce taxes and this can benefit only the companies , not the countries involved .
Thus , the community-wide coordination of tax policy , as suggested in the European Commission 's package of measures and Mr Secchi 's report , in the form of a code of conduct on taxes is a very proper aim and represents a step in the right direction .
However , it is in no way binding and this is something we should be pushing for .
At a time of European and international competition , the coordination of tax policy does not represent a loss of fiscal sovereignty for Member States , but rather a gain in sovereignty for both the European Union and its Members .
It makes sense to define profits and the way in which tax assessment bases are structured jointly and to introduce a minimum level of taxation .
Whatever happens , the tax oases in the European Union which currently allow transnational companies to transfer profits between countries in order to escape or reduce levels of taxation in their country of registration must be eliminated immediately .
As a result , I believe that we must place the tax code of conduct within the principles of free but fair competition .
We must not allow a situation to develop in which direct contributions in general are banned , but where there is no limit on subsidies through tax regulations in the European Union .
That is no longer acceptable .
I believe that the package must be expanded to include further intensive measures designed to standardize regulations and tackle new tax regimes , and also to include a comprehensive and modern system for the exchange of information and checks between tax authorities in order to create barriers to tax evasion in the European Union .
Mr President , the European Union has little to say about the taxes Member States impose on their citizens .
Only Article 99 grants some power , but with three limitations .
The article only applies to indirect taxes , the measures must serve the completion of the internal market , and the European Parliament has merely a consultative role .
I certainly understand the reticence of Member States to relinquish control in the sphere of taxation .
Levying taxes is a very serious affair .
Citizens or businesses have to hand over part of their income .
Taxes can exert an upward effect on prices , which means that businesses have less money to invest and citizens have less money to spend .
Of course , taxes are usually applied for the common good , for example , to finance public works or to discourage the consumption of certain items through excise duties .
My group favours less competition between countries as regards tax levels themselves , and to let them compete instead on what they achieve with the tax money .
Business parks , housing conditions , infrastructure , education ; countries make their own choices on how they allocate their money .
But we should not have a situation , Mr President and Commissioner , where inefficient states dictate the level of taxation to efficient states .
My group can therefore appreciate , to some extent , the extremely limited progress in the sphere of tax harmonization , or as it is being called more modestly now , tax coordination , and the prevention of mutually harmful tax competition which might erode tax proceeds in the long run .
Yet I am also disappointed .
Many years ago , the former Dutch Minister of Finance , Mr Ruding , wrote down his priorities for European tax harmonization , for VAT and duty harmonization . Apart from the minimum rates , none of these are anywhere near to being harmonized .
The interests of all the countries , the interests between various countries , and the interests within individual countries have turned out to be too divergent .
The time is right to take a step forward .
At the Cardiff Summit , broad guidelines were adopted to coordinate the economic policies of the Member States to ensure the success of the single currency .
As a result of these guidelines and the euro , the Member States will become very conscious of their mutual dependency . Perhaps this will help to set the affair in motion .
Carlo Secchi 's report is excellent ; it is a coherent and well-structured piece of work .
The approach opted for in the report offers the best chances for a step forward .
There is no point in simply shouting loudly from the rooftops , or wanting to take steps that are too large .
I hope that this combination of three routes , the code of conduct , the imminent tax on the savings of those living abroad , and the tax on interest and royalty payments , might lead to the Council reaching agreement more easily .
I do hope that the brilliant discovery of a single package will not lead to the Member States holding each other to ransom . My fear is that one aspect or another will not get off the ground because the entire package could not be accepted .
Of course , quite a few dossiers remain open . The pension system dossier is the most important .
The systems vary so much that we can expect great difficulties in this area during the next century .
Commissioner , I hope that we , the European Parliament , can support the attempts to improve this situation .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to express the support of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party for Mr Secchi 's report which , once again , makes a very positive contribution to the analysis of fiscal affairs at EU level .
We congratulate him most sincerely on his work .
We also welcome the Commission 's proposals , not just because of the work the Commission has done , but because of its tenacity in trying to restore balance to the fiscal situation , which is absolutely necessary in the context of the constitution of monetary union and the euro .
We have made progress in the commercial and economic field , with the European internal market . We have made a lot of progress in the monetary sphere , with monetary union and the euro .
But we are not making any progress in the area of fiscal harmonization , as we need to do , because of a real obstacle : the fact that we need the Member States to be unanimous in order to reach agreement in this area .
Nevertheless , the Luxembourg conclusions and agreements and the Commission proposals are headed in the right direction .
We think they are good proposals , which will serve to eliminate harmful unfair competition between Member States in fiscal matters , and to make suitable proposals , for example in the field of dual taxation or taxes on cross-border payments .
Nevertheless , I would like to conclude by repeating that there are still some very important aspects of fiscal harmonization which , unfortunately , have not yet been regulated and lead to an imbalance between these three areas : the economic , the monetary and the fiscal .
Madam President , at the outset I want to congratulate Mr Secchi on the presentation of his report .
Over the years there has been much talk of the need to achieve better coordination of national taxation policies .
Let us not be trapped by the illusion of grand taxation schemes which , in fact , could undermine the competitiveness of my country and send hard-won jobs out of the country .
Let me immediately say how appalled I am by Amendment No 5 by the Greens , which I reject out of hand .
It calls for further action to be taken to establish a European-wide minimum rate of corporation tax .
This is a backdoor way to increase taxes on business .
It would undermine the whole Irish economy . It would send out the wrong signals to investors .
As regards the code of conduct and business taxation , I want to underline the point that its purpose is not to harmonize business taxation but to deal with special tax schemes which are considered to be harmful in a Community context .
Harmonizing business taxation has no place on any EU agenda .
Such a position flies in the face of the principle of subsidiarity .
There are many factors which determine the location of a business .
Some incentives are not transparent .
Larger countries , for example , can attract investment through substantial grants or public procurement possibilities .
My country has a very transparent tax regime .
Other countries have high nominal rates and , on the other hand , they offer a low effective tax rate for business through special reliefs and allowances , some of which are not so transparent .
As part of the Commission 's package on taxation a directive has been tabled which is aimed at eliminating withholding taxes on interest and royalty payments between associated companies and different Member States .
This removes an impediment to cross-border business transactions .
This is an objective which we can support .
However , certain aspects of the directive could create difficulties which need to be examined and eliminated from the outset .
I should like to say as a representative from the peripheral area of the Union , from the northwest of Ireland , that we have great difficulties in attracting investment .
That is understandable from a geographical point of view .
But let no party in this House try to suggest that there should be no positive discrimination in any part .
Authorities in my country - the Industrial Development Authority or Údarás na Gaeltachta , responsible for development in the Gaeltacht regions on the west coast of Ireland - have all tried over the years to attract investment .
Any suggestion that there should be any tampering with our systems is very wrong .
Madam President , taxation could be an important tool for the construction of a Europe based on growth and employment and could thus encourage the development of human abilities .
Does fiscal coordination in the fight against unfair competition , as proposed by the Commission , enable Europe to respond to such a challenge ?
We know that tax dumping is already at work in the free movement of capital and tax havens . There is a serious risk of this worsening with the introduction of the single currency .
The Secchi report essentially tackles the issue of fiscal coordination from the point of view of the increased competitiveness of European financial markets .
In fact , it is a question of harmonization from the bottom .
For years , deductions on income from capital within the European Union have been endlessly reduced , whilst those affecting salaried income have increased , in particular through indirect taxation which , as we know , hits the lower paid hardest .
As representatives of our people , we should challenge the domination of the financial markets by advocating a tax system which is both fair and effective .
Firstly , balance must be restored between tax deductions on salaries and those on the holders of capital .
Taxation of speculative movements of capital would enable better control of the financial markets and could provide an additional way of developing growth , training and employment .
Furthermore , the European Parliament has already stated its agreement for such a measure .
It could also encourage Member States to increase taxation on large fortunes , in order to finance effective actions to fight against exclusion .
The financial burden must be lowered , especially for SMEs , through a credit policy favouring productive investment and jobs , rather than placing the burden increasingly on payroll taxes , which jeopardizes welfare systems .
Social dumping must be combatted through taxation , the same goes for relocations and tax havens , which are a factor of unfair competition that must be brought to an end .
In conclusion , it is only possible to respond to the enormous challenges of the technology and information revolution with policies aimed at human development as opposed to a decline in social costs , and a fairer tax system could contribute to this .
Madam President , our group supports the general ideas contained in Mr Secchi 's report .
He has been monitoring the harmonization of taxation for a long time now .
As a Parliament we obviously have good cause to be somewhat impatient , as Member States still view taxation as if it were some diplomatic affair comparable to foreign policy .
An example of this is that the meetings this high-level taxation group holds have an air of being top secret , and it is very hard to get any information on them , which is most certainly no longer the right attitude to take today .
It is quite obvious that with the advent of the euro such tax differentials between Member States will show up even more clearly , and tax competition will increase .
My group would like to warn against the picture that is being painted that tax competition is a very positive thing .
We see that it may , in some areas , be a useful tool , but we clearly wish it to be known that we want a minimum level of taxation in the EU , for example , for corporation tax .
As for the ideas of the Member from the Union for Europe Group , Ireland may well still compete to some extent with a low rate of corporation tax , if it likes , but we above all want to create fair and equal conditions for competition . Otherwise , what Mrs Randzio-Plath said here today will happen : Member States will lose their tax base .
How then will we be able to preserve this European model ?
Madam President , this debate confronts us with the wholly individual character of the European Union as a closely-knit framework of cooperation between independent Member States .
The exclusive sovereignty on tax issues lies with the Member States , but this does not mean that they can do anything they like .
The sovereignty of national states can never be absolute .
At present , this sovereignty is being eroded by globalization .
This is an important impetus towards coordination or harmonization of taxation at European level .
The European Commission wants to compensate for the loss of national sovereignty by creating a joint sovereignty of the Member States .
Within the framework of the Commission 's proposals , fair tax competition will continue to exist ; there will , therefore , be no uniform tax rates .
Taxation remains an exclusive power of the Member States .
It is a mystery to me why the Commission is quoting the subsidiarity principle in point B of the Council 's motion for a resolution .
According to the Treaty and the Council ' s Edinburgh declaration , this principle is out of place .
Has the Commission overlooked this ?
I would like to hear Commissioner Monti 's response to this .
High tax rates encourage harmful competition and tax evasion .
For that reason alone , tax competition is not a bad thing .
Due to high levels of public debt , or inefficiently organized governmental machinery , some Member States have condemned themselves to high tax rates .
We cannot have a situation whereby the Member States who have their affairs properly arranged have to suffer for the indiscretions of others .
Tax competition becomes harmful when it encourages the market players to relocate their production activities purely to net a tax windfall .
This type of competition is not only engaged in by Member States , but also -and perhaps especially- by regional and local authorities .
In addition , harmful competition not only takes the shape of a reduction or an exemption .
Businesses are sometimes exempted from legal provisions , so that special licences are granted , or environmental or noise standards are loosely applied .
This aspect is left out of the motion for a resolution .
One positive point is the call to reduce tax on labour , and to shift to a tax on the environmentally damaging use of raw and auxiliary materials .
It would be desirable if the European Member States started to compete with each other on the basis of who has the " greenest ' tax system .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Secchi .
The introduction of the single currency certainly raises in no uncertain terms the problem of achieving tax coordination throughout Europe , seeking first of all to avoid harmful tax competition and also guaranteeing fair and equally distributed taxation with no favours .
Like the euro , tax harmonization should be a valuable instrument at the service of economic growth and job creation .
However , it is a delicate matter that demands adequate expertise and legislative clarity .
The important thing is to provide individual national administrations with the instruments with which to cooperate and share information and experience as provided for , moreover , in the FISCALIS programme .
I would , however , like to emphasise that a genuine European tax policy cannot be limited to the passive role of fighting harmful tax competition .
Our companies and our citizens are urgently calling for a reduction in the excessive burden created by too much taxation , taxation that is stifling household and corporate budgets , and actually jeopardizing the recovery of the European economy .
I will therefore conclude by saying that the working party that is preparing to set about its task should also set itself the objective of defining the instruments and strategies for a serious European policy of tax moderation , failing which , from our point of view , we will not have the means to rekindle development and there will be neither social justice nor economic democracy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , with the introduction of the euro the completion of the European single market is coming ever closer .
In some important areas we are , however , still faced with major and difficult tasks .
Tax policy is one of these areas .
Increased coordination of tax policy at European level is urgently required if market distortions , double taxation and other similar phenomena are to be avoided and the four basic freedoms of the common market are genuinely to be guaranteed .
I am not talking about complete harmonization .
On the contrary , competition between national taxation systems remains necessary .
But this competition must offer individuals state services under favourable conditions because by opening up markets and implementing freedom of movement , we have created competition between systems and this very competition will become a significant part of the tax system .
But , at the same time , Mr Secchi in his excellent report speaks of a " beneficial ' degree of competition which we have to accept in order to guarantee competitiveness .
This I fully support .
The package of measures proposed by the Commission is a step in the right direction .
I should particularly like to congratulate Commissioner Monti on the progress he has made over recent years .
With the code of conduct for corporate taxation and the other two elements of the package dealing with capital earnings and taxes and licence fees between companies , he has achieved the first , important advances in taxation policy .
Other areas must now follow .
And here I particularly have in mind value added tax .
The transition to the country of origin principle should be completed as quickly as possible .
The current system , specifically designated a transitional system , is a burden on all companies trading across national borders and in particular on small and medium-sized businesses which are very important in terms of employment .
We should also look more closely at the possibility of halving tax rates for labour intensive goods and services .
At the moment , labour is overtaxed in relation to its much more mobile counterpart , capital .
This has obvious consequences for the labour market .
But we must also examine carefully how this area , focused on manual work , can be defined and delimited .
Our task is to close the gap between the high burden placed on the labour factor on one hand and the lower burden placed upon consumption , capital and energy on the other .
I look forward to hearing some appropriate proposals from the Commission and hope that in this important area it will prove possible to achieve some concrete measures quickly .
Madam President , there are four things I would like to say in this minute .
The first is that tax policy is and should remain essentially a national concern .
It should remain that way so that we do not construct a superstate or a federal state .
Secondly , the first thing you think of , and which the general public thinks of , is tax havens .
I would like to stress that we must do something about them in order to have any credibility on the issue at all .
It is simply harmful to the market .
Thirdly , not all tax competition is harmful .
I would like to stress that there should be healthy competition between companies and countries .
This is natural and simply promotes increased competitiveness and variety .
Fourthly , it is also quite natural and important for there to be differences in tax systems and rates which are based on social motives , such as the environment , health and consumer protection . And it is natural for these differences not to be regarded as harmful in tax competition .
Madam President , the main concern of the Commission 's proposed package of tax measures will be to deal with the imbalances in competition that may be caused by the different existing tax rules and regimes .
Mr Secchi 's report takes a similar approach .
In addition , the proposals put forward at this plenary emphasize the way we must go following the creation of the single currency , whose numerous advantages and universal benefits will only thus be revealed , namely tax reforms at community level .
We ask that this process be accelerated and synchronized , if only so that the code of conduct for corporation taxation , which is part of the package and has already been approved by the Council , can be taken up with it .
Let us remember what some would apparently rather forget :
that the peculiarities of national tax systems arise from the peculiarities of national economies , which cannot be eliminated , despite all efforts to ignore them ; -that tax harmonization , if supra-nationally imposed after the adoption of the euro , which now serves as a pretext and justification , would take away yet another instrument of sovereign and ( democratic ) government , especially as regards savings , from the national authorities ; -that the inequalities of the weakest in terms of competitiveness may be seriously aggravated in the name of standardizing competition by means of tax reforms.The tax reform we are fighting for , at Community and national level , is a tax reform , or rather a series of tax reforms , that aims to create fairer tax collection systems with a reduction of the tax burden on working people , and not harmonized rules that lead to fresh and increased exemptions in favour of capital that already circulates too freely .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is clear that there is a ghost creeping through this debate , the ghost of subsidiarity .
It wears several guises : that of Mr Chirac , Mr Kohl , and more recently clearly that of Mr Gallagher .
What is at stake is not providing a clear definition of subsidiarity as a necessary dimension of European integration , but rather using it as a pretext to develop the EU , within the framework of the WTO , as a deregulated community in the face of the single market and the euro , introducing a system of dumping in which we will all be losers .
We all know that the only way out of this dilemma is to achieve common , reliable regulation .
We must put a stop to tax erosion .
And to do this we should take up and support the new convergence introduced by Mr Monti and , perhaps , as it has been increasingly watered down , give it back a little of its original shape .
We have submitted some amendments which head in this direction .
I believe we must make quite clear exactly what the aim of the whole undertaking is .
The aim of the undertaking is to complete the single market by creating the regulatory conditions for fair competition . Tax competition may be acceptable in terms of the quality , the good design and the proper application of taxation , but not in terms of rates of taxation .
Secondly , we should put an end to the disproportionate burden which , as Mr Monti has illustrated , is imposed on waged work , by shifting the burden to corporate capital and private assets on one hand and the environment and the consumption of resources on the other .
This means we should ensure that capital and business start paying taxes on environmental impact and resources again and thereby create an important precondition for the transition to a sustainable development model .
Madam President , Commissioner , Mr Secchi 's report clearly highlights what some of us feared at the time of the Maastricht Treaty .
This is namely that , following the transfer of monetary sovereignty , the transfer of economic and fiscal sovereignty would be almost inevitable .
Well here we are , we have arrived at the first step in that direction .
In fact , the technique is always the same .
We are given an assertion : the high level of tax competition has reached a clearly harmful level .
It would have been good if this assertion had been supported by concrete examples .
Then we are given another assertion : the Member States are slowly abandoning their fiscal sovereignty , thus the best way of finding that sovereignty once more is to abandon it completely to the European Union .
This being so , the real question to be raised is whether this tax competition between States within the European Union is desirable and good for the citizens of those States or , on the contrary , harmful .
In reality , this tax competition may be perfectly healthy for both consumers and citizens .
The States which in the future will be successful in an open market , a market in which there is - and this is a good thing - freedom of movement of people , capital and industry will be those which ensure moderate taxation , flexibility in regulations and legal security .
Thus this competition , far from being bad may , on the contrary , be extremely beneficial for individuals . It will create competitiveness between States and rather than creating some kind of gasworks - excuse me for this rather crude image - a harmonized tax gasworks , it is better to make the States compete with each other .
This being so , the idea of a code of conduct , especially for business taxation , is an excellent idea which should be adopted .
The debate is now suspended and will be continued after Question Time .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0474 / 98 ) .
Allow me to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Henderson .
I invite him to reply to Question No 1 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0497 / 98 )
Subject : Persecution of the Assyrian population by Turkey
On 14 May 1997 Turkish forces invading Iraq to persecute the Kurds passed through Iraqi Mesopotamia where a majority of the population is Assyrian and destroyed twenty Assyrian villages , killed scores of people and persecuted the population , forcing many of them to flee .
Assyrians in Turkey are forbidden freely to express their political and religious views ( they are Christians ) and most of them are obliged to live in various European countries and in the USA .
Will the Council say whether it is aware of the invasion by Turkish forces of Assyrian regions in Iraq and what measures it intends to take to prevail upon Turkey to respect the basic human rights to which the Assyrian community is entitled ?
I am delighted that we will have our full 90 minutes today .
Some of our previous sessions , for one reason or another to do with timetables , have sometimes been a little curtailed .
But maybe in the spirit of the World Cup , we will have our full 90 minutes .
In response to Question No 1 , the Council is aware that the Turkish armed forces launched a cross-border operation into northern Iraq in the spring of 1997 .
On 19 May the presidency issued a declaration on behalf of the European Union , noting with concern that fact and , inter alia , called on Turkey to exercise restraint , to respect human rights , not to endanger the lives of innocent civilians and to withdraw its military forces from the Iraqi territory as soon as possible .
The Council remains deeply concerned at the plight of the Assyrian people of south-east Turkey and northern Iraq .
The proper protection of human rights remains an essential component in the development of relations between Turkey and the Union .
The European Council meeting in Luxembourg on 12 and 13 December 1997 recalled , in line with the Council position expressed at the Association Council with Turkey on 29 April 1997 , that strengthening Turkey 's links with the European Union also depended on that country 's pursuit of political and economic reforms , including the alignment of human rights standards and practices with those in force in the European Union , including protection of minorities .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for his reply , which was quite constructive .
I am afraid , however , that it was a bit of officialese in that we are limiting ourselves to a reply which simply confirms past events .
The issue here is that we have a minority which has deep cultural roots going even further back than Ancient Greek civilization .
We are talking about the Assyrian people .
These people , who have carried with them their language , their religion and their traditions , are few in number , and they are being displaced as refugees throughout Europe , in Sweden , in Greece and in other countries .
I wished to ask whether , especially with regard to the Assyrian people , and especially with regard to the Assyrian minority both in Turkey and in Iraq , the Council will express its concern to the authorities of these countries and in particular to the authorities in Ankara .
Especially with regard to the Assyrian minority .
I am not sure that I have very much to add to what I have already said to Mr Alavanos .
I understand that he has further outlined the plight of the particular populations that he refers to .
I have already indicated the action of the Council in relation to these matters , and there is not much more I can add .
There is great ignorance about the fate of the Assyrian people compared with a number of other minority peoples .
When people discuss the past , the Armenians are often mentioned , although historically the Assyrians were also subjected to heavy persecution in Turkey .
When people discuss the present situation , the Kurds are often mentioned , although the Assyrian people are also extremely vulnerable .
That is why special attention should be drawn to this to this particular population group in contacts with the Turkish regime .
I would like to ask the Council whether it has ever drawn attention to the Assyrian people .
Has it ever drawn attention to this group when discussing these issues with Turkey ?
Are there any plans to draw attention to this group ?
The Assyrian people in Turkey today is more or less threatened with cultural obliteration .
Again , there is not much more I can add .
I am grateful to Mr Sjöstedt for drawing to our attention the plight of the Assyrian people he refers to , but I really cannot add anything further to my original response .
As the author is not present , Question No 2 lapses .
Question No 3 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0499 / 98 )
Subject : Measures to combat fraud in the sphere of excise duties
In the opinion of the Council , what measures should be taken to combat fraud in the field of excise duties , especially in the tobacco and alcohol sectors ?
The Council is aware that fraud in the tobacco and alcohol sectors has reached alarming proportions and results in very substantial revenue losses for the Member States and the Community .
Ecofin considered how to combat this type of fraud at its meeting of 19 May and concluded that , subject to a Commission feasibility study , the long-term goal should be a computerized control system .
In the interim an effective early warning system should be put in place so that customs authorities have better information about what goods are being moved .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , we have been told that the European Commission proposed some time ago to the Council that new measures should be adopted to combat fraud in the sphere of excise duties which , as the Council said , particularly affects tobacco and alcohol .
We were also informed at the time that this is not a question of isolated cases - and the Council has confirmed that today - but of organized criminal networks .
Furthermore , we know that the national authorities have the right to inspect goods being transported but , since they are not informed when they are being sent , they have difficulty in implementing effective control .
Our view is similar to that just expressed by the Council : that the ideal thing would be to set up a computerized system .
But in the meantime , we think it would be a good idea to set up an early warning system , based on governments notifying one another .
Would the Council be prepared to take this first step , before such time as we obtain the computerized system which would really be the best solution ?
Again there is not a great deal that I can add to my original answer .
It is recognized by the Council that there is a problem and that there is a loss of revenue which results in large measure from crime related to the evasion of duties .
Customs organizations throughout the Union will be taking what action they can in practical terms .
As my original answer indicated , until such time as a computerized control system is set up it will be difficult to completely eliminate the abuses which are currently taking place .
An early warning system will , we hope , help in the short term but if that was the solution then there would be no need for the long-term computerized way of tackling the problem .
There is really no substitute for that in the view of those who are charged with finding technical responses to a political objective which we all share .
I wish to thank the Minister-in-Office and Mr Camison for recognizing the problems of fraud within the excise duties sector .
I also recognize that in the short term , computerized records are not an immediate goal but obviously a long-term goal .
The proper functioning of Europol has to be part of that goal as well in both the short and the long term .
I would like to ask the Minister-in-Office whether ultimately the way to tackle this problem is to look at the different excise duty rates in the different Member States and perhaps that should be the long-term goal of the Council of Ministers .
I wish to say to the honourable Member that I understand the point he is making about the differences in excise duties which create an incentive for criminals to evade such duties .
I am aware of cases in my own country where gangs are involved in bringing back goods bought in another country which they claim is for their own personal consumption but is in many cases for sale .
This is one area where customs have been trying to catch up .
The question of common excise duties is a matter for Member States to consider .
It is the responsibility of each Member State to decide the level of excise that it levies on any particular product range .
Where there are issues of competition involved , it may be a matter for broader consideration but where it is a question of the regulation of excise duties on particular products , this is a matter for the Member States at present and I foresee no change in that .
Question No 4 by Susan Waddington ( H-0502 / 98 )
Subject : Employment Guidelines 1998 - women 's employability
Given that the Employment Guidelines agreed at the special Luxembourg Employment Summit last December and the current Council presidency place great emphasis on developing women 's employability , what specific measures are being taken by the Member States to increase women 's participation in the labour market and encourage lifelong learning , whilst at the same time reconciling these activities with family life ?
The measures being taken by each Member State are set out in the national employment action plans .
As Members of this House may know , they include : improved child care provision , extension of parental leave , strengthened training opportunities and targeted help to get lone parents back into work .
Members may also be aware , and when they read the Cardiff conclusions they should then be fully aware , that employment was an important topic of discussion at Cardiff and it was agreed that action to mainstream equal opportunities in employment policy should be our priority in future .
I thank the President-in-Office for his concise and clear answer .
I understand that in some of the national action plans that were presented this year equality of opportunity for women was given a lower priority than the other three pillars .
I wonder if the President-in-Office believes that the Cardiff Summit will enable women 's employability and women 's employment to gain a higher priority in future years .
I thank the honourable Member for her supplementary question .
I can reassure her that in the discussions at Cardiff and the conclusions which arose out of the discussions , the matter to which she refers - employability of women -was given the highest priority .
There are clearly a number of high priorities in relation to unemployment and I hope that Members would understand that , given the high levels of unemployment that pertain in virtually all of the European Union countries and the need to tackle that problem of unemployment .
One of the ways is to give a particular incentive and pressure to the various Member States to take measures which will raise the employability of women .
That will give women greater opportunity to move into jobs which previously may have been closed to them for all sorts of reasons .
In general terms if one is serious about ' welfare to work ' which has also become an increasing priority of all of the Member States of the Union , as reflected in the conclusions in Section 1 of the Cardiff report in relation to economic reform , it has to be recognised that an important sector of the Community who are currently excluded from work are young women .
Helping to tackle the problem of youth unemployment necessarily involves tackling the problem of unemployment among young women .
That is a priority in the conclusions and I am confident that the Member States will take on board their obligations to take action to assist schemes to raise the employability of women and thereby provide more equal opportunity .
I am also concerned with these issues .
Mrs Waddington and I sit on the same committee .
I would like to ask a more general question in connection with employment for women .
It concerns the following : are you , as a representative of the Council , generally positive about developments in the area of employment since the Luxembourg Summit and up to the current summit in Cardiff ?
Do you think that so far the decisions taken in Luxembourg , the general decisions , and the national action plans have satisfied the demands for improvements which we had the right to make ?
I believe that the important thing is to get job creation into context .
Apart from where the state provides direct employment , the state cannot directly generate jobs .
Companies generate jobs , people generate jobs .
What the state has to do is create the climate - excluding areas of direct employment - where employability within the Community is enhanced .
I believe that the key measure is to raise the education standards of our peoples within the European Union and to raise their training standards so that they are better able to take on the global challenges which every company trying to export beyond the European Union faces .
Most companies within the European Union seek to export beyond that area .
Therefore the importance of the conclusions at Luxembourg and at Cardiff is to nurture the development of the right state policies , first of all deciding what can best be decided at European level and what can best be left , through subsidiarity , to action at national level or even below national level .
That in itself is a very important decision that must be taken .
But then , to impose an obligation on all the Member States - and that is what the Cardiff Conclusion does - to take action which is consistent with the thrust of the proposals which originated in Luxembourg , to tackle the various issues of youth unemployment , middle-age male unemployment , equal opportunities for men and women and stimulating entrepreneurship - these are all challenges .
Each Member State within the Union is required under the Cardiff conclusions to come back in six months and show what it has done on those issues .
If they are wise then they will understand the context of my introductory comments ; that , apart from direct employment , where the state is employing people directly , one has to understand that the state cannot require the manufacturing or service industry to take on more workpeople .
That is something that they must decide they need to do because there is a demand for their product or service and they have people who are capable of meeting that demand .
That is where the need for training and education is so crucial , so that there are products that will be world-leading products arising out of the economy of the European Union which is based on high education standards and good training .
That means that there will be more permanent employment creation effects .
It is in that context that one must view the conclusions from Cardiff .
Question No 5 by Aline Pailler , which has been taken over by Sylviane Ainardi ( H-0503 / 98 / rev. 1 )

Subject : Implementation of the Euro-Mediterranean agreement between the EU and Tunisia
On 2 March the EU presidency welcomed the entry into force of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreement establishing an Association with the Republic of Tunisia , Article 2 of which lays down that " relations between the Parties ...... shall be based on respect for human rights and democratic principles ' .
Despite the fact that the Government of Tunisia has signed that clause , there has been no halt to human rights violations in that country . Charges have been brought against Ms Nasraoui , a member of the Tunisian Bar Council ; Mr Ksila , Vice-President of the Human Rights League , has been sentenced to three years ' imprisonment ; and many leaders of human rights associations are subjected to harassment , police surveillance , provocation and so forth .
What measures does the Council intend to take on the basis of Article 2 of the Association Agreement , to help put a stop to human rights violations in Tunisia ?
As stated by the honourable Member who raised the question , the Council welcomes the entry into force of the Euromed Association Agreement .
Tunisia was , in fact , the first Mediterranean country to sign such an agreement , establishing a political dialogue which allows both parties to discuss openly a range of political issues , including human rights .
The Council attaches great political importance to the promotion of respect for human rights in Tunisia and closely follows the evolution of the situation in that country .
The presidency will be working closely with the future Austrian presidency to prepare the first meeting of the European Union / Tunisia Association Council which will take place under the Austrian presidency .
On this occasion the Council will raise the question of human rights and fundamental freedoms , reminding the Tunisian interlocutors of their human rights responsibilities and undertakings in the framework of both the EC / Tunisia Agreement and the Barcelona process .
Mr President , since the resolution which was adopted on 22 May 1996 , we have indeed noted an improvement in the human rights situation in Tunisia , with the release of Mr Mouada and Mr Chammari .
But as my colleague Aline Pailler underlines , the situation has once again deteriorated , with the sentencing of the Vice-President of the Human Rights League , Mr Ksila , to three years ' imprisonment .
My question is thus the following : what can be done to guarantee the application of article 2 of the Association Agreement , because making reference to it is not enough .
I am grateful to the honourable Member for taking up the question .
One of the key matters that will be discussed at any Association Council meeting would be the question of human rights and the need to uphold the highest standards .
That , in a sense , would be an essential part of the agenda of any meeting before other matters could proceed .
But the specific point that the honourable Member raised was referred to by my colleague , Mr Fatchett , who is another Foreign Office Minister in the United Kingdom , when he visited Tunisia .
I think that was in a presidential capacity - or it may have been in the run-up to the presidency .
He made that very point on behalf of the Council .
Does the President-in-Office share my opinion that of all the Arab countries Tunisia is the most democratic - relatively speaking , of course - and that since it is wedged between Algeria on the one side and Libya on the other , we should take a special view of the situation of a country which is , furthermore , very much threatened by Islamic extremism and by other extremist movements ?
Would he agree that in this connection it has done a remarkable job in keeping relative freedom for the people and in trying to save the country , so that , rather than giving them too much advice , we should encourage them in the right direction and not give them the feeling that we are criticizing them ?
I thank Mr von Habsburg for his supplementary question .
I have much sympathy with him , and others , in our discussions in this forum .
However , it would be very wrong of me to act as some kind of jury and make assessments as to which of the countries which could be described as Arab countries - although I am not sure that definition would be too easy to make - was most democratic .
What would be right for me , the Council and , I hope , Parliament , is to encourage all countries to build democracy and to guarantee human rights .
In all our dealings with third parties in the European Union , that should be a high priority and we should continue to pursue that .
Where we recognize that there have been big improvements , then we should say that , arising partly out of the discussions and the dialogue we have had , there have been improvements and that has led to a better life for a lot of people in certain countries .
Question No 6 by Mark Watts ( H-0504 / 98 )
Subject : Failure of Member States to transpose EU transport directives
The Council will be aware that a significant proportion of EU Directives have not been transposed by Member States .
For example , in the transport sector , most Directives have not been transposed .
What action does the Council propose taking to speed up transposition and complete the single market in sectors such as transport ?
The Council has made a commitment to transposing all overdue single-market directives in all sectors by the end of this year .
Each Member State has submitted timetables to the Commission showing how this will be done , with progress monitored through the single market scoreboard .
As a result , the number of overdue directives has halved in the past year .
I thank the President-in-Office for what is clearly good news for the European Union .
And that is that , under the UK presidency and , indeed , the preceding presidency and no doubt the one that will follow it , we are making real progress towards completing the single market by ensuring that all Member States who have signed up to European laws comply with them .
I would ask the President-in-Office whether he can confirm that , if Member States do not honour the undertakings that have been secured , he will continue the practice of naming and shaming those Member States that do not comply with the laws they have freely adopted .
I thank him for the progress we have made but I believe we need to keep the pressure on so that the remaining half of untransposed legislative acts are brought into Community law at Member State level within the year , as all the Member States have undertaken .
I am sure all of us will be encouraged but we all want to see the pressure continue .
I can say to the honourable Member that I am grateful for his question and the opportunity to raise this very important issue .
I can assure him that the Council is not going to act like some candid camera running round Europe seeking to expose breaches of commitments .
To the question as to whether countries responsible for breaches will be publicly named and shamed by the Council , the answer is No .
Where the Commission has collated the information and placed it on the scoreboard , the information will name and shame .
It has been done with this purpose , so that we can try to speed up the process of achieving a more effective single market .
Question No 7 by Freddy Blak ( H-0508 / 98 )
Subject : Council of Ministers as a showcase for lobbyists
The display of a luxury Jaguar in the entrance hall of the Justus Lipsius building in May was reprehensible .
It purported to be a general advertisement for the British presidency and the Coventry area , but in reality it was a commercial advertisement for a car firm .
The matter becomes even more serious with the Open Day arrangement on 9 May .
Is the presidency aware what signals the transformation of the Council of Ministers into a bazaar sends to the public ?
The whole affair shows the European institutions in a bad light .
Lastly , which other lobbyists have been allowed to exhibit in the Council of Ministers , and how much does it cost to use Council buildings as a showcase ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mr Blak 's concerns about that Jaguar .
It is normal practice , as Members of this House will recognize , for Council presidencies to mount an exhibition of a cultural , social or historical nature in the conference part of the Justus Lipsius building .
The exhibition staged by this presidency was supplemented for a period of two weeks by an exhibition on the history , culture and social and community profile of Coventry .
This was timed to coincide with COREPER 's visit to that city .
The Jaguar car was part of this exhibition , symbolizing the importance that motor vehicle manufacture has played in Coventry .
There was no advertising and no information about the car , its price or where to buy one .
The car was there to give the exhibition popular appeal and succeeded admirably .
I am sure all honourable Members share my satisfaction at Jaguar 's success in boosting employment in Coventry .
In many ways that is what the exhibition was all about .
The Council building is reserved for the use of the Council and its members and no outside commercial interests have access to it or its facilities .
I must say , you have quite a sense of humour , Mr Henderson .
If you can see sex appeal in a car , you definitely will not be pulling any birds .
I must say your answer astonishes me .
To my mind , it is wasteful to pay out £ 10 , 000 to remove a window in order to get a car into a building , followed by another £ 10 , 000 to get it out again .
I find it obscene .
It is downright wasteful of taxpayers ' money .
It is all very well advertising for Coventry , but as you are all well aware , Jaguar has been sold ; the company is now under American ownership .
I have to say we must be way off track if we are now starting to advertise for the USA .
Mr Henderson , I think we need to exercise care to avoid a situation whereby we have to ask Jesus to come and cast the money-changers out of the temple .
I think we need to stop these propaganda exercises .
It is a disgrace and people are at a loss to understand it .
Thank you very much , Mr Blak .
I was waiting for that last , biblical sentence in the interpretation .
Now that Mr Freddy Blak 's speech is complete , Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply .
I should warn you that we cannot leave the Justus Lipsius building just yet , because Mr Ford wants to put a second question .
You have the floor , to reply to Mr Blak first of all .
I thank Mr Blak for his question .
I have to say that he must have a more lateral-thinking mind than I do .
I thought that the exhibition had popular appeal .
If Mr Blak thinks that is sex appeal , he has a more inventive mind than I do and I commend him for it .
I believe it is important to demonstrate to the whole of the Union the lifestyle of our communities within the Union .
Any attempt to explain life in the community of Coventry in the Midlands of England to the rest of the European Union and beyond without mentioning Jaguar would give a very false impression of the importance of Jaguar to that city and , indeed , to the motor car industry within the European Union .
I believe that the Jaguar is a good product and that it is appropriate that Coventry - not the Council - should feel that was an integral part of their community and one that they would want to show to the rest of the world .
Generally relating to lobbying , a number of parliaments within the European Union have in recent times drawn up stricter rules on the role of lobbyists and lobbying , how it should take place and in what circumstances it should take place , how it should be regulated , what relationship lobbyists , lobby companies and lobby organizations should have to Members of Parliaments and so on ; and it may be that it would be appropriate for the European Parliament to give this matter further consideration .
It is something which the Council would be wise to keep always under review , to see if any changes need to be introduced to current practices .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
As I warned you earlier , our thoughts are still on the Justus Lipsius building . More specifically , we are thinking about its interior , near that luxury Jaguar .
Measuring the car 's possible sex appeal does not form part of this Parliament 's remit .
However , to continue on this same subject , Mr Ford has the floor for one minute .
I appreciate Mr Blak 's sense of humour .
I am not sure whether everybody else does .
We are both members of the Socialist Group .
It was only a few months ago that we actually had racing cars outside the Socialist Group room and , as far as I recall , Mr Blak was not making a protest then .
Obviously racing cars are okay - I think they are probably sexy .
I do not know whether they have popular appeal , but clearly we need to sort out the plank in our own eye before we sort out the mote in the Council 's eye .
This is an area that we need to look at as there were complaints this morning about exhibitions currently going on in Parliament .
Common standards are required and perhaps it is time for the European Parliament to take the lead .
We had a report on the control and registration of lobbyists which already seems to be ineffective , and the Rules Committee , of which I am a member , is doing a follow-up report on that to try to tighten up and strengthen the regulations .
Maybe we can take the lead and the Council can learn something from us .
I hope Mr Henderson can agree with that .
Mr Henderson , I am not sure whether to interpret Mr Ford 's comment as a question to you or an argument with Mr Blak .
However , if you wish to reply in any way , you have the floor .
If the same question had been asked in the British Parliament , I am sure it would have tried to have established itself as a genuine question , whether it was or was not .
I am in agreement with the honourable Member that there is a need for a continual review of the lobby system , to take place from time to time as circumstances change , and I can assure him he would have my support for that .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
I am glad to see that the Council Presidency and the hemicycle are on the same wavelength , at least at the moment .
We shall see if that continues to be the case with Question No 8 by Jaime Valdivielso de Cué , which has been taken over by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0512 / 98 )
Subject : Aid to shipbuilding
Faced with the new moves to gradually eliminate aid to the shipbuilding industry , could the Council say what sort of criteria were used as a basis for withdrawing it and whether account has been taken of the importance of shipbuilding to certain regions of Europe in general and Spain in particular ?
The new rules on aid to shipbuilding , which were agreed with widespread support from Member States , including Spain , are designed to improve the competitiveness of the European Union shipbuilding industry .
Whilst the new regime abolishes operating aid , it also refocuses remaining forms of support in order to promote the competitiveness of the industry .
There will be new aid for innovation and the opening up of regional aid .
A strict limit will be placed on restructuring aid , and strengthened monitoring provisions will be introduced .
We believe this is a very positive outcome for the future of the European Union shipbuilding industry .
The new aid regime certainly takes account of the interests of all Community regions with shipbuilding interests .
Spain stands to benefit particularly from the agreement to open up regional aid .
First I want to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the information he has provided in response to the question .
But since the question placed special emphasis on the case of Spain - I do not know what data he has in that regard - I would be grateful if he could be a little more specific about the case of dockyards in the Basque Country .
Thank you very much , Mr Camisón Asensio .
I shall invite Mr Henderson to reply .
However , I am sure that if he does not have the information at this moment , you will receive it very shortly .
Mr Henderson , you may reply but , in any case , I have told Mr Camisón Asensio that if you do not have the information at the moment , I am sure you will send it to him in writing very shortly .
Mr President , I am very grateful to you for suggesting the answer to that question .
I should like to endorse your comments .
The purpose of changing the regulation is to allow more flexibility , to give each country a capacity to do what it thinks is necessary to restructure to help its industry and , of course , that applies to Spain .
If there are specific points which the honourable Member wishes to raise in relation to the shipbuilding industry - if he was referring to the shipbuilding industry in northern Spain - then I would be happy to answer them in writing .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
Having worked together for six months , Mr Henderson , it can come as no surprise to you that this Presidency , despite not being held by a member of the Labour Party , is pretty much in tune with your replies and can predict , to a certain extent , the problems you may experience at a given moment with such a specific question .
So we need to be in tune to a certain extent , Mr Henderson .
We have been working together for six months , and I hope we can do so again in the future .
So , along the same lines , I propose we now move on to Question No 9 by Nikolaos Papakyriazis ( H-0514 / 98 )
Subject : Desecration of a graveyard in Istanbul
On Wednesday , 1 April 1998 , 51 graves in the Agios Eleftherios Greek Orthodox graveyard in Istanbul were desecrated .
This was the worst act perpetrated in a Christian burial ground during the last decade .
In recent months , the Greek Orthodox community in Istanbul has been the victim of a growing number of acts of provocation and aggression , while no official reaction has been forthcoming from the Turkish Government .
In view of developments concerning relations between the European Union and Turkey and in the framework of the contacts with the Turkish Government and negotiations regarding the Association Agreement , what steps will the Council take in response to this and what explanations , measures and guarantees will it seek to obtain from the Turkish Government regarding the protection of the Greek Orthodox community in Turkey and respect for its rights , given that acts such as those described above are inconceivable and unacceptable for the European Union ?
The Council regrets the developments concerning the Agios Eleftherios Greek Orthodox graveyard in Istanbul , and is well aware that under the Treaty of Lausanne signed in July 1923 the Turkish Government undertook to grant full protection to churches , synagogues , cemeteries and other religious establishments of nonMuslim minorities .
The European Council meeting in Luxembourg on 12 and 13 December 1997 recalled , in line with the Council position expressed at the Association Council with Turkey on 29 April 1997 , that strengthening Turkey 's links with the European Union also depended on that country 's pursuit of political and economic reforms , including the alignment of human rights standards and practices with those in force in the European Union , which also encompasses religious minorities .
The situation of democracy and human rights in Turkey remains high on the Council 's agenda .
The Commission 's report to the Council in March 1998 on developments in relations with Turkey since the entry into force of the customs union , concluded on human rights that no substantial progress had been achieved as regards human rights and the democratic reform process in Turkey .
These issues are raised regularly with the Turkish authorities .
Cooperation in the field of human rights and humanitarian issues formed part of the Commission 's European strategy for Turkey of 4 March 1998 .
I wish to express my thanks and my satisfaction to the President-in-Office of the Council for the clear answer he has given me on the matter of principle , which is of course the most important political issue .
This comment applies to the second part of his reply , but I am afraid that the first part , in which he attempts to give respond to my question on the specific unacceptable event which took place in Constantinople , is not an answer .
My question refers to the specific event which took place there , which should to be condemned , and to the explanations that have been demanded and to those that have given by the Turkish government . It also asks what measures , explanations and guarantees the Council is seeking in the context of the discussions it is holding with Turkey on the conclusion of relations between Turkey and the European Union .
Desecration of a graveyard is unacceptable and outrageous conduct in any society , and that is as true in Turkey as it is anywhere else .
We have urged the Turkish authorities to do all they can to bring those responsible for this action to justice .
That is a matter which will be reviewed on an ongoing basis .
Question No 10 by Sören Wibe ( H-0518 / 98 )
Subject : Tax-free sales and international conventions
The Member States of the EU have signed international conventions stating that the sale of goods in international waters and international airspace shall be free of tax .
No country has the right to impose taxation where journeys are effected between two countries .
Does the decision to end tax-free sales within the EU from 1999 not constitute a breach of those conventions ?
Must the conventions not be renegotiated by all the countries which are party to them ?
The decision to end intra-European Union duty on tax-free sales from June 1999 was taken by the Council in 1991 and I am not aware that this issue formed part of its deliberations at that time .
However , the Commission has now produced a set of proposals on a duty-paid regime following abolition and Commission-chaired discussions are now under way at official level to work out the practical details of this regime .
The honourable Member may wish to address his question to the Commission to ensure it is aware of the need to consider international conventions in these discussions .
Should I interpret your reply , Mr Henderson , as meaning that the Council does not know whether the Member States have signed international conventions which they may possibly infringe when tax-free sales end ?
It is , of course , reasonable for the Council to obtain information .
I know that there were multilateral negotiations on which these decisions about international waters and international airspace are based .
It is probable that these negotiations and the agreements which were then entered into also contain a clause about the circumstances in which individual states may cancel these agreements .
If the Council is unaware of this , I would like to advise the Council to try to obtain information on this point , as it is very important .
I have seen the general outlines of the Commission report on this matter .
If it is the view of the honourable Member - and I thank him for his question - that those proposals contravene obligations which have already been entered into by Member States , then I would urge him to submit his views to the Commission and seek its comments .
When the Council considers this matter further , all these issues will be taken into account .
Given that only the Council can seek action from the Commission in this area , perhaps I could give an example of why there is a problem .
Will the President-in-Office agree with me that ferries sailing from the east-coast ports of the United Kingdom to the continent through international waters will be able to sell goods on those ships at duty-free rates , even when the duty-free regime is abolished on 1 July 1999 ?
Is that not the case and is it not the reason why my colleague Mr Wibe 's point needs to be addressed at Council level ?
It is only the Council that can seek action from the Commission to ensure that the postduty-free regime is clear and transparent to the consumer and the enforcement agencies .
I know that the honourable Member takes a deep interest in these matters , and if I represented his constituency I am sure I would as well .
I also have an airport in my constituency so it is a matter of considerable interest to me back home .
The Commission proposals are not in line with what the honourable Member suggests .
The Commission proposals require a duty-paid regime to be put in force on intra-EU traffic after 1999 .
As I have said to the other honourable Member , if there is a belief that the Commission proposals contravene Member States ' other obligations , then I would urge the honourable Members to put their views or the views of their constituents to the Commission , so that the Commission may reassess their proposal .
It would then be up to the Commission to come to the Council with an original proposal or an amended proposal .
At this stage what we are really talking about are the facts of the case , and of any legal opinions that may flow from that .
I think we want to get all that information on the table before any of us jump to conclusions .
Mr Gallagher , do you wish to put a supplementary on the same question ?
I am sorry I did not see you , and I invite you to take the floor .
I indicated to your officials at the initial stage that I had a supplementary .
In view of the Commission 's recognition that there would be a negative economic impact from the proposed abolition of duty-free within the EU and the fact that it has promised to present a working document to Ecofin clarifying the Community instruments available to Member States for addressing the consequences of abolition , could I ask the President-in-Office whether the Council agrees with the principle of using taxpayers , money to pay for the abolition of an industry which is currently self-financing and provides employment and economic benefits to regions around Europe ?
Could I also ask the President-in-Office if the matter was discussed at the Heads of State meeting in Cardiff ?
Does the view expressed outside that meeting by some of the Heads of State reflect the view of the presidency ?
In conclusion , could the President-in-Office indicate the number of jobs he believes will be lost as a result of the abolition of duty-free ?
I was not at the meeting of the Heads of Government in Cardiff , as the honourable Member will understand , but , as far as I am aware , that issue was not discussed .
Certainly there are no conclusions which lead to any change in the situation .
The matter was discussed fully at the Ecofin Council in May and the honourable Member is clearly aware of the conclusions of that Council meeting in May , as can be deduced from his question .
In response to the general issue , whether public money should be used in some instances to restructure industry , the answer is that in some circumstances that will be appropriate if , in the location , there is a qualification for structural fund aid or regional aid within a country .
That would also apply in relation to any duty-free revenue loss .
If there was a counter-proposal which on its own merit meant that it qualified for public money , then it would qualify .
The whole purpose of the change in the regulation is to increase competitiveness , which should to lead to a gain overall for the public - if not in the immediate period ahead , then in the longer term .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
Mr Gallagher , allow me respectfully to remind you that , in accordance with the way we apply our Rules of Procedure , requests for supplementary questions are made when the main question is announced .
In other words , the request cannot be made in advance because that could obviously give some Members an advantage over others .
So we have established , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , that supplementary questions are accepted chronologically immediately following the announcement of the main question .
Question No 11 by Angela Billingham ( H-0520 / 98 )
Subject : The case of Els Pins Park , Moraira , Alicante
Over 13 years ago , two Spanish nationals committed a crime against fifty-four European citizens ( non-Spanish ) when they sold them property in Els Pins Park , knowing that there was a 63 million peseta loan on the whole property .
This case took the Spanish judiciary until 28 May 1996 , 11 years later , to bring to trial .
In 1996 one of the property developers was found guilty and the other did not receive any sentence .
The owners put forward an appeal against the non-conviction of the property developer two years ago .
They have still received no final date for the appeal .
Could the Council request information from the Spanish Government as to why this case took so long to be brought to trial and request notification of when the date for appeal will be set ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mrs Billingham 's question .
I thank the honourable Member for her question and recognize the difficulties those involved in the Els Pins Park dispute have faced over their properties , but I regret it is not for the Council to intervene in cases which are pending before national criminal courts .
I am grateful for the reply , however negative it would appear to be .
This is a really sorry saga . It has attracted the interest of Members from all sides of this Parliament .
We have sought the intervention of the President of Parliament too .
But I can tell you that even with your response matters have got even worse .
When I asked the question it was about an appeal .
We have now subsequently learnt that appeal has been heard .
Nobody was notified of the appeal .
None of the plaintiffs therefore attended .
Nobody has any idea of the outcome of this appeal .
Quite frankly , people are absolutely desperate .
Already people have lost their property .
Others are in the process of losing their property .
It seems to me that we have an absolute impasse here .
It seems to me that there is no procedure within Parliament , the Council , the Commission or whatever organization they are turning to that is able to offer them some help .
So I seek further acknowledgement of the problem .
I thank the honourable Member for her further question .
I acknowledge the seriousness of the situation in the way it affects those who are directly involved .
Indeed I have had constituents who have been involved in difficult situations which are broadly similar .
Ultimately they have had to seek legal redress .
As those matters are currently before the national criminal courts it would be inappropriate for me to comment further other than acknowledging that there is a serious problem .
Question No 12 by Paul Rübig ( H-0521 / 98 )
Subject : Cost of new customs legislation
As a former member of Parliament 's committee of inquiry into fraud , I welcome any initiative aimed at making procedures more effective and more fraud-resistant .
However , I am in favour of a rational and , above all , manageable realignment of EU customs legislation based on the requirements of SLIM and the assessment form .
The other parties - customs services , trading partners , freight companies and banks and insurance houses - should also be involved as far as possible .
Can the Commission state what costs the new customs system will involve for the European economy ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mr Rübig 's question .
The Council obviously attaches great importance to the fight against fraud , and reducing customs fraud is one of the main objectives of current work on reform of the transit system .
Mr President , the problem with the Commission 's current proposal on customs law and transit is that it is , in reality , unworkable .
We are approaching the enlargement of the EU .
We want to trade with these countries and the system is currently structured as if all goods were sensitive goods like cigarettes , meat and alcohol .
The fact is that normal trade accounts for 99 % of the total and the formal proposals currently under examination are completely unworkable in practice .
As a result , if the system were to come into force in the version currently proposed by the Commission , it would prove absolutely catastrophic for economic relations .
I believe that these strict regulations designed for sensitive areas should not be applied to small consignments and basic necessities .
I have very little to add except to say that there is a need for reform .
The precise nature of the reform should be achieved in a balanced and measured way .
Where there are costs involved , they have to be borne .
One would hope that in the long term there would be a saving because a new system would prevent abuses which have cost public revenue in the past .
I was fascinated by Mr Rübig 's question , particularly as it refers to the Committee of Inquiry that I chaired .
I would just like to ask the President-in-Office if he will agree with the main conclusions of the Committee of Inquiry , in particular those that relate to the role that computerization can play in preventing the loss by fraud of excise duty to Member States and own resources to the European Union budget ?
Is he aware that the transit system as it now operates is so porous that billions of ecus are being lost across the Member States and that serious efforts are by the Member States are needed to inject the necessary urgency and political will into the resolution of this problem ?
Will he give us his assurance that the presidency will make sure that this continues ?
I thank the honourable Member for his supplementary .
The answer is that the Council is aware of the report produced by the honourable Member 's committee .
It has endorsed the general outlines of the plan and recognizes , as I said in relation to a previous question this afternoon , that computerization is a very important aspect of any changes which will enable a check to be kept on the transit of goods .
Hopefully , this will outlaw abuses and lead in the longer term , once the system is in place , to increases in public revenue .

In accordance with Rule 41 of the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 13 and 14 , by Olivier Dupuis and Ursula Stenzel respectively , lapse because they refer to the situation in Kosovo and , as you know , a debate on that subject was included in the agenda .
Question No 15 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-0524 / 98 )
Subject : Autonomy in Northern Epirus
According to the UN Charter , autonomy is one of the inalienable civil rights of peoples .
In the EU , autonomy is a common form of institution ; countries such as Italy , Spain and Finland have granted fundamental rights to autonomous regions on their territory .
Northern Epirus is a region of Albania whose right to autonomy has been established ( as long ago as 17 May 1914 by the " Corfu Protocol ' ) and provision made for the protection of the population 's language and religion .
Moreover , the Protocol was signed at the time by the plenipotentiary countries of the ( present-day ) EU ( Italy , Great Britain , Germany , Austria and France ) and by the Special Representative of Albania himself .
Will the Council state its position on this issue , which concerns the protection of human rights in a country which desires closer relations with the EU but which has refused for years to honour the commitment that it undertook ?
Mr Henderson , you have the floor to reply to Mr Kaklamanis ' question .
The presidency welcomes the significant progress made by Albania regarding the rights of Greeks living in southern Albania .
It encourages Albania to continue to make improvements in this area .
Albania has repeatedly declared its commitment to observe the rights of the Greek minority in accordance with international standards .
Mr Henderson , I am very sorry but you have not answered my question .
You have answered another question , which I did not ask you .
I am very clear on the matter .
Does the UK Presidency divide autonomy into good and bad ?
Does it give the right of autonomy to some people but not to others ?
Your country signed the Corfu Protocol of 1914 , which refers to autonomy in northern Epirus .
My question is this : how is it possible , through the use of weapons , for the European Union to want to grant autonomy to the Albanians in Kosovo and for the European Union , through your own presidency , to refuse to implement an instrument which bears the signature of five Member States of the European Union and that of Albania ?
I would like you to answer my specific question , and I would also like you to tell me whether , in the discussions which are taking place in the Council on autonomy in Kosovo , the Greek government has raised the issue of the autonomy of northern Epirus .
I refer to my previous answer , that political encouragement has been given to Albania to recognize the rights of Greeks who live in the southern part of Albania .
The Albanian Government has declared its commitment to meet the necessary international standards in this regard .
The matter has not been specifically raised in the Council by the Greek Government - or , if it has , I am not aware of it .
In relation to the general point , one cannot say that the solution should be the same in every situation in every region or country in the world where there is an argument about regional devolution in one form or another .
One really must look at the situation that pertains in any country .
Indeed , those who believed they were a persecuted minority might want differing solutions in different countries even though the persecution was of a similar nature , for all sorts of historical , political or economic reasons .
So one must look at particular situations .
But , generally , it is consistent with the Albanian Government 's statements of support for a greater say over their own affairs by the people of Kosovo that the Albanian Government recognizes within its own borders that special needs have to be accorded to the Greek minority who live in the southern part of Albania .
Question No 16 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0526 / 98 )
Subject : Removing obstacles to trade
Can the Council inform Parliament of the terms of the agreement at the Internal Market Council of Ministers ' meeting on 18 May concerning legislation removing obstacles to trade ?
In particular , what powers have been accorded to the Commission to demand that states take the " necessary and proportionate measures ' to remove such obstacles to trade ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mr McMahon 's question .
The Council reached unanimous agreement in principle on a regulation and resolution on the functioning of the internal market in relation to the free movement of goods among the Member States .
Parliament will be reconsulted on the text of the regulation since it is substantially different from what the Commission originally proposed .
The regulation requires the Commission to request a Member State to take action within a period which it shall determine .
The Member State then has five days in which either to set out the action it will be taking or to submit reasons why it does not consider that there is an obstacle .
The regulation also sets up an information mechanism to keep all Member States informed of actual or potential obstacles and action being taken against them .
I thank the President-in-Office for his very full answer .
I am pleased that the British presidency has curbed the zeal of the Commission , which really wanted to exercise excessive powers , which could have meant restraints on the right to strike and legitimate trade union practice .
Would the Council not agree with me that we now have a more sensible compromise , and that no doubt there will be successful proposals coming forward from this Parliament when it expresses its opinion ?
I have known Mr McMahon for a number of years and as ever I agree with the point which he has raised .
I gladly accept his congratulations on the Council 's view on this matter .
I assure him that in any revised position we will be ensuring that the measures do not affect the right to strike or other fundamental rights .
As the author is not present , Question No 17 lapses .
Question No 18 by Gary Titley ( H-0537 / 98 )
Subject : Problems facing beneficiaries of wills across the EU
One of my constituents has inherited a legal estate through the will of a relative .
He has been informed that as different parts of the estate are in both Ireland and Britain , he will have to go through the legal processes and costs of securing executor 's oaths and powers of attorney in both countries .
What proposals will the Council produce to ensure the harmonization of legal procedures for births , marriages and deaths , so that in future the Single Market will serve the citizens of Europe from the cradle to the grave ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mr Titley 's question .
The Council has no plans to harmonize the present procedures in Member States of the European Union relating to the inheritance of property on death .
In view of the widely differing national laws relating to inheritance - particularly of family property - and the formalities relating to the drawing up of wills and the procedures involved in their administration , the technical difficulties that would be involved in such a project would be formidable .
The honourable Member has also raised the wider issue of the harmonization of legal procedures for births , marriages and deaths in this context .
I would draw his attention to a convention on jurisdiction and the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters which was agreed by the Council of Ministers at the end of May .
An important benefit of this agreement is that it will ensure that orders in Members States in divorce and similar cases , including orders affecting children at the time of divorce , will generally be recognized throughout the European Union with the minimum of procedural requirements .
If this is furthered by regulating the competence of divorce courts , this should help to avoid the present confusion among courts in the European Union .
Could I thank the President-in-Office for his very full answer .
Since putting this question down I realize that this problem is much more extensive than I had anticipated .
One of the benefits of the single market is that people can now own property anywhere in the European Union .
A number of people take advantage of those provisions to retire to countries like Spain ; clearly that is an ageing population and inevitably people are dying and their families are finding that they are getting entangled in a legal nightmare .
I recognize the impossibility of harmonizing legal systems but as the President-in-Office has said we have just agreed a convention on divorce .
I would have thought that if we can sort out divorce we can sort out deaths .
Could not the principle of the conventional divorce , whereby there is mutual recognition of legal systems in Member States , also be applied in this case ?
I would summit this is going to be a bigger problem .
If we are going to build a Europe for the people then we ought to sort out the basics of births , deaths and marriage so that the single market does cater for citizens from cradle to grave .
I am not sure if everyone will agree that if we can sort out divorce we can sort out death .
It is complicated enough sorting out divorce .
I think that the honourable Member raises an important point .
As Europe becomes a more mobile area and people move from one part of the European Union to another then increasingly there will be problems that arise because of that movement of people , especially when it happens in large numbers - and the numbers are growing .
I think all of us in the United Kingdom know friends who have retired to Spain or to Ireland .
I am sure that all Members from different Member States could quote similar experiences so the honourable Member raises an important point .
In my original answer I explained the current position of the Council but it would be wise for all of us to think further on this .
During this presidency the honourable Member will be aware that justice and home affairs has been a lively area where a lot of change has taken place and a lot of future change has been initiated , and it is an area where those who have been involved in this question will want to give further thought , because it needs practical solutions .
Question No 19 by Marie-Paule Kestelijn-Sierens ( H-0540 / 98 )
Subject : European subsidies on school milk
Can the Council explain why , under Article 2 of Council Regulation 1842 / 83 , sterilized full cream milk is the only kind of full cream milk excluded from the European subsidy scheme for school milk , in spite of the fact that it is the only kind of full cream milk sold in glass bottles ?
Does it not consider that schools which opt for educational and environmental reasons to supply milk in returnable glass bottles are being unjustifiably penalized for this under the subsidy scheme ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens ' question .
Sterilized whole and semi-skimmed milk has been ineligible for European Community school milk subsidy since the introduction of the scheme in 1977 .
When the scheme was introduced the list of eligible products took account of the market situation , availability and the type of product actually supplied to schools at the time .
The list has been amended over the years at Member States ' request but there has been no request to add sterilized unflavoured milk .
Its inclusion would require amendment of Council Regulation 1842 / 83 or of the detailed implementing rules in Commission Regulation 3392 / 93 which provides for a derogation from specified heat treatments .
I am surprised that sterilized whole milk is the only type of milk supplied in glass bottles in some Member States .
In the United Kingdom pasteurized and UHT milk is available in glass bottles while sterilized milk tends to come in plastic bottles .
There is of course no link between the type of container and eligibility for subsidy .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply , but I am left with the problem that between a quarter and half of the schools in Belgium provide milk in glass bottles to their children .
This concerns sterilized whole milk which is only available in glass bottles .
In order to reach a solution , the directive should be modified since it excludes sterilized milk .
This means that environmentally-minded schools receive no subsidies , even though they use glass bottles .
I would like to urge a modification to the directive on this issue .
I am so used to answering questions in the British Parliament by saying No that I find it quite difficult to say ' Yes ' sometimes .
I say to the honourable Member who raised this question that she has raised a real point .
So far Member States have made no requests for the addition of sterilized milk to the list .
As I understand it , sterilized milk is 5 % of the European Union liquid milk market .
If there is a need for a modification to the regulation , perhaps the Belgian Government could consider making representations to the Commission .
If there is a logic to the case , there will be receptiveness in the answer .
Question No 20 by Maj Theorin ( H-0541 / 98 )
Subject : Relations between India and the EU
India has conducted five nuclear weapons tests and created instability in its region .
Pakistan has announced that it will conduct its own nuclear weapons tests .
The risk of a new nuclear arms race , global as well as regional , is obvious .
The EU is an important partner for India as regards cooperation .
It possesses political , economic and diplomatic leverage .
The USA is urging that sanctions be imposed on India , but there are alternatives , such as suspending cooperation agreements , stopping aid and prohibiting all exports of arms or arms parts .
The EU thus has an opportunity to criticize India not only in word but also in deed .
What action does the Council think the EU should take ?
Mr Henderson , I invite you to reply to Mrs Theorin 's question .
The European Council welcomed the conclusions of the meeting of P5 Foreign Ministers in Geneva on 4 June and G8 Foreign Ministers in London on 12 June as a positive contribution to the process of encouraging India and Pakistan to address constructively the issues which divide them .
It also welcomed the decision by some Foreign Ministers on 12 June to establish a taskforce to promote non-proliferation in South Asia .
Previously , the Council has called on India and Pakistan to engage urgently in dialogue on regional stability issues and agree confidence-building measures to reduce tension and urged them to sign and move to ratify the comprehensive test ban treaty , join negotiations on a fissile material cut-off Treaty , exercise stringent control over nuclear-related exports , and commit themselves not to assemble or deploy nuclear weapons .

Member States have already worked for a delay in consideration of loans to India via the World Bank and other international financial institutions and will review the advisability of international financial institution lending to Pakistan in the relevant institutions in the light of the economic and financial circumstances .
The Council has also asked the Commission to review India 's and Pakistan 's continued eligibility for GSP preferences .
That was a good summing up of many proposals we would like to see implemented ; above all the condemnation of India and Pakistan .
However , there was one measure which I clearly missed , namely that we were willing to take measures with regard to arms exports or the export of weapon parts to India and Pakistan .
In percentage terms , India is competing harder in the area of military research than any other country in the world apart from the USA .
Their new prime minister has proposed an increase of 100 % over five years .
There is therefore a very dangerous situation with regard to both conventional weapons and nuclear weapons in this region .
It is a serious situation which demands a response and action from the outside world .
But , of course , the five permanent nuclear weapons powers must also accept their responsibility and follow the measures they promised in Article 6 of the non-proliferation treaty , namely to seriously negotiate a real reduction in nuclear weapons .
Otherwise no actions will be credible .
I thank the honourable Member , as ever , for her supplementary question .
I am pleased that she recognized that the original answer covered much of the ground that she would expect to be in the response of the Council .
She was somewhat critical of the lack of an arms embargo .
I say to her that there is no consensus in the Council for this .
But even if there were , it would be doubtful if it would be effective because Russia is a main supplier of arms in this particular situation to India .
I should like to say how much I have enjoyed spending my Wednesday afternoons in the company of Mr Henderson for the last six months .
I look forward to the Austrian presidency .
Does the President-in-Office not agree that this current situation reinforces the need for Western powers to take seriously the dangerous potential insecurity in this region , particularly in view of the running sore of Kashmir between India and Pakistan and the ongoing problems of disputes between India and China ?
We ought therefore to have a fresh political initiative in order to ensure greater stability in the region .
I wish to say to the honourable Member that it is so pleasant to do business with a man who is so easily satisfied , and I look forward to continuing to try to satisfy him in other forums on other occasions .
He is absolutely right that the recent events in India and Pakistan highlight the need for the rest of the world to enter into a dialogue with both of those countries and other neighbouring countries to try to build a stability which will ensure that what was a relatively minor problem , which has become a very much greater problem , does not become an even greater problem in the future .
The honourable Member is absolutely right to bring that to the Council 's attention .
Mr President , before I sit down , I just wish to say to you that this is the end of my six months of reporting to Parliament and it has been a pleasure to have operated under such a genial chairmanship as your own and one which has been courteous and fair .
I apologize for the fact that once or twice airlines have not cooperated with either Parliament 's timetable or mine and it has led to deviations from our original intentions .
But I hope that we have covered the ground , and I thank you very much for your chairmanship .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
Ladies and gentlemen , that concludes Question Time .
Questions Nos 21 to 44 will be dealt with in writing .
As Mr Henderson said , today 's sitting marks the end of six months of collaboration in questions to the Council .
I would like to say , Mr Henderson , that Mr Titley is not the only one who is glad to have shared some of his afternoons with you .
As President , I have had the honour and pleasure of sharing all my Wednesday afternoons with you , and I would like to express my thanks and satisfaction . I would also sincerely like to wish you all the best for the future , and I hope we meet again , here or somewhere else .
In one of the later questions , it was repeatedly said that many people go to Spain to retire .
Mr Henderson , Spain is a good place to go to even before you retire .
I hope we may be able to meet there , too .
That concludes questions to the Council .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.00 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Harmful tax competition ( continuation )
The next item is a continuation of the debate on the report ( A4-0228 / 98 ) by Mr Carlo Secchi of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the Commission 's communication to the Council and the European Parliament concerning a package to tackle harmful tax competition .
Mr President , I would like to draw the attention of the Bureau to defects in the text of the report we are now debating .
The German version and the Swedish version contain 22 paragraphs .
However , the English version contains 35 paragraphs .
We are all anxious to know what we are going to be voting for tomorrow .
Thank you , Mr Svensson .
We will take note of this .
Your comments will be given consideration .
I can promise you that .
Mr President , after monetary union , it was to be expected that sooner or later the harmonization of the tax systems of the Member States would be raised as part of the project for a federal Europe , which is gradually being imposed on us , whether we like it or not .
I fear that today 's debate is only the first act in a long play .
It may be packaged under the heading ' countering harmful tax competition ' , but ultimately it boils down to the same thing : the powers of the Member States are being moved in dribs and drabs , but very systematically , to federal level .
I am not in any way opposed to extensive European consultation and collaboration . Nevertheless , as a Fleming I am wellqualified to be critical of this form of equalization .
As you know , the Flemings find that they now are unable to introduce essential reductions in taxation - at their own expense , would you believe - within the federal state of Belgium - for example , regarding social security taxes or the burden of taxation on labour - , as these reductions have been vetoed by the federal partner in the Walloon provinces .
The question may therefore justifiably be asked whether the hypothetically harmful tax competition which would be countered , and which nevertheless also has advantages , would ultimately not be a lesser evil than the federal uniformity which threatens to replace it .
May I remind you that large companies and capital are easily moved outside the European Union for tax purposes , an option not available to the average citizen .
Finally I should mention , albeit not with a totally clear conscience , that a variety of tax advantages are granted to the European institutions that are not available to the common citizen in our Member States either .
Those who wish to harmonize and equalize would do well to start with themselves , if not , they should leave well enough alone .
Mr President , the introduction of the euro has caused the Member States to realize that their direct taxes require some tax harmonization .
The code of conduct relating to harmful tax competition , dated 1 December of last year , was the first writing on the wall , and we hope to see a future agreement regarding tax on interest for non-residents .
The need for such initiatives is obvious .
Since 1980 , the burden of tax has been shifting from mobile factors such as capital to the least mobile factor of labour .
Europe will not succeed in drastically reducing unemployment , presently standing at 11 % , without departing from this trend .
The Secchi report recognizes the above mentioned necessity for some harmonization in the area of direct taxes in order to prevent the race to ruin .
However , a new concept , that is , profitable or healthy tax competition , was introduced in this report , to which my group strongly objects .
This seems to me to be a totally muddled concept which assumes that tax competition exists which has favourable social effects .
Admittedly , variations in taxation will continue to exist , and these variations will always lead to competition .
Tax competition is inevitable in this sense .
But we cannot see how this competition could be beneficial to persons other than those who are subjected to it .
Differences in taxation create a constant pressure on governments to lower their tax rates .
The more mobile the tax source , the harder it is to resist this pressure .
The result , however , is seldom a lower level of tax , but rather a shift of the burden of tax to the least mobile source , namely , labour .
That is what we have seen in recent years .
It is one of the reasons for the high unemployment rate in Europe .
I would advise the right-wing members of this Parliament to think twice before coming up with tangled concepts such as tax competition .
Mr President , the internal market is now five years old , and , as the rapporteur stated , the arrival of the euro will render it more transparent and efficient .
Everyone knows by now that , besides eliminating the traditional obstacles to free movement , the internal market can only function well with a proper competition policy .
The Commission has considerable powers at its disposal in this respect and is taking firm action in cases of unlawful governmental support or actions by companies that reduce competition .
Unfortunately , a similar range of instruments is not available to the Commission with respect to removing the harmful effects of fiscal competition .
Unless this changes , Member States will continue to steal a march on each other with specific provisions for non-residents ; the fiscal shopping around on the part of companies and private citizens will only increase .
In addition , the risk of erosion of state revenue will become a real threat , which is certainly not a good thing in times of budgetary constraint .
Finally , the trend during the past decade to lighten the burden on mobile factors at the cost of the less mobile labour factor could not be reversed , despite any number of employment debates .
It is therefore laudable that the Commission has presented this package and that the Council has also decided at long last that something must be done .
Cardiff has emphasized this as well .
It is a cautious beginning .
The question of harmonization has not yet been raised in any of the three selected priority areas , which are therefore limited to coordination here and there .
The package method is a step in the right direction for Europe and the Member States , but the package , which contains no more than three products , would appear to be rather minimal .
Indirect taxation and border labour also suffer badly from the lack of fiscal harmonization .
The package presented by the Commission is admittedly a good move for us politically , but only as a first step , that is , with the condition that further steps must follow , including those relating to the decision-making procedure .
It would not be right for the Member States to maintain the unanimity rule and give the impression to their citizens that they are safeguarding their powers with respect to fiscal matters , when that same unanimity rule prevents the Member States from realizing the harmonization required to counter harmful tax competition and the erosion of tax revenue .
By retaining the unanimity rule the Member States are themselves undermining the formal powers they cling to so eagerly .
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner three questions before closing .
Firstly , a code of conduct working party has been established which is to implement specific matters .
How will this be democratically controlled ?
Secondly , does the Commission intend to talk anyone else outside the OECD into taking one or more of these measures ?
Thirdly and finally , Mr President , when can retailers in border areas expect the VAT rates to converge ?
My congratulations to the rapporteur .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report .
We agree with the proposal in the Monti package .
Unfair competition in the area of company taxation must be eliminated .
In five years time there should , therefore , be no more fiscal constructions set up by Member States to entice companies from other Member States .
A provision for savings is also required .
All sorts of calculations are being made about how much the new regime will contribute to the national treasuries .
However , we should not be under any illusion , as savings are also deposited outside the Union .
But the Council is correct in its conclusions dated 1 December of last year that we must safeguard the competitiveness of the European financial markets .
In this context , I would imagine that an advance levy on income derived from securities of 20 % or more would be counterproductive .
Large savers will undoubtedly invest their money outside the Union .
In conclusion , I have one more question for the Commissioner .
I know that the text of the directive on the tax regulation for savings has been finalized .
When does he expect this directive to take effect ? Many citizens are , of course , interested in this matter .
Mr President , the positive thing about this report is the criticism of so-called tax havens and demands for minimum standards and for a duty to inform to apply to banks .
However , the idea of more general tax harmonization is unrealistic .
It would be a serious encroachment on the prerogative of national parliaments and the rights of the citizens to shape their country 's tax policy through elections .
It could also upset the stability of state finances .
The Member States have such different tax systems that they would be forced at the same time to harmonize all sorts of taxes .
This is politically and practically impossible and an unrealistic idea which we should abandon .
Mr President , I would like to echo the compliments expressed by other speakers to the rapporteur . Allow me to congratulate him on the content of his report which , whilst containing comments on and criticism of the Commission , essentially supports the Commission in what I consider to be its bold intervention in Member States ' tax policy .
Particularly once Economic and Monetary Union has come into force , there is no doubt that Member States , who are being stripped of what margin for manoeuvre they had on budgetary and monetary policy , will not easily relinquish their prerogative on tax matters ; there will certainly be resistance .
The Commission therefore needs Parliament 's backing on this , and I believe that , in the democratic spirit which drives it , Parliament will support it .
Let us not forget that nearly all Member States , particularly the larger ones , have created oases within their borders . We are not talking about tax havens , but oases in which taxation is somehow lighter .
These oases spark off competition , and the competition system hampers the healthy and harmonious management of taxation which would create the results we are seeking , including in terms of economic progress and growth .
I would like to stress , moreover , that we must safeguard the possibility of using the tax lever , applying tax incentives for areas which need to expand ; there are some outstanding examples of this in the Community .
These should still remain possible because even labour taxation , for example , can allow areas with difficulties to get onto an equal footing with other areas of the Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in his report Mr Secchi has shown a great deal of sensitivity , which is very important in dealing with such a delicate issue .
However , we must under no circumstances allow ourselves to close our eyes to the economic reality of the European Union .
It is a fact that the single currency , the euro , amongst all its positive effects , will also have a politically positive side effect in that it will stimulate extra activity in the overall policymaking of the European Union .
And for me this extra activity means that things will , at last , have to get moving in the tax sector .
It will not stop at coordination .
We will have to move on to harmonization , and there are many reasons why this is the case .
I myself think that we should move away from the principle of unanimity .
Europe needs a certain level of coordination , better coordination in the area of tax policy , precisely because many different levels of tax burden apply in the European Union . Labour is too heavily taxed .
Corporate groups are largely left to deal with their tax matters as they see fit .
Small- and mediumsized businesses don 't really get a look in .
In truth , it is only the international tax consultancies who really benefit profit from the situation .
What we need is better coordination in order to eliminate certain double and multiple taxation problems .
It is quite simply unacceptable that Europe has coordination centres , as is the case in Belgium , which make large loans to groups and subsidiaries of groups with interest payable outside the country in question , where in turn they are subject to very low tax rates and thus in practice manage to avoid the whole taxation process .
This is unacceptable !
These practices exist all over Europe and we must get rid of them .
This is our chance to achieve better harmonization in this sector .
Mr President , I will not repeat any of the comments made by Mr Secchi , which I support from start to finish .
I would prefer to concentrate on one point concerning the stage at which we Europeans find ourselves after the coming into force of the euro .
We Europeans have from now on rejected the possibility of devaluing currencies in order to recover lost competitiveness by way of a short cut .
We have also rejected the use of monetary policies as a national instrument to create employment in the oldest sense of the Phillips curve .
In addition , we have rejected budgetary policies by signing up to the Stability Pact .
Now it is time for us to tackle the problem of fiscal harmonization , which still remains to be solved .
And here there are two conflicting ideas : one - from the Council - which is timid , narrow-minded and slow ; and the other which is the one the Commission wants to opt for .
I would like to assure the Commissioner of my personal support for the efforts he is making in order to overcome the Council 's opposition , and would like to emphasize several points relating to the package being presented to us here today .
As regards fiscal competition , I completely agree that a single market , with a single currency , is not compatible with fiscal privileges which distort competition .
However , it would be appropriate if , alongside allowances , tax reductions or increases in credit facilities , the Commission tackled the complex problem of state aid .
One thing that has been talked about during the days in the run-up to the Cardiff Summit is the desire on the part of some Member States for the principle of subsidiarity to be applied in an unequal manner , in such a way that the Commission cannot control , review or examine state aids .
I cannot see any difference between aid granted by means of tax reductions and aid granted from items of public expenditure .
Secondly , as regards taxation on savings , I share the Commission 's view that it is unacceptable to increase taxation on work while decreasing the tax burden on capital . Nevertheless , I believe that the measures which are being implemented , and which we are currently considering , are insufficient .
I think - and this is not the moment to go into this as I do not have time - that we will need to consider whether the model of calculated added value for consumption is still valid , a model we approved at a time which was very different to that in which we now live .
In conclusion , Commissioner , I would like to reiterate my support for the efforts being made to overcome the Council 's opposition and to move towards the harmonization which we Europeans now need .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Monti package is a good impetus for further coordination . We must find the right balance between policy coordination and competition .
In my opinion , we should not compete outright in a number of policy areas but rather arrive at cooperation .
In this respect , I believe that the code of conduct regarding corporation tax should be elaborated further .
In its present state , it provides a host of possibilities for tax evasion , and the entire issue of VAT has been disregarded in these proposals , which is regrettable .
I do not consider this to be Commissioner Monti 's fault , but rather a matter which the Council is still afraid to tackle .
The same applies to indirect taxation , such as creating environmental and energy taxes to avoid increasing taxation on employment , as has been mentioned often by other Members .
The reduction of double taxation on wages , in particular , should be given a higher priority .
I do not blame Commissioner Monti , but I do blame the Council .
Mr President , the introduction of monetary union will create a previously unknown level of transparency and thus of total comparability of all prices and costs from one Member State to another .
As a result , competition-distorting differences in many areas , including environmental conditions for example , but of course above all the tax sector , will take on a new and greater dimension .
Our domestic market with its complete liberalization and freedom of movement must have fair competition conditions , otherwise it may produce shifts and changes running counter to economic and social balance .
Harmful tax competition can destroy the economic advantages of the single market in the states in question and runs contrary to the logic of economic and monetary union .
Strictly speaking , reaching the degree of tax harmonization we are currently labouring to achieve should have been be an important condition for introducing Economic and Monetary Union .
In this respect I welcome Mr Secchi 's report with its very clear and logical assessment of the Commission 's communication .
I believe it is important for us to agree that tax coordination - in terms of reducing the labour factor - is necessary and can therefore also serve as an important instrument in the fight against unemployment .
The achievement of a compromise between tax sovereignty and stronger voluntary economic coordination is an inescapable necessity for any state which wants the single market and monetary union to work .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Secchi , very sincerely for having successfully handled a particularly difficult task when it comes to encroaching upon national , in some cases even nationalist , prerogatives .
In my report on European industrial competitiveness , I myself proposed fiscal harmonization in order to avoid anarchic competition between Member States and in order to produce beneficial effects at the level of business competitiveness .
I am also delighted at the adoption of a code of conduct in the area of business taxation by the Ecofin Council .
There is currently concrete progress which points to real hope in this area .
With regard to the text of Mr Secchi 's report , there are however a number of points which raise certain fears and doubts for me .
I consider that the bias in favour of a correlation between lower taxes and lower unemployment is far too optimistic .
If such a simple solution existed , there would no longer be any unemployment in Europe .
Similarly , I do not support the lowest tender fiscal policy which the rapporteur seems to suggest , for it encourages negative competition between Member States .
I would finally like to remind you that tax deductions also result in a redistribution within society as a whole : education , research , security , infrastructure - none of these would be accessible to everyone without a fiscal policy which enables strong public intervention .
In conclusion , I would like to reaffirm my conviction as a Member of the European Parliament and as a Frenchman , that it is necessary to harmonize the Union 's fiscal policy .
However , we must keep in mind that this fiscal policy is a way of constructing a political Europe , and that it is a political Europe alone that can legitimize a fiscal Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for some excellent work .
The report presents us with a splendid opportunity to discuss the weapons the Union will choose to combat harmful tax competition between Member States .
Divergent national tax systems and the competition they lead to will result in a total failure to achieve the prospects for growth and employment in the internal market .
In many Member States , the level of tax on labour is the greatest barrier to solving the unemployment problem .
The higher overall labour costs are , the higher the unemployment rate generally is also .
Unfortunately , harmonization has not extended into this particular sector .
What has happened at national level is at best special tax allowances for foreign executives and the use of option and other tax systems , which , in conjunction with a low rate of capital gains tax , results in production becoming capital-intensive , thus exacerbating the unemployment problem .
The Union has quite rightly intervened in indirect taxation , for example by aiming at harmonization of VAT .
Otherwise tax on tobacco , alcohol and car tax , for example , can differ quite substantially from one country to another .
When the Union fusses over the abolition of the duty-free system , it forgets that this only serves to cause unemployment and preserve different levels of indirect taxation .
Tax havens can only be created in countries whose national economies are in good shape or with an undeveloped social security system .
They are able to compete with low taxation .
Countries with a high rate of taxation , which , in addition , have problems balancing their budget , apply negative tax competition instead : in other words , they burden their own citizens with high special taxes .
Tackling this problem is at least as important as intervening in harmful positive tax competition .
Mr President , I think that this report contains a lot of good things .
However , I would like to talk about three things that are not included , and which I think should perhaps have been included .
The first concerns the Ecofin group which is to be set up to monitor the application of this Code of Conduct .
Its meetings are secret .
I think Parliament should have called for the minutes of these meetings to be published as soon as possible .
The second point which I find lacking comes in part two of the action plan , and concerns the duty to inform which people are considering applying to banks within the Union .
In fact a very common way of avoiding tax today is to place your capital in another country and then withhold information on income from this capital from the tax authorities in your home country .
This is a quite simply criminal tax fiddle which is taking place on a large scale within the Union today .
A very simple way to overcome this , Mr President , is to impose an obligation on banks to report to the authorities in the capital owner 's home country that this income exists , so that they can be taxed .
I think Parliament should have said that we welcome such a duty to inform .
The third point concerns measures against tax havens .
Obviously , like the rapporteur , I too welcome the fact that we are trying to tackle this problem within the Union .
However , I think we should perhaps have pointed out that to get a definitive solution to this problem we need a global agreement , otherwise there is a risk that capital owners will move their capital from one of the Union 's tax havens to a tax haven outside the Union .
Mr President , I did not vote for Mr Secchi 's report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and I will not vote for it in the House , because it proposes a fool 's bargain in the sense that , in practice , it advocates non-respect for the demand for simultaneous adoption of the Community directives on business taxation and taxation of savings .
There is no way we can be satisfied with a code of conduct in the area of business taxation whilst demanding a directive on the taxation of income from savings , especially given that harmful tax competition is far more important in the area of business taxation than that of the taxation of savings .
In this latter field , my amendment recalling that the competitiveness of European financial markets at world level must be protected was fortunately taken up by the committee , which particularly delighted and reassured my colleague , Mr Fayot , who is no longer here and who , unfortunately , was also absent from the committee when this amendment was voted on .
Mr Secchi 's report goes as far as putting in the rubbish bin the integration of the legislative process with regard to the different components of the package formulated on 1 December last year by the Ecofin Council .
My amendment clarifying that there is no cause for killing fair tax competition within the European Union was rejected , as was my amendment which confirmed that the only objective of harmonization must be the elimination of real distortions which truly interfere with the single market . An example of this , in the area of indirect taxation , is the excessively high rate of excise on wines coming from certain Member States - and Mr Monti will have understood clearly that there is no cause to take initiatives to kill the zero rate in this area .
Mr Secchi 's report calls for the elimination of tax havens in the internal market .
No Member State is a tax haven , quite the contrary , but many territories which have special relations with certain Member States , such as the Isle of Man , the Dutch Antilles and so on , may be considered as tax havens .
In the internal market , there will be a need to eliminate these .

It is furthermore intellectually dishonest , if not hypocritical , to consider an eminently social model of taxation as a tax haven , such as that in my country which imposes reasonable rates of VAT and excise duties - to the advantage of the low paid - and taxes higher incomes more heavily ; which treats non-residents the same as neighbouring countries with regard to taxation of savings but which fortunately refrains from confiscating income from savings , savings made , by honest people , on the basis of income on which the taxpayer has already paid his or her taxes .
The taxation of border work is held up as one of the areas in which fiscal harmonization is necessary .
On this subject it is sufficient to ensure respect for the principle by which it is appropriate to consolidate , in the country of employment , the payment of social contributions and income tax .
Mr President , I fear that a number of exaggerations in this report hardly contribute to consolidating the Ecofin Council 's decisions of 1 December last year , reached under the Luxembourg Presidency , which deserve credit for unblocking the process of direct fiscal harmonization , but which must not be the victim of a fool 's bargain .
Mr President , I should also like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur , and I would like to say that I understand that a certain degree of competition between national tax systems may in fact stimulate efficiency and benefit consumers .
But it should be emphasized that the present inequalities between tax systems can also contribute to making it impossible for us to reap the profits we might otherwise obtain from the internal market in terms of growth and employment .
So I think it is becoming a matter of urgency to improve the coordination of these policies , which are a hindrance to the proper working of the internal market .
Particularly in the area of taxation , bearing in mind that tax coordination can be used as an essential instrument for the practical implementation of our employment policy guidelines by reducing the tax burden on employment .
We must reverse the taxation philosophy we apply to the labour market and other production factors , especially capital .
As the rapporteur quite rightly emphasizes , between 1985 and 1995 taxes on employment increased by 20 % while taxes on capital decreased by 10 % .
We shall only succeed in creating jobs when we have the political ability and the political courage to reverse that trend .
It is therefore vital that we should adopt a package of measures that deserve the support of Member States and include , for example , a code of conduct for company taxation , and conditions that will make it possible to reduce the tax burden on those who promote employment , with a consequent reduction in non-wages social costs .
To succeed in our fight against unemployment it is important to counteract the disastrous consequences of harmful tax competition , and I would emphasize that , if it becomes necessary , we must retain beneficial forms of competition in taxation between Member States as an instrument for increasing the competitiveness of the European economy in the face of the present challenges of the global market .
Mr President , a number of shrewd observations have been made this afternoon and this evening .
I would like to look at this matter more in terms of principle .
Firstly , I must say it is a good thing that we are taking this up , and I would also like to congratulate the Commissioner on his excellent results in Cardiff .
The Council has also followed the recommendations in the document forwarded by the Commission .
To my mind , there is a matter of principle involved in these problem areas .
My premise is that we should deal with trans-border fiscal matters .
That is where the problems lie .
My honourable friend Mr Gallagher from Ireland made a fine contribution this afternoon , amply illustrating the problems of company taxation .
I can well understand our delight at creating jobs in one place , but I do not like the fact that jobs are simply disappearing elsewhere , which means that jobs are not really being created at all and that the Union is not making any progress .
The second point I would like to mention is environmental taxes or duties .
These traverse borders just as company taxation does .
Here , too , we need to keep in step .
Once again , we have heard Ms Lulling and also Mr Fayot speaking earlier today about returns on investments , interest , and so forth .
What is the good of agreeing on uniform taxation of interest if we cannot even locate the interest ?
That is the real problem : a lack of openness , or banking secrecy .
Finally , we have what are known as excise duties - as mentioned previously - on spirits , wine , cars , and so on .
That , too , is a trans-border issue that we must examine .
However , I do not think we should touch on personal taxation .
That would not be realistic at present .
Overall , the tax ratio is actually fairly uniform .
Some countries have heavy user fees ; other countries , my own included , have little in the way of user fees . However , adding it all up , for more than half the members of the Union , much the same tax ratio goes on welfare and welfare services .
I strongly recommend that we take a good look at the real world and include a voluntary aspect when implementing changes in taxation within the Union .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating Commissioner Monti on the action he has taken on tax harmonization , with all the difficulties that arise from the fact that a unanimous vote in Council is still required in this area .
From our political point of view , the idea that there should be no harmonization , and that the market should resolve the problems , is an attractive one .
But we have to be realistic and recognize the certainty that , as economies are opened up and all other rules are increasingly harmonized , competition in the field of taxation would have the effect of increasing the already excessive tax burden on employment .
Thus , while we cannot achieve everything at once , we must pay special attention to the introduction of the euro , which means that we have to harmonize the taxation of savings and interest . When the currency is the same it makes no difference whether , for example , the money is deposited in one country or another , because the countries with the lowest tax rates will naturally benefit and transfers are therefore to be expected .
But the risks of unfair tax competition do not end at the boundaries of Europe in an increasingly open world .
For that reason the European Union must close the loopholes by demanding that third countries observe minimum tax rules , which would be just as legitimate as our requirements in the social and environmental fields , and would therefore act as a disincentive to countries outside Europe .
And it is for the same reasons , and even more so , that I wish to voice the strongest agreement with the rapporteur , Mr Secchi , when he says that we should speed up the elimination of tax havens within the internal European Union market - as already mentioned - to put an end to the ruinous tax competition between Member States , which is compatible neither with the single market nor with the spirit of the Community .
As I have emphasized , these havens are of no help to the products and areas most in need of support , and European citizens cannot understand why they continue to exist ; or at least , I am unable to explain this in my own country .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the multiplicity of taxation systems and the way they are in competition with one another result in a situation whereby economic growth cannot be competently steered in the direction of employment .
Furthermore , tax competition has a damaging effect on energy and environmental policy , for example .
Unequal corporation tax systems attract big business to those areas where treatment is more favourable , and this distorts open competition .
The central problem is the ever greater concentration of tax on so-called immobile factors , that is to say the workforce .
For some reason , people imagine that companies that employ human beings are more solvent than , for example , companies that employ robots , since their tax bill is extortionate compared to that of others .
Such distortions will have to be eliminated when working on tax systems .
At the very least , companies that employ people should at least enjoy the same status as firm with a high degree of automation .
The burden of taxation therefore needs to be shifted away from the human labour force and towards activities with a greater ability to pay .
Currency dealing and speculation are regarded as more productive forms of business .
It is quite intolerable that this activity falls outside the bounds of taxation .
Thus , the Union must explore the possibilities of the ' Tobin Tax ' as quickly as possible and in the name of better employment policy .
In this way we could lighten the income tax burden considerably .
Negative tax havens must also obviously be sorted out .
Why do we allow black holes in the taxation system these days here in Europe ?
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Secchi on his report on this important subject .
Sluggishness , lack of political will and incapacity have hitherto been the hallmarks of this highly important tax harmonization dossier .
This is a very difficult subject technically speaking , and its political sensitivity is an aggravating factor .
The Council 's requirement for a unanimous vote is based on the fact that the national parliaments want to have the last word on the matter .
And although I can understand that if we carry on along this road we shall find it hard to make any progress , what is certain is that the national parliaments essentially came into being because taxes had to be fixed , and they are not likely easily to accept a role in which they are merely required to rubber-stamp decisions taken by supra-national authorities .
But the creation of a single market and the free movement of citizens and capital have already shown that the existing tax policy causes imbalances in the market that are in many cases highly unreasonable , prejudicial and indeed unfair .
The problem of harmonizing this situation is therefore an extremely difficult one . For that reason the lack of progress and political will I mentioned at the beginning is understandable .
The problem is that the results of that inertia are unacceptably harmful to taxes on employment and are too easy on other production factors , especially capital .
When the euro comes into force and the internal market is suddenly wide open , some major measures will inevitably have to be taken to bring the various tax systems closer together .
On this point Commissioner Monti has tried to take some positive steps which the Council has unfortunately limited to a few direct taxes .
Only the work and experience of the group of experts appointed by Ecofin will be able to guarantee that we have the political will to achieve something in this field .
But if it is to do so its work must not be kept secret .
One of the effects of the euro will be to make it necessary for tax policies to be approximated .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Commissioner Monti and wish him the best of luck in his fight for fiscal harmonization and the elimination of harmful barriers .
I would also like to thank my colleague , Mr Secchi , for this excellent report , which will allow us to make better use of the advantages of the single market and monetary union by eliminating fiscal distortions . These distortions exist ; they translate today into the relocation of savings and investments - with harmful repercussions on the competitiveness of businesses - and they also mean that there is an increase in the tax burden on workers who cannot relocate .
However , I want to emphasize that the code of conduct expressly recognizes the possibility that in a given Member State there may be different tax legislation and that all legislation must be equally subjected to this process of eliminating harmful distortions .
This process of eliminating distortions cannot and should not be used to limit the subsidiarity principle . Nor should it limit the fiscal authority that can now be exercised , in the case of Spain , by the Basque Country or the Autonomous Community of Navarre , whose constitutional relationship states that the fiscal laws passed by the Cortes of Navarre can only be challenged in the Spanish Constitutional Court .
Respect for existing levels of authority in the European Union can only strengthen the credibility of the current process of accelerating fiscal harmonization .
This process does not unnecessarily discriminate between fiscal rules according to the state or regional body which approves them , but solely determines whether or not their content is harmful for the entire Union .
Fiscal differences between the various countries can be advantageous for all citizens , in that they can stem from a different level of public spending on the part of the various administrations , from the best or worst management of their expenditure or from the effective use of public resources .
Therefore , we must take harmonization forward , we must respect the principle of subsidiarity and we must respect the causes which mean that different countries have logical distinctions in their tax burden .
Mr President , I am most impressed by this rich , flowing discussion . It has touched on some highly technical matters which nevertheless affect political questions at the very heart of the workings of our European Union .
It seems to me that on certain fundamental issues we have very broad agreement across the whole of the political spectrum represented in this Parliament .

I would like to warmly thank Mr Secchi for his excellent work on this realistic and balanced report , which provides a highly accurate analysis of the package of tax measures and questions related to harmful tax competition .
Let me take this opportunity , Mr President , to say how much I admire the energy and commitment with which Mr Secchi so promptly followed up his report with a proposed report on the draft directive on interest and royalties .
As I was saying , I was struck by certain points where there is broad consensus : one such point is the question of capital and labour .
Mr Caudron is quite correct in saying that this is a tenuous link , but the basic link does exist all the same , and any employment policy in Europe is not credible if it fails to make use of the taxation coordination lever in order to reverse the trend we have seen towards increasing taxation of labour .
When we talk of capital and labour it should be quite clear that the aim is certainly not to undermine the financial markets .
The financial markets are vitally important to the workings of the European economy , to competition and employment .
This is why the Commission - as I will repeat once again this evening - is against the idea of taxing financial transactions , as was proposed by Mr Moreau and Mr Passilinna .
We believe that we should not discourage financial market operations by taxing transactions , but we feel that within an integrated financial market we need to create a normal system for taxing capital income .
It is nothing drastic , it can be done , and it can be done Mr Lulling , Mr Thyssen , in full awareness of the need to avoid penalising competition on European financial markets .
That is why we are doing our utmost to act in international fora such as the OECD and the Group of 7 , and to extend the principles of the code of conduct and tax on savings to the dependent and associated territories .
Every country - as Mr Fayot said , and I would agree with him - has become a tax haven for the rest .
This is why we have focused our attention on cross-border taxation .
On the other hand we want to avoid a situation to which several of you referred - for example Mr Peijs - in which inefficient states end up imposing the tax burden on efficient ones .
This is the reason behind the fine line drawn in the fight against harmful tax competition - we do not indiscriminately want to tar everything with the same brush and attack every form of tax competition , even fair ones .
I am pleased to see that the Parliament has understood the value of the package approach both for business and for savings . This is why I must also point out that , as far as business taxation is concerned , we have already set the ball rolling .
Mr Lulling is already hard at work on this one , not with a directive , but rather with a code of conduct , which is starting to work for savings : we hope that in the not-too-distant future we will get the directive .
By the by , Mr Kesteleijn-Sierens was asking when Article 12 of the draft directive on savings should come into force ; it says that Member States should adopt legislation on transposition no later than 31 December 1999 which should come into force on 1 January 2001 .
The rapporteur himself , Mr Secchi , and other speakers suggested that we should go further than what is covered by this package .
I would fully go along with what was said by Mr Randzio-Plath , Mr von Wogau and others : this is just the beginning , but I trust that this package , modest as it may be , has radically transformed the climate of tax discussions in Europe .
We can now talk about such matters with some prospect of success .
Two years ago - as you well know - it was seen as something completely unrealistic .
We have to go further , from coordination to far-reaching harmonization , and on that we had different points of view : this is one of the few points on which there were divergent positions , which I find perfectly normal since there are different philosophical and political views .
Some people would see a loss of national tax sovereignty as positive ; others fear such loss .
We have been working until now on improving coordination , which allows everyone to better exercise the tax sovereignty they have .
Mr Angelilli commented that we should take steps from Community level to bring about a gradual drop in tax pressure .
I am convinced that this is the business of the individual Member States ; I am also convinced that it would be in the interests of their economies , and I believe that by closing certain loopholes the coordination of taxation puts everyone in a position where they can afford to reduce the gross average rate .
Mr Formentini recalled the requirements of regional policy : the code of conduct recognizes these requirements and submits them to certain checking processes .

Let me make another point , Mr President : I was very unhappy two months ago when I had to answer a flat " no ' to the request of this Parliament , which was supported by a large majority , to reopen discussions on the intra-Community duty free decision on the basis of a study . But those of you who so strongly backed this package against harmful tax competition cannot fail to realize that it would be highly contradictory to be for this approach yet at the same time to want to keep alive these localised tax havens , the duty free sales .
Finally , many of you pointed out that the euro is driving this harmonization or this tax coordination .
Let me state here and now that this has not been the case thus far .
Let us be frank : until now their preparing for the euro has not allowed the Ministers for Finance to focus all their energy as we would have wished on the coordination of taxation .
Consequently we have , in a sense , been swimming against the tide , although I believe that from now on the advent of the euro will encourage this process .
One closing comment : I rank amongst those who favour getting rid of the unanimity rule on taxation questions because , if I may say so , it would boost this Parliament 's decision-making role .
Unfortunately we are not yet at that juncture , but allow me to stress that , through close cooperation between the Parliament , in particular its Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and the Executive Committee , we were able to get the support of Parliament even under the present institutional system - you are bearing witness to that this evening - and to provide Parliament with the greatest possible amount of transparent information on ongoing work .
So in a certain sense we are creating the conditions which I hope will be institutionalised some day .

Thank you for your support , and thank you once again to Mr Secchi , the rapporteur ; I hope that we will have other opportunities to go into more detail on these difficult but important questions .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Tax treatment of private motor vehicles
The next item is the report ( A4-0217 / 98 ) by Mr Watson on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the proposal for a Council Directive governing the tax treatment of private motor vehicles moved permanently to another Member State in connection with a transfer of residence or used temporarily in a Member State other than that in which they are registered ( COM ( 98 ) 0030 - C4-0145 / 98-98 / 0025 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating you on the excellent spirit with which you are presiding over this evening 's proceedings and the calm efficiency of your chairmanship .
There is not a single question in politics that does not begin or end with taxation .
I am moving tonight a report on the tax treatment of private motor vehicles moved permanently from one Member State to another in connection with a transfer of residence or used temporarily in a Member State other than that in which they are registered .
This draft directive has two aims .
The first is to update the provisions of earlier directives on tax exemptions for vehicles imported from one Member State to another and tax exemptions applicable to permanent import from one Member State to another of the personal property of individuals .
Secondly , the draft directive extends these provisions to problems which have been encountered in the application of the earlier directives and to comply with the internal market and expectations of freedom of movement .
We know that there are obstacles to the free movement of privately owned vehicles , often in the form of double taxation .
This is a matter of concern to this House since the free movement of people is a criterion for a successful single currency area .
That free movement is hampered by obstacles to the movement of vehicles .
Hence we welcome the Commission 's proposals .
Generally vehicle taxes are not subject to approximation rules at Community level .
This has led to differences between Member States in terms of tax regimes levied on vehicles .
The draft directive before us defines the basic rules for vehicle taxation in the context of individuals moving between Member States .
The single market prevents the use of frontier formalities in the collection of taxes , but this has led to some Member States converting excise duties on motor vehicles into registration taxes or introducing new taxes to compensate for VAT rate reductions .
My report aims to ensure that there is no scope for double taxation .
The measures that are proposed cover two broad categories .
First , in the case of transfer of residence , the proposal is that Member States should not impose vehicle registration taxes on cars brought into their territory by individuals who are moving to live there .
Second , for temporary residence the aim is to safeguard the right of the individual to use a vehicle temporarily in a Member State other than that in which he or she lives .
There would be a right to use the vehicle for up to six months in any twelvemonth period .
Additional elements guarantee or include greater freedom to use rental cars in Member States other than that in which they are registered , and greater flexibility for cross-border workers who use vehicles provided by their employers .
We seek also to improve bilateral communications between Member States in the case of a dispute about a person 's place of residence .
It is surprising and perhaps depressing that there is not already suitable communication between the competent authorities .
In subsidiarity terms the aim is to provide a common set of rules for the non-imposition of motor vehicle taxes in certain cases in order to help movement of labour and to prevent double taxation .
I am proposing three amendments to this draft directive .
They serve as no more than tidying-up measures .
They do not change the character or the thrust of the Commission 's proposals in any way , but they seek to reinforce the rights of the citizen .
The first is to allow for a vehicle that is being scrapped or destroyed , perhaps after an accident , not to incur liability to taxation .
The second is , in the case of infringements of the rules being encountered , to allow the citizen to have the right to remove the vehicle from a Member State without payment of tax .
The third is simply to bring the whole piece of legislation firmly into accordance with Article 95 of the Treaty .
The most important message that I have for the House tonight is that we must stop Member States circumventing internal market legislation and abusing the spirit of the internal market by applying new names to old taxes .
This legislation will secure freedom of movement for cars and citizens in the single market , it will help car hire firms whose cross-border rental operations have been penalized by allowing better fleet management , and help the consumer by reducing car rental taxes .
Our colleague Mr Sindal spoke in the last debate of the importance of tackling transfrontier taxes .
This is a small step in that direction .
In conclusion , there are only two certainties in this world : death and taxes .
The grim reaper strikes only once .
This proposal aims to make sure that the same is true of the tax man .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , at first glance Mr Watson 's report may seem rather technical .
You only have to look at the small number of speakers to be convinced of this .
However , once this first sensation has passed , you very quickly realize that it touches upon an essential issue for the construction of Europe : the free movement of goods and people and the consequences of certain tax restrictions on this .
Indeed , when border formalities were removed on 1 January 1993 , many Member States invented new taxes , particularly for motor cars .
These new deductions institute a de facto double taxation which is completely against our principles .
I therefore welcome with a great deal of satisfaction the proposals in Mr Watson 's report .
In fact , it was important to legislate on such a sensitive subject and , similarly , to do all within our power to remove the final restrictions on freedom of movement .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur warmly .
I would add that it would have been absurd to debate tonight , on the one hand , the need for harmonization of fiscal policy at a Union level whilst on the other to continue to accept taxes which are in contradiction with one of the driving forces and principles of the construction of Europe .
Nevertheless , although I am pleased with the text , I am forced to wonder once more about the fact that it always seems easier to reach an agreement on material goods than on people and the taxation of people .
In fact , Commissioner , over the last few weeks I have had a number of problems of double taxation affecting employees referred to me , and these employees came to me so that I might intervene to help them get out of absurd and often difficult situations .
Tomorrow , when we vote on the Watson report , these dozens of cases will leave me with a bitter taste in my mouth , in spite of the responses the Commission has given me with regard to these dossiers . They are far from being solved .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe is progressing and I am pleased at this , but I cannot help thinking that , sometimes , its construction is being achieved the wrong way round .
Although , following this directive and our report , goods transportation will be carried out with increasingly fewer restrictions , the same cannot be said for the movement of people .
In fact it remains difficult , and I wanted to say this this evening , to be able to work freely wherever work can be found - and that , in itself , is not easy - and this is in spite of Treaties signed and ratified , and directives .
It is truly a shame , if not downright upsetting .
Mr President , this proposal for a directive is another step towards our goal of free movement of persons . In that sense it is surely a link in the further expansion of the European Union .
However , I agree with Mr Caudron that there is still much to be accomplished in that area . Although border formalities when importing cars following a change in residence or for temporary use in another Member State were abolished in January 1993 , quite a few Member States have been ingenious enough to replace the border formalities and the accompanying taxes which were dropped with some form of registration tax .
This creativity by the Member States is finally getting a suitable response .
Promoting the mobility of persons in the European Union , while at the same time preventing mobile people , accompanied by their beloved car , from taking up residence elsewhere unless they pay an additional tax levy , can no longer be justified .
The Commission 's proposal rightly limits these practices , which often boil down to no more than double taxation .
My group , Mr President , is fully in agreement with the proposal for a directive , with regard to the basic problem as well as to the solutions found .
We will therefore support the proposal .
We have not tabled any amendments ourselves , but we will support the amendments tabled by the rapporteur on which we unanimously agreed in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The amendments by the rapporteur render the proposal more explicit in three areas and therefore contribute to clarity and increased legal security . Who could be against that ?
Mr President , I agree with the proposal but I would add this : I hope that the Italians -I do not know if you are a football fan , Commissioner - I hope that the Italians will be just as successful tonight in their match against Cameroon as you have been tonight in the match in this Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very sensitive to the remark made by Mr Thyssen and believe that we are faced with a case of harmful competition between television programmes and debate in the House , a debate on very important issues like the one dealt with in the report by Mr Watson whom I would like to thank and congratulate for his document and for the conclusions reached .


Mr Watson welcomed the Commission document as a logical and sensible proposal - it is always nice to hear these words - that should allow the Union 's citizens freer movement .
According to the Commission , this proposal is an important step forward towards a single market for the owners and users of private vehicles .
Its adoption will help solve problems that can crop up for people who change their domicile from one Member State to another or who temporarily want to use a vehicle registered in their country of origin in another Member State .
As far as Amendments Nos 1 and 2 are concerned , I fully agree on the content .
The Commission is in fact grateful for these suggestions and will do all it can to get them adopted .
As for Amendment No 3 , which is suggested in Article 11 of the proposal , I would just like to point out that Article 95 of the Treaty is already in itself directly applicable to all national legislation and does not need any additional clarification .
The direct effectiveness of Article 95 of the Treaty is upheld by what are now consolidated rulings by the Court of Justice and therefore , for this reason , I am sorry that the Commission cannot accept the amendment .
Secondly , the content of Article 11 of the proposal would not be amended by the insertion of a reference to Article 95 .
For this reason , the point of such an amendment also appears debatable .
Again I congratulate the rapporteur and thank you , Mr President .
Thank you , Commissioner .
You may be pleased to know that our service department has just informed us that Italy is leading 1-0 - as Commissioner Bangemann will now confirm .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Mobile and wireless communications
The next item is the report ( A4-0221 / 98 ) by Mr Camisón Asensio on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision on the coordinated introduction of mobile and wireless communications ( UMTS ) in the Community ( COM ( 98 ) 0058 - C4-0144 / 98-98 / 0051 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , in its resolution of 29 January 1998 on the third generation of mobile communications , this Parliament clearly demonstrated its emphatic support for this extremely interesting project , which concerns nothing less than the nervous system of the global village of the 21st century .
It was undeniably a political impulse and a commitment - which we are hoping will now be renewed - before the proposal for a decision which we are debating today .
Our 11 amendments have the same objective and they were approved almost unanimously in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
It would also seem logical to capitalize on the success of GSM to secure a leading position for Europe in advanced technologies and on the international markets .
To achieve this , we hoped for mutual collaboration , including the sector of industry involved as well as the public authorities , in a sincere attempt to overcome individual preferences so as to achieve a model of open networks and technologies , getting away from proprietary designs aimed at controlling captive markets which would , in the end , be unable to compete on the world market .
Given the lack of time , I would like to mention the following aspects . The ETSI has already made substantial progress in the standardization process , and rival equipment technologies have been combined .
Although a great deal still remains to be done , we hope that the speed of technological progress in the industry is such that the first commercial services may be available by 2002 .
It is therefore time to initiate the licensing process , so as to give operators and manufacturers the indispensable legal certainty they need to initiate the sizeable investments that are required .
The draft decision establishes the necessary guidelines in line with the directive on licences as well as in cooperation with the CEPT .
In short , Commissioner , we are satisfied with this proposal and we believe that it is perfectly legitimate not to reserve access to UMTS licences to present GSM / DCS operators , nor to exclude them in principle .
The proposal does not address selection criteria for licences or the pricing of the licensed frequency spectrum - which is not its purpose anyway - because the freedom of the Member States must be respected in this field .
We are advocating the need for sufficient coverage in less populated areas . The Commission should be given a higher profile for international negotiations , while respecting the Member States ' rights in the field of spectrum management .
We hope that the Council will take a favourable position , thus allowing this decision to be adopted without delay , since we are involved in a global battle of the utmost urgency , and we must always remember this .
As regards the amendments tabled , I have only two points to make : firstly , there is no serious scientific study highlighting the danger of using earpieces for mobile communications , and it would thus be inappropriate to raise any unnecessary social alarm ; and secondly , we must not forget that we are talking about a sector - European telecommunications - which is completely liberalized .
I would like to end with a warning .
The next World Radiocommunication Conference - WRC 99 - will take place in the second half of next year .
At global level , many applications from the radiocommunications sector compete to use the scarce resource of the radio spectrum ; they are applications which are of paramount importance for the economy , for consumers and even for peoples ' security .
At the WRC , legally binding decisions will be adopted which may also affect broadband mobile services , that is , the UMTS sector .
At the WRC , the Member States of the European Union negotiate on their own behalf by way of coordination with 28 other European countries .
There is an obvious need to establish common European positions in this situation , and it is therefore time to harmonize European positions for the WRC .
I hope , Commissioner , that this has not been forgotten .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Commission 's proposal to introduce UMTS in Europe concerns an extremely important technological development in mobile telephony , one of the fastest growing markets , a sector in which Europe has been able to gain a competitive edge using the common GSM standard before the United States .
But on the UMTS standard , greater global convergence has been achieved than on GSM and American operators in particular are expected to rapidly adopt this technology , and will therefore be competing in this area from the very start .
With the arrival of this standard , the European industry could therefore lose the sharp competitive edge that it had with GSM ; moreover , the idea of delaying the introduction of UMTS would be entirely detrimental to the European industry , in that it would lag behind in this competition .
We therefore fully agree with the Commission 's proposal and with a rapid timetable to introduce new services and we in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy encourage investment in the development of terminals that comply with the new standard .
Two points are of great concern to me , and they are the subject of amendments that the rapporteur has received .
The first point is non-discrimination between competing operators when all the frequencies of the 900 , 1800 and 1900 MHz range are being allocated , to allow these operators to offer services via GSM or UMTS , guaranteeing coverage of both urban and rural areas in a situation of fair competition .
The second point is political support for the Commission so that it can spur Member States on to reallocate and make available new frequencies for UMTS services .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my appreciation to Mr Camisón Asensio and the European Commission for their constructive approach to this subject .
The Commission , and in particular the Commissioner , have set to work energetically and have managed to get the industry as a whole to agree to a European standard for UMTS .
Hopefully , this will enable Europe to lead the world in the area of mobile telephone systems .
The rise of the mobile telephone is impressive .
UMTS offers Europe the opportunity to repeat the success achieved with GSM .
UMTS offers many multimedia adaptations and applications and , in fact , spells the end of the traditional telephone .
In addition , the development of this system may create a large number of jobs .
Success is , however , only possible if the licensing system and the availability of frequencies are clear at an early stage .
In this context , I would like to make two points .
Mr President , it is very important that great care be exercised with the selection of an allocation mechanism for the scarce frequencies which will be made available for UMTS .
To this effect , I have submitted a written request to the Commission to start an investigation of the best allocation mechanism .
I believe that Commissioner Bangemann has already promised to contribute to such an investigation in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I would ask the Commissioner whether he can now confirm that he will , in fact , conduct this investigation .
A number of Member States , including the Netherlands , are preparing to set up an auction for UMTS .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could tell me when we can expect the result of the investigation , because I consider it important that the results are available before Member States decide on their selection of an allocation mechanism .
Mr President , in addition to the selection of the allocation mechanism - and this is my second point - it is very important , as Mr Malerba has said , that the Member States strictly adhere to the principles of transparency and non-discrimination in the allocation of the UMTS frequencies .
We must avoid a situation where operators who are awarded a UMTS licence at this stage are denied the possibility of using GSM and DCS frequencies for UMTS services .
Such a prohibition only serves to drive up the market price of frequencies and flies in the face of the principle of spectrum efficiency .
An amendment to this effect was approved by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy in this Parliament with a large majority .
I should like to hear from the Commissioner which measures he intends to take against Member States who do not adhere to the principle of non-discrimination and who still impose such a ban .
Mr President , UMTS will become very important for Europe in the future .
But the emergency number 112 is now also very important for the citizen ; the use of the emergency number 112 in the entire European Union should have been introduced a long time ago .
I have pointed this out many times and I submitted a written question on 22 October of last year , a question which was repeated later in the House .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner could throw light on the following three points .
Which Member States have not introduced or activated the 112 emergency number and why have they not done so ?
Secondly , which steps and actions will be taken by the Commissioner to ensure that the Member States comply with this obligation ?
Thirdly , does the Commissioner not think it is useful if at least the staff manning the emergency switchboards can communicate in the three languages which must be spoken for the users of 112 in the respective Member State ?
I would appreciate it if the Commissioner could provide an answer to these questions .
Mr President , the GSM system has given European producers a world-leading position and made it possible for the EU countries to build a comprehensive mobile telephone network . It has limitations .
For example , it cannot handle the high-speed transfer of multimedia required for the Internet via mobile telephones , as shown here . Hence UMTS .
It is important for both the EU and the Member States to play an active role in promoting the development of the new system so that it becomes just as big a success for Europe as GSM .
It will certainly take several years before the first of the new services reaches the market , but , as the Commission says , it is quite right for us to lay down the legal framework now so that the enormous investment required for the development - a greater investment than ever before - can be made .
We know it is important for the Member States to adopt a common standard and to be able to act jointly at the next meeting to be held by International Telecommunications Union this autumn , at which the decision is going to be made .
The Commission does not have a vote there .
The USA may perhaps present four standards which will lead to a split in their market .
We need a single standard to have the same kind of opportunities throughout the Union .
A fair amount has been said about licensing .
I hope other countries will be able to do the same as the UK , which is setting a good example , and will think about starting to grant licences soon so that we actually achieve the target of bringing the new system into service no later than the year 2002 , in accordance with the Commission 's timetable .
The granting of licences has also been debated here today .
I think it is important to look at which consortia want to ask for a licence and not accept those who lack credit and opportunities to develop .
Instead we should be able to oversee a royalty system which gradually gives them the ability to pay .
The open process , which has been highlighted here , is also important .
If we have one standard , we can then share the patent .
We need a competition for the best applications .
In this way the consumers will gain access to new services and new products .
Mr President , Commissioner Bangemann , ladies and gentlemen , how often in the past have we spoken of revolutionary developments in relation to telecommunications ?
As so often before , this also applies to the changes we can expect in wireless and mobile telecommunications .
UMTS not only provides data rates of up to 2 MB per second and ISDN standard speech quality .
It also creates a whole new market for mobile multi-media services .
However , we must look carefully at the various success factors .
The necessary frequency spectrums must be distributed sensibly amongst the network operators .
The total technical cost of UMTS involves high investment costs , but we all want the end price for the customer to be as attractive as possible .
For this reason we must endeavour to keep the cost of licence fees , regulations and other costs as low as possible .
If we do not , we will be unable to achieve satisfactory market conditions in Europe and will put ourselves at an enormous competitive disadvantage in the medium term .
However , let us consider competition on a global scale .
In Japan , the first preliminary stages of UMTS will go into operation at the end of 1999 .
If these preliminary stages go on to become de facto standards , network operators in the single market will have to adopt them .
We must at all costs counter this threat with our own activities .
On the other hand , as Mr Camisón Asensio says in his report , Europe is capable of taking both the technological and the strategic lead in this area .
Our advantage lies in our experience of collaboration on matters of standardization , which should serve us as a model for other areas of technical legislation - here I am thinking of the bus directive .
Mr President , first of all let me express our thanks to the rapporteur .
Working with him we have , in a very short period of time , been able to prepare a very important measure . This has essentially been achieved jointly and on the basis of the same fundamental principles .
I also believe that the discussion today has shown that there is no difference in the positions held by Parliament and the Commission on these fundamental issues .
I should also like to remind Parliament that a good six months ago , when we last dealt with UMTS , we were still awaiting a decision from the ETSI and the situation was very unclear - to say the least .
It has , however , proved possible to draw up this new standard for the third generation of mobile communications within a relatively short period of time and with the broad consensus of all the parties involved .
This represents a considerable success and one which should not be underestimated .
During these six months we have arrived at the necessary legal guarantees and I believe that we will now be able to move on to commercialisation very quickly . Of course , this stage is clearly not dependent on measures determined by political authorities .
On the contrary , it is up to commercial operators to play their part . I have absolutely no doubt , however , that European industry will again be able to achieve the lead it has now with GSM , not only in the European market , but worldwide .
We agree on that .
We have also had the occasion to discuss some individual issues .
For this reason , I want to go into these individual questions in greater detail and to state once again that we are unable to accept all the amendments .
This is partly because certain amendments either repeat or pick up issues , such as health protection , which have already been dealt with in sufficient detail elsewhere and do not need to be revisited in relation to the legal guarantees for UMTS .
We are , nevertheless , accepting seven amendments unchanged , Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 , 8 , 9 and 11 , along with Amendment No 7 in principle and Amendment No 6 in part .
We are unable to accept the other six amendments but , as I have already said , they tend to relate to individual questions .
So , let us move on to these individual questions which Mr van Velzen has once again asked .
It is always a pleasure to answer these questions .
That is presumably why he likes to ask them several times .
I have already dealt with them in committee and on other occasions .
I am , however , quite happy to go over them again today .
As far as the increase in frequencies is concerned , as I remarked recently in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , it is simply a matter of method and of course we have already gathered , and will continue to gather , relevant experiences .
There is no need to commission a study and we will soon be suggesting , in a statement to Parliament , how the various options available can be used to develop a sensible frequency policy .
We are also completely aware , Mr Malerba , that we need to pay great attention to the Radio Conferences .
The last conference was an improvement on its predecessor , and I am sure that next year 's conference will produce an even greater consensus between the Member States and the Commission and therefore provide us with access to valuable resources .
With regard to Amendment No 7 , which - to answer another of the points raised by Mr van Velzen - relates to Article 3 Para .
4 , we can give our agreement in principle .
It is one of the list I have already given you .
However , we would like add the words " in compliance with the Community legislation in force ' in order to point up the link with current legislation , in particular the Directive on authorizations and the Directive on competition in mobile telecommunications .
In Amendment No 6 , which we can accept in part , the same applies to the reference to Community legislation currently in force .
However , we have taken the view that there is no need for a specific reference to the principles of transparency and nondiscrimination as this is clearly an integral part of Community legislation .
Sometimes things can be overstated . It doesn 't make things clearer .
I have also already answered the question on emergency numbers and their implementation , Mr van Velzen .
With one eye on the time , and given the discussion which is to follow , let me suggest the following .
I have already said all this to you before and I hope you will agree that there is no point in my repeating it again here .
Or would you like me to do that ?
I can , I do not have a problem with that , but it strikes me as perhaps being a waste of time .
So , I have dealt with the most important questions which were asked .
Finally , a few closing words on our draft .
It occurs to me , Mr Rübig , that there is no danger that either we or companies working in Europe may be forced to adapt to Japanese standards .
Rather the other way around !
All the Japanese standards we know about at the moment , and the reactions from the MITI Ministry and the Ministry of Post and Telecommunications , indicate that Japan is likely to adopt the standards chosen either by us or by the ETSI .
This is , in part , due to the fact that in drafting these standards we were able to work together with Japanese and US firms , and so in its approach the document is actually far more than a European standard .
So , as you can see , we have a good chance of not only repeating the success of GSM , but perhaps even of surpassing it .
In further discussions , in particular with US industry and the US administration , we will stress the fact that UMTS is not a mandatory standard proposed by the Commission or by Parliament and the Council but , as ever , an industry-devised standard in our usual tradition .
It is a standard which anyone can adopt , but no-one is forced to adopt .
However , in the interests of consumers and in the interests of creating as uniform a market as possible - and thereby above all reasonable prices - , we must persuade the various political wills that a standard of this kind will achieve the scope of influence it deserves .
That means that everyone is invited to use it and therefore everyone has to be convinced of its advantages in order to use it .
It is this positive policy which has allowed us to make good progress in this area so far and I would like to take this opportunity to thank Parliament for its support .
Mr Commissioner , can you guarantee that we will be able to start the licensing process next year ?
That , of course , depends on whether we receive any applications , which will not necessarily be the case .
If we do , and if we have agreed this draft , there are no further legal obstacles .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Transport of nuclear waste
The next item is the statement by the Commission on transport of nuclear waste in the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 30 April the Commission received information from the French authorities indicating that a significant number of cases had been registered in which fuel casks being transported to the reprocessing plant at la Hague , France exceeded the limit of 4 becquerels per square centimetre for unfixed beta gamma contamination .
Given that some of the fuel casks concerned came from German nuclear power plants , more detailed studies were urgently launched , not only in France but also in Germany .
The Commission has remained in contact with the relevant French and German authorities , in order to monitor the results of these studies which have not yet been competed .
It must be recognized that Member States have primary responsibility for the implementation of Community directives and that the Commission would only consider intervening to fulfill its role as guardian of the Treaties in the hypothetical situation where a Member State failed to take the measures dictated by this responsibility .
The first measure taken by the relevant authorities when the current situation became known consisted of immediately suspending the transport of irradiated fuel from nuclear plants , whilst awaiting a complete study of the situation and the adoption of additional and appropriate safety measures to guarantee the correct application of European legislation at a national level .
It clearly emerges from the results which are currently available that neither staff nor the population were subjected to exposure to radiation in excess of the limits set at Community level .
In fact , any exposure resulting from the excess contamination of the flasks corresponded to no more than a fraction of the current limits .
It can be concluded that the relevant authorities of the Member States acted responsibly in order to rectify the situation as soon as the problems were identified .
The Commission remains in contact with the Member States concerned .
Furthermore , the issue was discussed at a meeting of the Permanent Working Group on the Safety of Transportation of Radioactive Substances , on 18 May and lessons to be drawn from their analysis of the situation have been passed on to the relevant authorities of the Member States .
At the current stage , the Commission proposes no further immediate measures .
Nevertheless , as has already been noted , measures aimed at assuring the correct application of European Union legislation are still being studied by the Member States concerned .
Furthermore , the Commission is concerned about the circumstances which were at the origin of the situation observed , even if corrective measures seem to have been implemented promptly .
Consequently , when the full results of the inquiries at national level have been communicated to the Commission , it envisages an impartial overall study of the situation not only in France and Germany but in all the Member States likely to be affected .
Mr President , Commissioner , the public has in fact just recently learnt that we are not the only ones who sweat working here , but that flasks sweat too .
These sweating flasks actually put people 's lives at risk .
You have said that there is no risk .
That is not quite true .
If the hot spots where this sweat concentrates come into contact with the human body , these people are at risk .
Some of them work on these flasks and others watch over them .
Not that they sweat because they are being watched .
So there is a real risk .
What is remarkable in this whole story , however , is that the public has only just found out about these sweating flasks , while the people who operate the flasks have known about it for a long time and have been measuring the sweating for a long time .
So now let me put the question to you , Mr Commissioner .
You must know something !
You have a standing working group .
You discuss transport matters . It is a close community with its ear to the ground .
I can imagine many scenarios , but it is really possible that no one knew anything about the measurements these operators were taking ? Or the fact that COGEMA had additional facilities built to clean the returned material in advance ?
Was the Commission really unaware of all this ?
No , maybe you do not know anything ! The whole thing is quite inconceivable .
For this reason I should like to know in greater detail exactly what the Commission knew and when .
Looking at your new statement on the work of this standing working group , it says very vaguely that there was no risk because these incidents and accidents were few in number and limited in consequence .
Please , exactly what accidents and incidents happened with the flasks ?
This is where I think the vital security leak lies .
There were obviously some people who knew something but chose not to share this knowledge with the public .
Then , of course , I have a much more specific question . If such knowledge was available , what did the politicians responsible do with it ?
Did they knowingly deny this knowledge ? And what conclusions should they now draw ?
You cannot simply act as if the Commission suddenly received this knowledge in May like a bolt from the blue !
As for the industry , it is not just because certain best-sellers are doing big business at the moment that I should quote Lenin , but the motto " confidence is good , control is better ' seems very apt in this case with the hushing up of security problems and accidents , particularly in the nuclear industry , so topical .
As far as I can see , at the moment the nuclear industry , which has known about these sweating flasks for years , is no longer a reliable source of information .
I urge the Commission to make sure that if there is to be cross-border transportation of radioactive waste , that checks , uniform standards and a reporting duty should be introduced .
At the end of the day this is just another example of the fact that there is no absolutely safe final storage for nuclear waste .
It is simply pushed back and forth across borders .
I urge the Commission to act in the interests of the citizens of Europe and not to become an accomplice of the nuclear industry , trying to make energy policy against the will of the majority of the population of Europe .
It makes for a shaky structure , a colossus built on shaky foundations .
This is the reason I simply cannot understand why your statement , from which I have just quoted , states in this important area that the question of security is discussed not from the point of view of risks or the concerns of the population , but simply in terms of how we can gain greater acceptance .
No , the Commission must serve its citizens and not individual industries .
Allow me to try to cool matters down a little bit .
I welcome this statement from the Commissioner .
We are dealing with an industry which is very highly regulated , one of most regulated industries in Europe , and we must take cognizance of the fact that contrary to what my colleague suggested , the containment in these flasks was not breached .
We are talking about a minor degree of surface contamination , and I urge that we do not let this matter get out of proportion .
In stirring up concern , we exacerbate the public 's fears about these matters unreasonably and excessively .
It is true that if an industry is highly regulated , it has a duty to inform the public , as well as the authorities , and arguably it should be like Caesar 's wife , that is to say , quite beyond reproach , and should take all steps to inform people of the situation .
My understanding is that there has been some expression of regret and contrition on the part of the utilities in Germany and the transport organization .
Although , as I understand it , they did not breach the disclosure requirements , because the levels of contamination were not that great - and I welcome the Commissioner making that point - nevertheless it would have been better if all information had been made public because more information , not less , is better for restoring and establishing public confidence in the nuclear industry .
I would like to point to the BNFL establishment at Sellafield in the UK , as an industry which has gone out of its way to take the point of transparency and openness to the degree of turning their facility at Sellafield into a tourist attraction .
That seems to me to be quite an achievement and a step in the right direction .
The real question here is : was there any danger to the public ?
No .
Was there any danger to the operators and the staff involved ?
I think not .
Are there lessons to be learned ?
Yes - there needs to be more openness .
That is a useful outcome of this exercise .
But above all , let us not go overboard in sounding alarmist about this .
Other industries have far worse instances of difficulty which do not get the same attention as anything to do with the word ' nuclear ' .
I think that is regrettable .
So I welcome the statement and hope we will not let matters get out of proportion .
Mr President , I consider Commissioner Oreja 's reply to be very unsatisfactory .
He says that we will not take any additional measures at present , while two Member States , France and Germany , have announced a total ban on the transportation of nuclear waste .
The response of the Commission is not to do anything at all , although there are 13 other Member States , some of which face similar problems .
Just look at all the questions we ask in the present joint resolution .
I will not list all our questions to the Commission about improving the situation because this would take more time than I have been allocated .
But you could take a look at paragraphs 4 , 7 , 8 , 11 and so on .
We would really like a response from the Commission on these matters .
Could we have some answers please ?
These are questions where we ask the Commission in a joint resolution to tackle the problem .
I must say that it is scandalous that so little information has been released about this transport and the health risks it entails .
I stated above that two Member States have halted the transport .
The Netherlands should do likewise because it has suddenly come to light that the power stations in Borselen and Dodewaard , located in my own country , have also shipped their waste to La Hague and Sellafield , with similar risks .
The containers in which the nuclear waste is shipped have been shown to have excessively high levels of radiation and contamination .
The transport in my own country of the Netherlands should also be halted for as long as this situation remains unclear .
But even this is not enough , Mr President , because it is very frightening that such matters have been concealed .
More openness and control with respect to nuclear transport is therefore of the utmost importance .
The Commission must present a plan and submit it to our committee as soon as possible .
According to German law , the seabed off Sellafield , with its nuclear waste , and even the pigeons around the reprocessing plant , must be classified as " contaminated with radioactive waste ' . This debate seems long overdue .
Mr President , I cannot speak about the transportation of nuclear waste without speaking about Sellafield , which Mr Chichester has mentioned .
The daily discharges from the nuclear plant at Sellafield are now estimated at nine million tonnes of nuclear waste .
The recent application by BNFL to the British Government for increased area discharges is another unpleasant episode in the ongoing saga of Sellafield and Thorp nuclear plants .
I find comments made this week in Dublin by a scientist Dr Sue Lon - who is BNFL 's director of operations and technology - that the UK has a safety record which would bear up to the closest scrutiny rather sickening .
If BNFL had such a blue chip record in the field of public health and public safety why do lobsters along some parts of the east coast have levels of contamination 247 times greater than was the case only in 1993 ?
May I tell the experts that Mr Chichester has mentioned , who say the industry is highly regulated , that the Titanic was the most highly regulated ship in the world and it sank .
If Sellafield sinks we will all sink with it .
If the British nuclear industry is such a model profession , why do BNFL not agree to allow the European Commission independently to evaluate its operations and the powers which derive under the EURATOM Treaty ?
The comments of that BNFL director are verging on the extraordinary .
In the light of the fact that the Dounreay nuclear plant is now being closed because of the public health risks to the operations being carried out there , the Irish Sea must not be used as a dumping ground for nuclear waste materials from the Sellafield plant .
Undisputed statistics clearly demonstrate , since the setting up of the Thorp plant , wholesale increases in the amount of nuclear materials found in concentrations in seaweed in Ireland .
This was observed by the radiological protection institute in Ireland in 1994 , exactly one year after the British granted BNFL the licence , which is responsible for the environmental mess that we now have on our hands .
Mr President , I notice that the previous speaker has learnt to read , but has not learnt to stop reading .
We have only recently had proof of how Pakistan and India , through smuggling , fraud , theft and bribery have obtained the means to manufacture a nuclear bomb .
I do not claim that a nuclear power plant is an atomic bomb , but the nuclear power lobby in Europe engages in that same secrecy and lying in public that has characterized the behaviour of states with newly-acquired nuclear arsenals .
I would hope that the citizens of Europe can trust those who use nuclear power plants to the extent that nuclear power poses no danger to them .
The main problem is that nuclear plants produce spent fuel .
That is the end product , and there is nowhere to dump it .
For that reason , it has to be transported to and fro , and it is quite possible that all Europe 's nuclear waste has now ended up being dumped in the wrong place and that it will all have to be moved yet again .
That is why urgent measures are required of the Commission to enable the gradual construction of final nuclear waste sites .
Mr President , the Commission would have done itself a favour if it had read its own papers , in particular the paper dated 3 April 1996 , Commission , No 11 .
Because it states , word for word , that the outside of the packaging - referred to as a " fuel transport container ' causes contamination in water .
You have known this since 1996 , and now you stand there in front of us acting dumb and claiming you have only known since April !
Incidentally , there is also a working paper No 4 from Technical Committee 996 6 96 which makes detailed proposals on this subject which have been included in the safety series produced by the AIO with whom you also work closely .
So , if you 're trying to tell us now that the limit values were only slightly exceeded , I have to ask you whether you think we are absolutely stupid .
The limit values are 4 becquerels / cm2 and we are looking at recorded contamination levels of 50 , 000 becquerels .
The only reason you have waited so long is that you were hoping the industry would solve the problem .
Except that the contamination has kept on increasing .
It has not dropped , it has increased year on year .
That is my first point .
Secondly , it has yet to be established whether contamination occurs whilst the water basin is being loaded .
Because the water basin must contain isotopes other than cobalt and caesium .
Until now , however , we have only found cobalt and caesium .
So what has happened to the other isotopes ?
The cause may actually be quite different , they just have not yet been established or even researched yet .
Then , to refresh your memory , I should like to quote you something from the Euratom Directive , namely Article 2 of Directive 92 / 3 / Euratom .
It says quite explicitly , " The transport processes required for delivery must adhere to the provisions laid down by the Community and by the individual Member States and must be in compliance with the international agreements on the transport of radioactive materials . ' If this is so , then the reverse must also be the case : if the authorities in question are unable to control things at national level - and you have been quite aware of that for years - then you too must perform your regulatory duties .
You are the guardians of the law .
As is it , the only reason this whole scandal has been revealed is because of an indiscretion , not because you were looking into it .
That is the real scandal of the matter .
Now to play that down and on top of everything else to say that the transport workers or the convoy staff were not exposed to any risk is just another example of your treating the public as fools .
But everyone knows quite well that even if you are carrying a dosage meter it obviously cannot show anything if it is an alpha emitter !
But if it is swept down through the air from a transport container , for example , and the poor policeman who is driving alongside or the transport worker gets it , then he can obviously suffer from serious radiation damage .
But he can never prove it later !
So my question to you is what conclusions are you drawing from this ?
Are you finally going to give us access to the minutes of the standing working group and the studies which have been paid for over the years with money from EC coffers ?
Are we finally going to get to see these studies ?
It is now vital that the reliability of the operators is tested , because authorization to operate nuclear power plants is always linked to this reliability .
And this reliability can no longer be taken for granted .
You should have revoked their authorizations a long time ago . Those are the facts .
And everything else you are trying to tell us is inaccurate .
You just have to read your own papers !
Mr President , the question of the safety of Europe 's citizens in relation to nuclear waste transport is obviously of great importance .
However , the subject can only be dealt with as one detail of a more complex overall issue which deserves our most serious attention .
Until the question of intermediate and final storage has been settled , all matters relating to the commissioning of new nuclear power stations and the re-commissioning of old plants must be rejected out of hand .
As we see it , the European Union should do everything in its power to effect a complete withdrawal from nuclear power and , to this end , should promote alternative sources of energy to a much greater extent .
The European Union had an opportunity to treat this matter as a model .
The safety or otherwise of nuclear waste transport is nothing more than the treatment of a symptom of unsafe development .
It is important .
But it would be even more important if we could treat the root of the problem and stop all further development of nuclear energy .
I would like to say to Mr Chichester that in Britain Caesar 's wife has been putting it about a little bit !
Dounreay has been closed by the nuclear inspectorate .
We have in Sellafield a situation I can only describe by saying that we are expecting a spectacular nuclear orgasm any time now because there is in that place a pit which it is suspected may explode at any time .
However , I think this debate today timely , against the background of the situation in Germany , where rail workers , policemen and even protesters against nuclear issues have been irradiated .
In fact the situation was so serious in Germany that the head of the German police force was threatening to bring charges of causing serious bodily harm against the German Ministry of the Environment as well as the management of the German nuclear power stations .
These workers were exposed to radiation levels three thousand times above the permitted levels .
The flasks were unsafe and inadequately tested .
Last year one quarter of the flasks sent by rail from Germany to France had not been properly cleaned and were thoroughly contaminated .
This has been going on for something like 13 years .
Of course this is only possible in an industry like the nuclear industry which is protected and shrouded by secrecy .
It is almost impossible to monitor and call to account the movement of radioactive material .
The industry has known about radioactive contamination in transport to the UK and France since 1980 .
The industry was aware of the dodgy and unsafe fittings of the casks and I am given to understand that the smaller casks , which were transported to Sellafield had never been tested for their effectiveness , safety and efficiency .
Can I say something that I hope the Commission will take note of .
This material must be processed and stored , not at the point of delivery far away in Scotland or in England , but stored and processed as near as possible to the point of production .
Can I also say to the Commission that they now need to take on board the seriousness of this issue ?
We will get another chance to do that when we debate the transport of nuclear material , when the Commission sees fit to bring their report to the Transport Committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we must ensure that legislation - both European and international - is implemented correctly .
Objective testing and transparency must be guaranteed immediately and where abuse occurs , legal measures must be taken immediately .
Mr Lange has already mentioned Lenin .
I believe that we must turn our attention to eastern Europe and endeavour to implement safety standards there as quickly as possible .
That is why we must establish joint safety standards in Europe on the broadest possible basis immediately and strengthen our information policy significantly .
Mr President , Commissioner , as I listened to your explanations , I remembered how last year President Santer , full of enthusiasm , stood in this place and shouted out the words , " Let us make this Union a Union of health . ' But the protection of the people of Europe 's health has been neglected when it comes to transporting nuclear waste .
If this were not the case , transport workers , convoy staff and even people protesting against the transport would not have been exposed to radiation . It should also be remembered that these consignments are merely in transit ; there is still no final place of storage for nuclear waste .
The research goes on , but we have yet to find a solution .
We do not only need , we must also implement uniform security regulations , Mr Chichester , because when Caesar said that his wife should be beyond reproach , he was in fact announcing his divorce because his wife had hidden from him things that had happened in his own house .
And that is just the point !
It is unacceptable that things should be hidden from people , that the Commission , the companies and the Member States do not have free access to all information so that they can pass it on to the public .
A number of Member States have refused to use nuclear energy as a source of electricity .
However , the consignments pass through these countries too , because often there is no way round it in Europe for geographical reasons .
I see no reason why people should be exposed to this risk and believe that the funds we so generously spend on Euratom should finally be used to draw up a set of safety regulations which would then apply to all Member States and all new applicants for membership in order to guarantee safety in Europe . For security cannot be parcelled out , and we cannot keep pushing the blame back and forth from one side to the other .
Mr President , we are really here tonight to comment about the nuclear industry , but having heard the Commission 's initial response it is fair to say that it is not adequate and is certainly lacking in seriousness and complacent .
We really need more from the Commission when we get incidents like this .
These recent revelations of these high levels of radiation found in casks and rolling stock used to ship nuclear waste are unfortunately yet another example of the nuclear industry shooting itself in the foot .
When are they ever going to learn ?
Fragile public confidence in the technical competence and responsible care exercised by the industry is once again evaporating into thin air .
When will the industry learn that in order to maintain public confidence and support and to have any hope of operating in future they must operate to the highest safety standards with a diligence and zeal second to none ?
It is my personal opinion that if the industry wants to have a long-term future in a stable legislative and economic environment it must learn the lessons of the past and conduct itself in an open and transparent manner with the highest concern for public safety .
Some of the resolutions , I have to say , are an overreaction to the latest incidents , which , technically I do not think are as serious as some people have made out .
I must admit , though , that I did enjoy Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz 's intervention !
There are some lessons that have to be learned .
The lessons can be found in those resolutions that we see tonight .
First of all there has to be an urgent public investigation : that is absolutely necessary .
There has to a prompt remedy to any problems and abuses identified .
New standards must be established on a European basis for monitoring , evaluating risks during transportation , and subsequently a new set of uniform operating standards across Europe .
Finally , the Commission and the Member States involved have a responsibility to ensure that action is taken against any guilty parties identified during the investigation .
Let us hope that this small straw is the one that breaks the back of a very stubborn and blinkered camel which is the model of the nuclear industry as we see it to day .
Finally it might just see the light .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make an initial comment .
It was an honour for me to be here today to share with you the Commission 's position on the contamination of the irradiated fuel casks .
Mrs Bjerregaard would have very much liked to be here with you - she is the Commissioner responsible for this area - but as you are probably aware , she had an extremely important Council in Luxembourg today , what we call in our idiom a " mega ' Transport and Environment Council .
I will briefly reply to a certain number of the points raised , but you can be sure that I will pass on your questions to her tomorrow morning .
I have taken note of all the questions you have raised and the way in which they have been formulated .
Mrs Bjerregaard will provide you with replies , either written or verbal .
I would first of all like to say to you that the Commission is very sensitive to this problem and that it is entirely in agreement with the statements which have been made by some of you , in particular the last speech made by Mr Bowe , and others such as that of Mr Chichester on the need for greater public information .
Reference was made to President Santer 's sensitivity with regard to health related aspects .
This is indeed one of the Commission 's main concerns , and has been since the beginning of its term of office three and a half years ago .
So how could we not be sensitive to a problem such as this ?
To try to reply to Mr Lange and Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , I must first of all say that I am not aware of how many times contamination levels have been exceeded at the time of exposure .
The levels apply to unfixed contamination , that is , one which can be removed by wiping the surface and thus likely to be transmitted to people in contact with the surface .
We have known for some time , however , that contamination which is impossible to remove at the time of shipment can undergo changes through natural processes whilst in transportation , such that on arrival it is no longer fixed .
The fuel casks are thus covered during transit to avoid all contact with people and any leaching effect caused by rain .
Furthermore , any reappearance of excess unfixed contamination during transportation must be followed by decontamination as soon as possible after detection .
A certain number of cases of this kind are thus to be expected , although I cannot give you an exact figure .
However , in this instance , it seems that there was a lack of communication between the operators who detected the contamination and the competent authorities .
The latter were thus not fully aware of the extent of the problem raised by the contamination , nor of the possibility that these effects concealed the need for stricter procedures .
These aspects must clearly be the subject of further measures , in particular at a national level .
In response to part of the question raised by Mr Lange , I would also like to tell him that a report drawn up in 1985 by the International Atomic Energy Agency explicitly recognizes the possibility of the reappearance of unfixed contamination on the surface of the fuel casks during transit , even when this contamination had been wiped off before shipment .
Many of the Member States of the European Union , as well as the Commission , contributed to this report .
However , the responsibility for applying Community directives falls primarily on Member States , and the Commission was unaware of the possible extent of the problem of contamination of fuel casks attributable to this phenomenon before being informed of the situation in France by the relevant French authorities on 30 April 1998 .
Finally , in reply to a comment by Mr Eisma , I will say to him , as I have already said moreover , that inquiries are still underway in the different Member States .
When they are completed , the Commission will very rapidly examine the appropriateness of a more thorough collective study of the situation in the many Member States which are potentially affected .
I will say finally to Mr Fitzsimons that I listened with great interest to his speech , as well as those of Mr Seppänen and others .
There are questions which , if I have understood correctly , do not exactly touch upon the problem of transport .
I will nevertheless pass them on to Mrs Bjerregarrd , along with the others .
With regard to Mr Morris , I will simply say that it clearly emerges from the available results that neither staff nor the population were subjected to radiation exposure above the limits set at Community level and that any exposure resulting from the excess contamination of the fuel casks only corresponds to a small fraction of the current limits .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is what I am able to tell you today .
Allow me finally to insist on the fact that we are particularly sensitive to the problems which have just been raised .
As I said , I will immediately pass on your questions to Mrs Bjerregaard , who will be able to give you full answers .
I can see that four Members have asked to speak on very brief questions .
I would ask the honourable members to consider that Mr Oreja is deputizing for another commissioner and that there will be other opportunities to question the appropriate commissioner .
Mr President , I would just like to ask two questions which I would be grateful if you would pass on to the competent commissioner .
Firstly , when will we receive the minutes of the standing working group ?
Secondly , will a reporting duty for company transporters and transports at long last be introduced now ?
This information does not appear in any of the directives .
Thirdly , I would just like to say that contamination reaches this high level on arrival , not departure .
Mr President , a year ago last April we sent back from the Committee on Transport and Tourism a report to the Commission , for consideration also by the Council , on the transport of nuclear material by air .
We are still awaiting the return of that report to the Committee .
It is an urgent matter and I would therefore request the Commission to make enquiries as to when that report will be presented to the Transport Committee .
Mr President , when will Parliament have the opportunity of seeing the minutes of the standing working group on nuclear safety if they cannot be delivered to us directly ?
I would be pleased to come to the Commission on Monday morning to read the minutes there .
Yes , certainly .
But I am not in a position to give concrete responses and I do not want to give replies which are vague .
That is not my role here and would have no meaning .
The respect you deserve as Members of the House prevents me from speaking to you in generalities .
However you , and Mr Lange in particular - who asked if he could go and see the minutes of the meetings on Monday - can be assured that no later than tomorrow morning at 9 a.m. , Mrs Bjerregaard will be fully informed of all the issues raised here , regarding the minutes of the Permanent Working Group , regarding a directive and so on , and I hope that within 24 hours you will have a reply from Mrs Bjerregaard , one way or another .
Personally , I can give no further detail , out of respect for Parliament and parliamentary Members .
I would like to thank you , Commissioner , for appearing before Parliament at such short notice , and for answering so well , considering this is not your field .
Please convey the best wishes of the House to Mrs Bjerregaard .
On behalf of the Presidency , I would like to add that it is of course important for the management of Parliament to endeavour to arrange the debates in such a way that the appropriate commissioners can be present .
This is a self-directed criticism on the part of the Presidency .
But once again , thank you , Commissioner , for your willingness to step in .
I have received six motions for resolutions , tabled pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) , on the agenda .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , surely due to some fault of my own , I do not appear in the list of Members that attended yesterday 's sitting .
For the morning , there is proof that I attended all of the roll-call votes and , for the evening , I had the privilege of chairing part of the sitting .
Therefore , so that the Minutes are accurate , I would like this error to be corrected which - I repeat - I am sure was due to a mistake I made myself .
I did not remember to sign at the correct time .
Thank you very much , Mr Gutiérrez .
It will be corrected .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz has asked for the floor .
Mr President , as you all know , we had a debate last night on the Commission 's statement about nuclear transport .
The Commissioner present on this occasion , however , who had obviously made a considerable effort and was very polite - since he is responsible for publicity - had no idea about the subject matter .
We could have saved ourselves the debate .
He was unable to reply to any of the questions .
As if that were not enough , he read out a statement by the Commission which was clearly false .
It said in the statement that the Commission knew nothing about the contamination from the castor containers until the 23 April of this year .
I could prove without a shadow of a doubt , however , that the Commission had already written about it in its communication of 3 April 1996 .
Of course , the Commissioner could say nothing in answer to this - it is obvious ; it is not his brief .
I would therefore ask that care be taken to ensure that someone is present from the Commission who is capable of entering into a real debate .
Otherwise we will have to forego debates of this kind , because they would just be a waste of time .
( Loud applause )
Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , I would like to remind you that , in any case , it was decided to add this item to the agenda in the full knowledge that Mrs Bjerregaard had an important Council meeting and that there was no certainty that she would arrive on time .
The Conference of Presidents preferred to run the risk , knowing that this might happen , as unfortunately turned out to be the case .
The Council meeting lasted longer that it should have and the Commissioner responsible was not able to be here .
However , in this case , we knew that we were running that risk .
European Council in Cardiff - activities during the British presidency
The next item is the joint debate on :
the report by the Council and the statement by the Commission on the Cardiff European Council of 15 and 16 June 1998 ; -the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the activities of the British presidency.The President-in-Office of the Council is arriving now and we will give him the floor as soon as he can join us in our work .
Mrs Malone wishes to speak .
Mr President , I wonder whether Members realize that the session is starting at this hour .
There seem to be a lot of vacant seats .
Perhaps we could ring the bells .
Mrs Malone , I think that the purpose of your speech has just been covered , since the President-in-Office of the Council is already in the Hemicycle .
So , since I am now aware of his presence , I am going to give him the floor immediately so that he can present his statement on the activities of the British presidency and his report on the Cardiff European Council .
Mr Blair has the floor .
Mr President , honourable Members , I am delighted to make my first visit to the European Parliament as British Prime Minister and to report to you on the UK presidency and the Cardiff European Council .
I would like to begin , if I may , by putting on record today our gratitude to you for the cooperation which has marked relations between the Council and Parliament during our presidency .
For our part , we have worked hard to ensure that British Ministers have reported regularly and fully to you on the major dossiers and made every effort to take on board Parliament 's views .
I would like to say a special word of thanks to José María Gil-Robles for his kindness , support and cooperation during our time as President of the European Union .
There are two dimensions to my report : first of all , the practical results and achievements of the presidency ; secondly , a description of the mood and direction as we see it in the European Union today .
Our presidency was marked self-evidently by the launch of two historic events : monetary union and enlargement .
A single currency in Europe has the potential to create a force for stability in the world .
But no one should underestimate its challenges to each of us .
There are some who talk as if the creation of a single currency is enough in itself to bring economic prosperity .
It is not .
To work , a single currency must be accompanied by two things : the European Central Bank policy must be credible ; monetary policy must be disciplined , and therefore the euro strong and not weak .
In addition , there must be economic reform in the European Union .
The single currency brings with it huge structural economic changes , change that is sometimes beneficial - necessary , even .
But we must be honest with our citizens that change there will be , and we must prepare for it .
The European Central Bank now has strong leadership for at least a 12-year period .
The Cardiff Summit has produced an agenda for economic reform .
There are four elements to this programme of economic reform .
First of all , employment .
Jobs must remain the top priority of the European Union over this coming period of time .
( Applause from the left ) Eighteen million unemployed in Europe is far too many .
At the jobs summit last November we agreed guidelines to promote a skilled , trained and adaptable workforce and flexible labour markets responsive to economic change .
All fifteen Member States have submitted national action plans for jobs .
We agreed at Cardiff to take that work further , to put particular stress on further work on lifelong learning , strengthening equal opportunities , revising tax and benefit systems to improve work incentives , and developing a culture of entrepreneurship .
There is now consensus on the need for a flexible , dynamic approach to respond to the challenges of globalization .
Secondly at Cardiff , we endorsed a firm commitment to pursue structural economic reform in Europe .
As well as sound macro-economic policies we have developed broad economic guidelines .
Member States have agreed to reform labour , product and capital markets and to reduce regulatory burdens on business .
They also agreed to produce annual reports on their progress in doing so .
These changes are vital if Europe is to remain competitive .
Thirdly , the single market .
With the help of this Parliament the European Union has made good progress in the last six months : new measures on financial services and biotechnology patents , new competition in telecoms markets , a new framework research programme to promote hi-tech research and development , and measures to safeguard the free movement of goods .
I hope that Parliament will give its formal agreement to the last two measures as quickly as possible .
Since December last year the so-called single market scoreboard shows that the proportion of measures which have been implemented in all Member States has increased from 73 % to 82 % , but we must go further and we must go faster .
We agreed at Cardiff to extend the scoreboard to develop better indicators for effective market integration , and particular priorities for the future were agreed : financial services , improved enforcement of single market law and tackling unwarranted price differences across Europe .
The fourth element of economic reform was help for small businesses : the small business sector , those who are self-employed .
Many of those people are going to be the engines of growth and jobs in the future in the European Union .
It is our task to give them the support they need in order to develop and grow from small firms into medium-sized and then to large firms .
( Applause ) They need better access to capital , less bureaucracy and a culture that supports them .
New initiatives in all these areas were again endorsed at the Cardiff Summit .
This is the beginning of the reform process .
It marks a move away from policies of the past - and rightly so .
Also , on enlargement , in the space of twenty days in March and again with this Parliament 's help , we opened the European Conference , we launched the accession process and we began the accession negotiations for enlargement .
We have finally started a process that will erase the scars of a divided continent and bring huge advances in the prosperity and security of the whole of Europe .
We have launched those negotiations with six countries .
The screening process is underway .
Seven chapters out of thirty-one have now been completed .
The opening of substantive negotiations will be the next stage .
And we have not neglected those candidates not yet in formal negotiations .
We want them to begin as soon as they are ready .
We will continue to seek closer cooperation with all the candidates .
I particularly hope too that the decisions taken at Cardiff mean that we can open a new and more productive chapter in relations between the EU and Turkey , including a resolution to the impasse over financing .
Successful enlargement also requires , however , the modernization of the Union 's own policies .
During the last few months detailed work has begun on the Commission 's Agenda 2000 proposals .
They involve crucial issues for all Member States : the size and distribution of the budget , equitable reform of the Structural Funds , modernizing the common agricultural policy .
But we also have a responsibility to the new Member States , a responsibility to extend to them as soon as possible the benefits of the single market to allow them to join a viable , competitive common agricultural policy , to enable them to have their fair share of Structural Funds .
The Agenda 2000 negotiations , like the enlargement negotiations themselves , will be tough - such negotiations always are .
But we , the existing Members of the European Union , cannot on the one hand say that we support enlargement and then not will the means to achieve enlargement .
( Applause from the left ) In particular we cannot let individual vested interest stand in the way of our historic obligation to the former communist states of Eastern Europe .
They , after all , with courage , took the path to democracy .
We have to help them on the path to prosperity .
( Applause ) The Council agreed that decisions on Agenda 2000 should be taken during the German presidency in the first half of next year .
It is an ambitious timetable .
We have worked with Parliament to ensure your full participation in this complex and important process , and we are committed to the successful negotiation of a new interinstitutional agreement during the lifetime of this Parliament .
Meanwhile , too , we have worked very closely with you in the important annual task of preparing the budget for 1999 and improving financial management , drawing on the work of the Court of Auditors .
This kind of cooperation will be vital as we determine the financial framework for the beginning of the next century , and I hope will continue under the next presidencies .
Let me deal with a point which I know is of very great concern to many of you : the implications of the recent European Court judgment . The Commission spending on certain programmes did not have satisfactory legal authority .
In the view of the Council it was essential that there should be legal certainty and transparency in a budget process which involves taxpayers ' money .
That is in the interests of all institutions .
Let me make it absolutely clear that the judgment is about the law we all have to follow when we agree spending programmes ; it is not a judgment on the programmes themselves .
We now need to act together to resolve these difficulties speedily .
The European Court of Justice ruling recognizes that the Commission can still authorize spending without a specific legal base in certain circumstances , and contracts entered into will be respected .
At my request , however , presidency representatives will now meet Commission and Parliament representatives on 23 June to identify an early and satisfactory solution to this problem so that it can be resolved .
( Applause ) The purpose of this meeting will be to allow the Council and Parliament to ensure the rapid adoption of those programmes where Commission-proposed legal bases are on the table .
We have worked to develop a more coherent and powerful European voice on issues beyond our borders .
Last month Robin Cook set out to you the practical actions taken by the European Union since January towards this goal .
Our efforts have focused on several key areas , and let me describe them briefly to you .
The crisis in Kosovo confronts Europe with a dangerous challenge , to establish a just solution for an autonomous Kosovo within the Federal Republic , while avoiding a repetition of Bosnia .
This time at least the European Union has moved fast to put in place measures to dissuade Belgrade from continuing the violence in Kosovo .
I have discussed our resolve to act with each of our Heads of Government colleagues .
No one could be in any doubt after our Cardiff statement of what the Union wants to see in our resolve to act with our allies in the wider international community , if our demands are not met .
I should say to you - controversial though it is in certain quarters - that military planning is well under way in NATO , with the full support of European Union Member States , in case diplomacy should fail .
But we cannot allow stability to decline and chaos to result in that part of the world : it will affect all of us .
( Applause ) In recent months , too , the European Union has secured a more prominent role in the Middle East peace process .
We support American efforts there but we now have a clear and distinctive position also for the European Union in helping drive the process forward .
The Union and its members have likewise responded quickly and effectively to other international problems , for example the Asian economic crisis , Indonesia , and the Indian and Pakistani nuclear tests .
Of course Europe cannot resolve all these crises but we have been able , rapidly , to articulate a clear European view , to express a consensus where one exists and to act effectively in concert with our international partners .
We were able to resolve the long-standing EU-US argument about extraterritorial US legislation in a way which fully protects European economic interests and our principled opposition to legislation of this kind .
We have maintained the European role in other areas of long-standing concern : in Bosnia we acted quickly to sustain the momentum behind the new Dayton-friendly governments in Republika Srpska and Montenegro .
We have agreed a new European Union code of conduct on arms exports .
I hope that , as a result , Member States will no longer decide to go ahead with an arms sale simply because they believe that if they do not someone else will .
( Applause from the left ) We have actively pursued human rights through positive engagement with those concerned .
For example , there is now a new , more constructive dialogue on human rights with the Chinese , not forsaking our principles , but looking to see how we can make real practical progress ; and the first ever EU-China Summit in April showed the benefits of this approach .
Closer to home , the presidency has given priority to issues close to the hearts of ordinary people .
On the environment , at yesterday 's Environment Council the Union has reached agreement on how the European Union will implement the commitments on greenhouse gases agreed at the Kyoto Summit .
That is a major step forward .
We have agreed further measures to cut atmospheric pollution , to improve water quality , and to put an end to driftnet fishing .
We have agreed a new directive on areas of animal welfare , as in zoos .
We have also worked out a programme of work with the next three presidencies to ensure continuity and real action .
Overall I believe the Union has created and accomplished a great deal in making for a cleaner Europe in these last six months .
I would like to pay particular tribute to my colleague , my own deputy Prime Minister , John Prescott , for his work both at Kyoto and yesterday in the Environment Council .




( Applause ) In addition , the Union has made good progress in the fight against crime : a new pact with applicant countries on cooperation against organized crime ; movement towards closer cooperation between Member States in criminal matters ; the core elements of a post-1999 European Union drugs strategy ; a package of measures to ensure better coordination between police forces and judicial authorities to tackle cross-border crime ; and an agreement to work for mutual recognition of court judgments .
This Parliament rightly attaches importance to greater openness .
We have worked hard to make the Council more transparent : this year 's open debates have been better attended than ever before , and Member States have agreed now to establish a public register of Council documents .
But I am well aware there remains a very long way to go .
I am grateful for your support .
You backed us in the first ever summit for ordinary people , which brought together to debate our agenda NGOs from across Europe .
We also welcomed at Cardiff the initiatives of the Commission and the Council to improve their effectiveness .
We agreed that once the Amsterdam Treaty is ratified - a step taken by Britain earlier this week - we will need to tackle the institutional issues not resolved at Amsterdam .
However , my presidency , and , indeed , any presidency , should not be known just for a catalogue of results but also for the sense of direction and feel about the European Union that it represents .
I hope that Britain has come a long way in the past year in its relations with the rest of the European Union .
The days of the beef war - 14 against 1 - government positions ravaged by warring factions in the governing party are , I am pleased to say , over .
( Applause from the left ) I should like , very diplomatically , simply to say to those British Conservative Members of Parliament here who have organized dissent against the presidency in the European Parliament : thank you for your interest , but we remember when your party was in charge and we do not want those days back again .

( Applause from the left ) We also signed the social chapter with pride ; we negotiated the Amsterdam Treaty with ease ; and we have worked during our presidency with our colleagues as partners .
However , in conclusion , I wish to be frank with you and the citizens of Europe .
There are always two strands of opposition to Europe in Britain , and these strands are reflected across the whole of Europe , they are not confined to Britain .
One is utterly opposed to Europe , come what may , on straightforward nationalist grounds .
Here one must simply win the argument for a modern view of how nation states work .
But the second strand is different : it can support the European Union but it worries about its directions and its actions .
This strand of opinion must be engaged with by us .
We must understand its concerns : it fears Europe is too centralized , too remote , and its economic policy too caught up in regulation .
In my view , such concerns do not justify being anti-Europe , but they merit being addressed by us honestly and frankly .
I am pro-Europe - without any hesitation at all - but I am anti the status quo .
We need economic and political reform .
In economic terms we need an open , competitive Europe that has macro-economic stability and dynamism and innovation in its supply side .
I believe that education , not overburdensome regulation , is the key for our workforce for the future .
The single European market must be driven through .
I reject laissez-faire and state control of industry .
The third way , surely , is to recognize that government has a vital role to play but one that is enabling , empowering our people and business to prosper in a new global market .
The European social model should not , and will not , be abandoned .
( Applause ) But it should be reformed to provide for solidarity in today 's world of international financial markets , industrial change and technological revolution .
Alongside that economic reform we need political reform .
We need a vision for Europe that allows people to feel safe in their national identity whilst reaching out and embracing European partnership .
In some areas we are going to integrate more , in others much more can be done at national , regional and local level .
We must think boldly about how we connect the European Union with its citizens , about its institutions at a national and European level .
I believe this is the coming debate in Europe .
We began it at Cardiff , we shall carry it forward at the informal summit in Austria in October , and it is a debate in which we must engage the whole of the institutions of Europe , including Parliament .
Mr President , we still have some decisions to take in Britain about Europe , as you know .
But , at long last , Britain is engaged : it is constructive , we know we have something to give and something to learn .
Pro-Europe , pro-reform - that is where I am , it is where the European Council is and it is where our electorates and our people are .
I believe in the European ideal .
I want it to live again in the hearts of the new generation .
I hope that our presidency will be seen in retrospect to have developed some arguments for the long term that may contribute to the revitalization of that ideal .
Mr President , it has been an honour to be President of the European Union .
I consider it a privilege .
I have enjoyed working with you and the Members of Parliament , and I thank you for listening to me today .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Thank you , Prime Minister .
This presidency has through its ministers and its officials responded to your own personal wish to develop good relations with Parliament and its President in a cooperative and friendly spirit .
I thank you very much for that .
Mr President , I should like to begin by welcoming Prime Minister Blair to the European Parliament on behalf of the Socialist Group in this House .
It is a great pleasure to be the first MEP to speak in this debate and to warmly welcome the first British Labour Prime Minister to Europe 's Parliament .
You are very welcome , Tony .
It is an added personal pleasure for me to be able to welcome him as my party leader and I very much do so .
These last six months have been important months in the political life of Britain and its relationship with the European Union .
It is quite impossible to overestimate the significance of the change in attitude which is now manifest in Britain and which has been evidenced by the frequent visits of your ministers to this Parliament during the presidency .
We , here , all remember too well , for instance , the arrogant disregard of the previous Conservative ministers for the European Parliament and notably the refusal of the then Agriculture Minister , Douglas Hogg , to accept the invitation and come and explain his handling of the BSE crisis ...
( Applause from the left ) ... which has had and continues to have such disastrous consequences in Britain and throughout the rest of Europe .
By contrast , Jack Cunningham , your Minister of Agriculture , made his sixth visit in six months to the European Parliament on Tuesday of this week .
He has done a huge amount to explain , discuss and engender confidence that , despite the complex problems and formidable cost to Britain , your government would act in good faith to eliminate BSE from the British beef industry .
His approach exemplifies the change of mood , tone , attitude and substance of your government to Europe .
That change is clearly having an effect on attitudes in Britain and is instrumental in creating a better-balanced view of the European Union .
Whilst , of course , this Parliament will inevitably have differences with the European Council , no matter how irreproachable the presidency , no-one is in doubt about the intention and commitment of this British Government to play a full part in the life of the European Union , if sometimes controversially .
For that above all else , Prime Minister , this whole Parliament congratulates and thanks you .
When looking at the achievements of the British presidency it is impossible to look at the outcome of the Cardiff Summit alone .
This presidency is remarkable because of the two outstanding events which occurred in March and May .
The launching of the enlargement process in March marked the opening of a new era in the evolution of the European Union .
On our side of the House , we support enlargement to ensure peace and stability on our wider continent .
We want a prosperous and dynamic Europe and know that cannot be built on a Europe where intolerance , extreme nationalism and conflict prevail or simmer just below the surface .
The European Union is a superb model of conflict resolution .
And if there were no other reason for enlargement , we in the Socialist Group would support it for that reason above all others .
The successful opening of the European Conference and the bilateral negotiations with six of the eleven applicant states deserve our hearty recognition .
You will forgive me , Prime Minister , if I say that the launching of the single currency on 2 and 3 May was not quite such a seamless operation , although all of us appreciate that you were seeking to reconcile seemingly irreconcilable positions , something we contend with in this House very often .
My group has been critical for many years of the way in which the Council deals with the appointments of the most important political and now , economic , positions in the Union .
Whilst we all appreciate that the launch of the single currency was , thankfully , in market terms an unqualified success , there was real dismay at the wrangling between heads of state , which was seen by all .
I suspect , Prime Minister , that as the man in the middle , you share some of that dismay .
We are thankful that you brought that process to a successful conclusion and that the euro has become a reality .
Perhaps , when you engage with other heads of government in your informal discussions in Austria , in October , looking into ways to make the Union more understandable to its people , we could urge you to seek a more satisfactory method of securing senior appointments in the future .
The euro is launched .
I must say that we were rather pleased with the role Parliament played in that process .
My group is now determined that we will make our relationship with the decision-makers on the euro one of great seriousness and rigour .
It is our responsibility to perform this function effectively and to ensure that our national parliaments are kept fully up to speed with the accountability which we shall exercise over the Central Bank , its president and executive board .
Cardiff saw the first assessment of the national action plans for employment drawn up by each government .
We thank you for driving that agenda forward .
Frankly , over the past five years we , here , have got somewhat fed up with the excess of words spoken about the need to help the 18 million plus unemployed in the European Union .
We have heard many of those words here .
In fact we have generated a lot of them .
Your election in May last year and that of Mr Jospin in France a month later created the progressive majority in the Council which allowed us to actually move forward from words to action through the creation of the employment chapter in the Amsterdam Treaty , the Luxembourg special summit on employment and the defining of some real shared targets for employment creation .
Cardiff reinforced the equality criteria of employment policy : support for women , the disabled , ethnic minority citizens and , of course , the long-term unemployed .
While some national action plans are , without question , better than others , at least we have them .
We note that the British Government was the first to produce such a plan and this has acted as a catalyst for the rapid and serious production of others .
Prime Minister , I want to welcome , on behalf of this whole House , what you have just said about the issue which is causing a major problem for citizens and non-governmental organizations throughout the European Union .
I refer to last month 's judgment of the Court of Justice regarding monies being spent by the European Commission without an explicit legal base for such spending .
As a result of that judgment , as you know , the European Commission has taken the decision , as one might expect , to cease all spending on the budget lines concerned .
This means , for example , budget lines for social exclusion , the elderly , sport in Europe , the fight against racism , support for the disabled , public health , anti-personnel mines and , of course , the work of NGOs in the developing world .
We can all see at a glance that these small but significant budget lines are ones which have been having a significant impact on the lives of some of the most needy citizens in our Union and those whom we seek to help beyond our borders .
We all share the view that European Union funding should be properly rooted in law .
That principle has been rightly secured by this judgment .
I am pleased that you have given your commitment to act to secure a legal base for this spending which you have made clear you have no intention of harming .
In the remaining days of your presidency , we look to you to ensure that the words ' a people 's Europe ' have some tangible and lasting resonance through this action .
I want to conclude on the problem raised at Cardiff about the legitimacy of the institutions of the European Union and the desire of the Council participants to bring Europe closer to its people - something which we here very much endorse .
There is still unfinished work to be done to ensure that the Union is ready for enlargement in the coming years .
Amsterdam was unable to conclude this work and in so far as the debate you launched will deal with these items , we very much welcome it .
I understand , however , that the Council intended this debate - indeed you said so - to be much wider-ranging than just that unfinished business .
I also understand the Council wants to look at the nature of the Union 's institutions themselves , at subsidiarity and democratic legitimacy .
These are complex and sensitive issues which must be faced .
I have no doubt that the European Parliament will be making its views known to the heads of state before the informal meeting in October .
I must say as well that for the first time in the living memory of anyone in this House , the European Council has actually taken up our entreaties to deal with the general conditions governing the performance of the duties of Members of the European Parliament .
During this parliamentary term , this House has been dogged by constant allegations of abuses of expenses and allowances of Members .
I note that in the British papers this week you are quoted as saying that whilst you will insist , quite rightly , on sorting these out , you want to acknowledge that the overwhelming number of Members of the European Parliament are honest , hard-working people , abiding by the spirit and the letter of our regulations .
We thank you for that recognition and assure you of our determination on this issue .
According to the Treaty , we need the unanimous agreement of the Council if these issues are to be solved .
We are keen to solve them .
We want the next Parliament to be clear about the shared mandate of its Members , their rights and responsibilities , their privileges and immunities .
It is no easy task to bring together the parliamentary and political cultures of 15 different countries and create a single shared European culture in this respect .
But if we , the 626 Members of the European Parliament , cannot do that , then we had better give up trying to develop a shared vision of the future for the 370 million citizens of the Union .
( Applause ) We want to ensure that the Parliament which succeeds us here next June can put this issue firmly behind it and we welcome your commitment to work with us to sort this out .
Prime Minister , I recognize perhaps more than some others here just how much you have supported a pro-European policy in our party at home and a pro-European constructive policy for Britain in the European Union .
I thank you , as my party leader , as the Prime Minister of Britain and as the President-in-Office of the European Union .
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of European Liberals let me welcome the United Kingdom 's new approach to Europe , as eloquently outlined by the Prime Minister just now : pro-Europe and therefore pro-reform .
In our view , the most important result of the past six months has been the normalization of relations between the United Kingdom and the rest of us .
This is important , for the European Union needs the United Kingdom as much as the United Kingdom needs the Union .
Welcome back United Kingdom !
I also salute the personal efforts of Prime Minister Blair to bring about a lasting peace in Northern Ireland .
( Applause ) Mr President , I am not worried about the United Kingdom .
I am worried , however , about another important European country , Germany .
The theme at the Cardiff Summit was the imminent advent of the German elections .
Elections bring out the best as well as the worst in people .
As a result the Cardiff Summit has become a populist Summit .
The criticism voiced by Chancellor Kohl and others of the European institutions are as hypocritical as they are misplaced .
What is the main task of the European Commission ?
It is to safeguard the Treaty .
Only then does the European Commission act in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Treaty when it also reminds the most powerful Member States of the rules of play . Germany would therefore do better , for example , to reduce its subsidies to the coal industry , which distort competition , instead of criticizing Mr Van Miert 's policies .
The criticisms of the Court of Justice are also false .


The Court of Justice recently decided that two Luxembourg nationals , who had respectively bought a pair of spectacles in Belgium and were seeking orthodontic treatment in Germany , were entitled to reimbursement of the costs .

The Court did emphatically not take the place of the legislator , as the Danish and German Prime Ministers maintain .
The principles of the Treaty apply in cases were no harmonization legislation applies , such as here .
In future , free movement of persons applies not only to healthy Europeans but also to sick ones .
Is that not what is meant by a citizen 's Europe ?
( Applause ) We are against a European super state , President Chirac and Chancellor Kohl said .
Well , everyone is against that .
So who do they criticise ?
Surely not the Maastricht and Amsterdam Treaties which they helped to set up ?
Such talk in public damages the Unions ' image .
The Union can only be brought closer to the citizens if leading national politicians accept responsibility for the Union 's actions .
How can the democratic legitimacy of the Union be increased ?
I can see three possibilities .
Firstly the introduction of a uniform election system based on proportional representation for the next European elections .
Secondly , an integral review of all internal reimbursements by the European Parliament , so that only actual expenses are reimbursed , and the introduction of a uniform charter for Members .
Thirdly , the introduction of a form of consultative referendum for the new Chairman of the European Commission , as advocated by Jacques Delors and others .
If Socialists , Christian Democrats , Liberals and Greens each nominate a candidate for the Chairmanship of the European Commission , then this might give the European elections a new dynamic impetus .
It would devolve more power to the European citizens and it would give the Commission more legitimacy .
Much has been said in Cardiff on a citizens ' Europe .
I welcome this .
I hope actions will follow swiftly .
( Applause )
Mr President , I warmly welcome the British Prime Minister to the European Parliament .
I wish to thank him and his colleagues for a very effective and efficient EU presidency .
I would like to place on record that at all times this Parliament and its Members were extended every courtesy and assistance at political and official level .
I want to say how thankful the Members are for this .
I wish to thank the Prime Minister for his contribution here this morning .
I also wish to thank the President of the Commission for his contribution and to say that my group will strongly support the main thrust of what the Commission President said here today .
The Cardiff Summit has been more a stocktaking exercise than one in which major decisions have been made .
Nevertheless , an ambitious timetable has been set for reaching major agreements on the reform of the common agricultural policy , the regional and social funds and the budget .
They represent policy areas that are at the very heart of the European Union .
The decisions will have a direct and immediate effect on the citizens of the Union , whether our farming and fishing communities , those in industry - large and small , rural and urban communities and those who live in the less-developed regions and islands .
These decisions must not become part-time hostages in the heat of election campaigns .
The Europe which we are building must favour an inclusive and caring society in which the interests of all must be respected .
However , with 18 million people in the Union affected by unemployment including the young and the long-term unemployed , this objective is not being met .
Tackling unemployment through a broad range of measures must remain our top social priority .
Failure to do so will result in the retention of a two-tier society of those who are included and those who are excluded .
I regret that there has been no consideration of establishing a new programme to combat social exclusion and actions on behalf of the elderly .
I appeal to the President-in-Office and to the incoming President-in-Office to reassure the House that whatever new initiatives are necessary will be undertaken .
The conclusions on unemployment which are outlined in part 3 of the presidency 's document are more an overview of what is being done at present than a new set of initiatives .
Only time will tell if they will be successful .
If we are to go along with the presidency 's conclusions then the fifteen employment action plans submitted by the Member States represent a real effort to enhance the employability of young people , the long-term unemployed and women .
It means that demands that we have been making for the development of skills , life-long learning , improving conditions for SMEs and the self-employed are being put into effect .
This is very much indeed to be welcomed .
What we now need to see is the practical and rapid implementation of these action plans .
A series of orientations for future work and employment are set out in the conclusions .
Regrettably the detail is vague , for example with regard to child-care schemes .
We attach considerable importance to the successful introduction of the euro .
It is essential that the remaining legislative and practical steps be completed rapidly .
The negotiations which have begun on Agenda 2000 are among the most important ever to be undertaken by the Union .
Choices will have to be made about key policies which will have major long-term consequences for each of our countries .
Agenda 2000 is indeed of fundamental importance for the future development of the Union .
It not only has consequences for present Member States but also for the whole process of enlargement .
Under no circumstances can the cohesion process for existing less-developed regions be jeopardized , nor should there be any link between EMU participation and eligibility under the Cohesion Fund .
The whole question of transition arrangements is of the greatest importance .
They must , for example , in the case of my country , be adequate in terms of the level and duration of funding in order to address our continuing significant development needs .
The reform of the common agricultural policy is very controversial .
Agriculture is one of our greatest assets .
Agenda 2000 must strengthen and not destroy the common agricultural policy .
It is crucial to the preservation of our family farms and rural life .
I do not believe that the present proposals constitute a reasonable basis for negotiation .
Mr President , I would like to personally congratulate you on your own efforts and those of my Prime Minister Bertie Ahern with regard to the Northern Ireland peace agreement of 10 April .
I also wish to acknowledge and sincerely thank Members of this House for their support for the peace process .
My group warmly appreciates the further endorsement by the European Council of this historic agreement and its renewed commitment that the Union should continue to play an active part in promoting lasting peace and prosperity in Northern Ireland .
We particularly welcome the Council 's invitation to the Commission to make proposals as to how new and creative ways can be found to support the fresh opportunities which the peace agreement will bring .
Finally , it is my view that it is regrettable that the European Commission has again come under attack in the context of the European Summit .
The Commission has always undertaken the duties and responsibilities it has been given in an even-handed and fair manner .
The Commission has consistently discharged its functions as guarantor of the European Treaties in an exemplary fashion .
President Santer and his team of Commissioners have consistently reported on their activities to this Parliament and have not in my view exceeded the powers which have been given to them by the Council and I hope that the Commission will not be made a scapegoat in national election campaigns in our Member States .
Mr President , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , I would like to congratulate the Labour government , and particularly the Prime Minister , for the intelligence and courage they have shown in order to find a solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland .
This Parliament and public opinion throughout Europe are following with emotion the efforts being made to achieve peace and democratic normality in that European region .
We also thank the British presidency for the pro-European climate that it has been able to stamp on its term , a climate which would have been unthinkable among previous governments of the United Kingdom .
Maybe this is the best contribution of the British presidency because , and I say this very sincerely , the running of the presidency , even with the success of the birth of the euro and , in particular , the results of Cardiff , does not generate enthusiasm or excessive optimism at this extremely decisive stage for the construction of Europe .
On the one hand , almost all of the important decisions have been postponed until after the elections in Germany and , on the other hand , doubts and risks have appeared for the future of solidarity in the European Union .
We take a positive view of the incipient coordination of national employment plans , which could involve the first impulse of a Community policy which puts economic and social issues on the same level .
But the European Council has not analysed the viability of those national plans which , in many cases , do not set out clear objectives or set aside financial resources for their implementation .
We hope that the Vienna European Council is more decisive and takes into account the experiences of France and Italy to reduce weekly working time without loss of salary and other socio-economic measures which should be considered in terms of the European dimension .
We are very concerned because the debate on Agenda 2000 is not global and balanced and because the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund are being called into question .
If we want to respect the current internal solidarity and be able to finance enlargement , we will have to exceed the ceiling of 1.27 % of GDP and maintain the level of contributions from the wealthiest countries , which will be those that profit most from enlargement .
As regards international cooperation , we support the initiatives to relaunch the negotiations between the Israelis and the Palestinians and we believe that additional pressure must be applied in order to ensure that Netanyahu 's government respects the Oslo agreements and the United Nations resolutions .
We value the efforts made to develop a European identity in international politics , but I am sure Mr Blair will allow me to tell him that , at times , the British presidency has seemed more like the Atlantic partner of the United States than the coordinator of European foreign policy .
As regards institutional reform , we must learn from the failure of Amsterdam .
The situation is scandalous , in view of its urgency , which is unavoidable because of enlargement , and the need for a reorientation of the construction of Europe with institutions which are capable of responding to their citizens ' aspirations .

To conclude , I must tell you , Mr Blair , that a substantial part of the European left , which represents more than 12 million voters , cannot allow the monetarist ideology , expressed in the convergence criteria and in the Stability Pact which accompany the birth of the euro , to question economic and social cohesion and to put the European social model at risk . This model is a distinguishing characteristic of our democracy , as you have recognized , although you have talked about fine-tuning it and modernizing it .
But we must tackle all of these problems seriously .
In order to do so and to build a Europe of solidarity we will undoubtedly need the joint effort of the diverse left , as is already the case in certain countries of the European Union .
Mr President of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , as expected , Mr Blair has with much flair and feeling for public relations drawn attention to Europe at the start of the British Presidency , promising much .
A citizens ' Europe , democratic and transparent , a Europe which would credibly promote a healthy environment , which would easily and quickly enter the euro zone - in a manner of speaking - and with a more humane foreign policy , armed with a meaningful code of conduct for the export of arms .
Many of the promises went up in smoke in a blue skies discussion on the future , with fewer concrete results than hoped for .
However , the positive stance of the British Government in respect of Europe is an important change .
It spells an end to the europhobic attitude of the Conservatives .
But we are disappointed that you have attached so much importance in your press conference to the initiative by President Chirac and Chancellor Kohl , who together put subsidiarity on the European agenda , where the future evolvement of Europe is concerned .
What a present for the Presidency , the British eurosceptism is of the past but now the Continentals back the centralised bureaucratic euro nation which Great Britain has denounced .
We consider the initiative by Mr Kohl and Mr Chirac to be an attack on a future-oriented European political project .
The concepts of subsidiarity and decentralization are blatantly abused in order to exclude undesirable intervention in their own territory .
Member States who have previously supported a common market with common rules of play should not complain afterwards about the fact that the Commission safeguards its concrete realization .
Mr Hänsch is correct in saying that Mr Kohl 's liking for subsidiarity is proportional to his aversion to the ban on the Kirsch and Bertelsmann merger .
I cannot rid myself of the impression that it is not so much Europe which should get closer to the people as we , the national governments , who should get closer to them .
The Greens have always defended the idea that power should be devolved to a level which is as close as possible to the people but on the other hand that a political counterforce should be ready to oppose internationally organised economic actors .
In fact , a fake battle of powers is induced between the Commission and the Member States , whereas these same Member States think nothing of quietly transferring large powers to multinational organizations such as the World Trade Organization .
The erosion of democracy is not categorized , whereas political decisions by our Union , such as our option for hormone-free meat and the special banana regime for ACP countries , are thrown over , while we stand powerless .
We do therefore want a Europe which is closer to the citizen , which to us means a simple decision-making system and the disappearance of the democratic deficit .
Because the citizens not only harbour a growing rejection of Europe but also an increasing rejection of politics .
We should try and do something about that , both at national and at a European level .
We welcome the fact that the environment has finally made it to a European Summit again , after seven lean years .
Rightly so , as eight of the twelve essential environmental items show a degradation .
To us this means an important result in the British Presidency .
We are also pleased that Prime Minister Blair has brought up the subject of the reimbursements and the charter of the Members of the European Parliament .
It is about time this was settled and I believe , ladies and gentlemen , that we all have an interest in dealing quickly with this point so that it can be removed from the agenda .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Henderson and Mrs Clare Short for their willingness to accord consultative powers to the European Parliament in respect of expansion and the Lomé Convention , amongst other things ; support for the strengthening of this Parliament means indeed support for the strengthening of democracy and closer ties with the citizens .
Mr President , these are major occasions in the life of our Parliament and we should not overlook the fact that President Santer is here as well as the President-in-Office and I welcome them both .
I would like to thank the Commission President for his very skilful and diplomatic address .
However , we are mainly here to talk about the UK presidency .
We have to recognize that it started with a great deal of goodwill .
The change of government was welcomed right across Europe , not least in Scotland where the Conservatives suffered total wipe-out at the general election .
But I would say to the President-in-Office that he should not mistake the sighs of relief for gasps of admiration .
The greatest asset the Labour Government has is that it is not the old Conservative Government .
In saying this , I do not want to be grudging .
We welcome the change of tone .
This Parliament appreciates the fact that we have had Ministers such as Robin Cook , Clare Short and many others addressing Parliament and attending its committee meetings .
That is very worthwhile .
We all remember that handbag that Mrs Thatcher wielded when she banged the table and said : ' I want my money back ' .
Well , the handbag has gone but the rebate and the claim for rebate remain from the UK , and from Germany .
In trying to appraise the record of the UK presidency we have to match the rhetoric and the achievement and ask ourselves what we will remember the UK presidency for .
It departed , with perhaps unfortunate symbolism , from Waterloo Station six months ago .
There were two big events in the last six months .
The first was on 2 and 3 May when we assembled to welcome the launch of the single currency on behalf of 11 Member States .
It was supremely ironic that the British Finance Minister , Gordon Brown , who presided over that in Brussels could not be the team manager but had to play in the left outside position because he was not part of it .
We have waited in vain today for an indication of commitment to the cause of the single currency , which I and most of us think is the most important aspect of European integration .
A colleague , Mr Puerta , also mentioned the too-close association with the United States .
On the Iraq crisis the hotline to the White House was operative long before there was any thought of calls to the Elysée Palace or anywhere else .
This Clintonization of policy is regrettable , and I have to mention the disgrace of the secret importation of nuclear waste from Georgia to Scotland .
The citizens of Europe were not even informed until it had arrived .
There were also some non-decisions .
What happened to quota-hopping which was supposed to be sorted out in the British presidency ?
What about the compensation for the farmers who are desperate at the strength of the pound and are looking for compensation ?
But let us look ahead to the vision of Europe .
That is what Prime Minister Blair talks about , and all of us are concerned about it .
What do we make of the phrase ' a Europe of nation states ' ?
Was this a major faux pas ?
By that I mean a John Major faux pas .
When John Major talked about the nation states and subsidiarity , he meant that it stopped at Dover .
Nothing that applied below that level was in his mind .
It would be unfair for us to accuse Prime Minister Blair of that .
He has recognized the historic nations of the United Kingdom .
Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland are all to have their own parliamentary democracy .
That is a transformation which parallels those of Gorbachev in his day .
I finish by drawing on an analogy with the World Cup which is on all our television screens .
The Scottish football fans have got it about right .
They have been welcomed across Europe for their positive contribution .
These are the same fans that voted for Home Rule for Scotland in the referendum last year .
That was welcomed at the time .
Their behaviour is welcome now .
I would urge Prime Minister Blair to turn his back firmly on the equivalent of Les Hooligans - the Fleet Street tabloids with their constant Brussels bashing - and take a leaf out of the book of the Tartan Army whose vision , like mine , is to participate , to be there and to create a true Europe of the peoples .
Mr President , I too would like to add my words of welcome to the President of the Council to our Parliament .
You are very welcome as our Prime Minister .
I believe the UK presidency will be judged , in the long term , by what has been achieved .
I feel we are getting ourselves in a position , within the European Union , that every time a new presidency comes in , it tries to out-do the last one ; it tries to be more outward looking and come forward with great new ideas .
At the end of the day , unfortunately , on many occasions we do not always achieve what we set out to do .
Six months of a presidency is about as long as a two minute speech in this Parliament .
It is very difficult to say all you want to say or do all you want to do .
I certainly believe that the creation of jobs and the development of economic growth throughout the European Union must be our number one priority .
Despite the fine words we have heard in this House on many occasions , we have not had any success in this area .
We must succeed if the people of Europe are not to be further alienated from Brussels bureaucracy .
I believe the most positive way forward to achieve this is to develop , as you said here this morning , our small- and mediumsized enterprises .
There are tremendous opportunities here to develop and allow them to grow .
I note also your comments on achieving , by next March , an end to the Agenda 2000 negotiations .
I hope the Council and Commission will ensure that this Parliament and its committees are fully involved and informed of the whole situation .
I would also like to take the opportunity to appeal to you to tackle the real problem that agriculture is facing throughout Europe , and certainly within the United Kingdom , and the problem of the strong pound sterling in its relation to the green pound .
I should also like to take the opportunity to congratulate you very warmly , Mr President , for the time and energy that you invested in achieving the positive outcome of the referendum in my constituency of Northern Ireland .
I want to publicly thank you here today because I do not think it could have been achieved but for that time and energy you gave .
( Applause ) As the only representative from Northern Ireland here today , I want you to take that back with you .
I was saddened to read in the press comments made by Mr Brok of the PPE Group when he said that senior UK ministers were so preoccupied with Northern Ireland that they were unable to concentrate on the European Union .
I am sure that you will take the opportunity to reject that here today .
That was a very unfortunate statement by Mr Brok .
I should like to say , regarding the situation in Northern Ireland , that you made personal promises to the people of Northern Ireland .
I hope that you will be able to deliver on those promises , Prime Minister .
I also want recorded in this House the important role played by my party leader .
To a large extent his role has been overlooked .
It was extremely important , the very courageous decision that he , too , took in putting his own political future on the line to ensure that my people in Northern Ireland are able to achieve peace .
Finally , I should like to call on the Council and the Commission to work with us to find ways in which we can support the new assembly that the election next Thursday will hopefully put in place in Northern Ireland .
( Applause )
Mr President , President Blair , like his predecessors serving as Presidents-in-Office of the Council , told us : " jobs must remain the top priority in Europe : eighteen million unemployed in Europe is far too many ' .
These are impressive words that we have heard before and we will hear again .
The reality is that the European Union has peaked in unemployment in the industrialized world .
We have between 10 and 11 % unemployment in the European Union , compared with less than 5 % in the United States and less than 4 % in Japan .
Of course , we are talking of different continents .
But within the European continent there are two countries that have much lower unemployment levels , and I am speaking here of Switzerland with less than 4 % and Norway with less than 3 % .
These are two countries , two States whose peoples , through a referendum , have refused to enter the European Union .
What they are trying to tell us is clear .
The system set up by the European Union is inefficient and bad for the people , especially in terms of jobs .
We are not ignorant of the reasons .
First of all , it is the frenzied standardization to which the European Union aspires .
Then we have the furious economic free-trade ethic which blurs boundaries and eventually leads to their breakdown .
After all is said and done , President Blair , it is the Economic and Monetary Union that has been praised during your presidency .
In short , the cause of unemployment in Europe is the yoke imposed by the single market , single standards and the single currency .
Europe and the European Union could beat the unemployment problem if it changed its basic principles , if it stopped seeking to expand worldwide and if it genuinely embraced the principle of subsidiarity and the diversity of regions and nations , in short , if it legislated less and imposed fewer conditions upon us .
This is how the European Union could regain the path to full employment .
I have received seven motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place at 12.00 noon .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the British presidency has stood and continues to stand under the slogan ' The People 's Europe ' .
Since then more slogans have been added , such as subsidiarity , decentralization and renationalization , which together with this slogan could produce a highly explosive mixture .
We just had an example from Mr Le Gallou of what you can do with good principles when you mix them incorrectly and add a pinch of extreme nationalism .
Mr President-in-Office , I would like to state plainly and clearly : We need reforms !
To give one example , we have been recently dealing in this House with the question of the colour that signs on buses should have across the Community .
Even if the important question of buses suitable for the disabled were the issue , this is still no central concern of Europe 's .
We need reforms , de-bureaucratization , decentralization and transparency .
We also need freedom of movement for the citizens in the truest sense of the word , as you have already said today , and this should include all levels of our national spectrum , in Europe , at national and at regional level .
I would like to draw attention to one question - perhaps more strongly than we have so far done today : it is in the interest of Europe 's citizens to have more jobs .
That is why we need greater coordination of economic policy , more security , fewer wars and fewer crises .
That is why we need a truly common foreign and security policy for Europe and a better and healthier environment .
That is why we need as a minimum a European environmental policy and more democracy .
That is why we need more rights for this Parliament , that is so say more majority decisions at European level .
I hope that the current and the future Austrian presidency will not lose heart if the issue centres on the heads of government making these crucial decisions .
The slogan is the right one and it should also be pursued under the Austrian presidency .
At the same time I seek a Yes to reforms so that we really have a strong Europe where it is needed , that is to say where the interests of its citizens lie .
Mr President , I think this outgoing presidency should be named the Blair presidency in honour of a very great Englishman .
Of course , I refer to Eric Blair , better known as George Orwell .
Orwell described how the Europe of 1984 was governed by a Ministry of Truth in which spin doctors explained how the war being waged by the Ministry of Peace was always going well .
The language of this world was called newspeak .
New Labour speaks this language to perfection .
When they read of new measures against poverty our poor hide their purses .
When we hear of Britain 's new leadership of Europe we anticipate a new surge of xenophobia tempered , perhaps , by American advice .
It is quite fitting that the last achievement of the Blair presidency was the annulment of the Poverty 4 Programme .
I am extremely pleased to hear the Prime Minister announcing that annulment is now to be annulled .
It is clear that there is still some space in our Europe for public opinion to make its weight felt .
Now the President will be free to pursue his own course and I understand he is leading a team in pursuit of the third way .
They seek a way between truth and falsehood , between right and wrong .
If Europe goes along this path it will be widening its fissures both vertically and horizontally and I hope very much that we shall consider carefully before embarking on this road .
Mr President , I am the other ghost at the feast of the British presidency .
This ghost wants to say a few things about the presidency .
Firstly , the general consensus amongst informed opinion in Brussels is that the British presidency has been a bit of a damp squib : it has promised much but achieved little ; and the Cardiff Summit was summed up by the Financial Times as being ' long in words but short on action ' .
I wish to highlight two things .
Firstly , I want to reinforce those comments about the way in which your first failure as President of the European Union was to side automatically with Mr Clinton , without even consulting the European Union , on the question of the threat from Baghdad and the threat to bomb Baghdad .
That was a mistake and caused much consternation in this House .
Secondly , the fact that we have been bystanders on the question of a single currency is a major error of strategy of your government .
I have to ask you to comment on the words of your Permanent Secretary , Sir Terence Burns , in Brussels last week who , when asked why Britain was not joining the single currency , said two words : ' Rupert Murdoch ' .
When will you stand up to the Sun , Mr Blair , and actually say when your government will join the single currency ?
I have to say that your concern about building a people 's Europe is something we would all support .
Why , therefore , have you blocked major social programmes , like the extension of the reduction of working time directive , the consultation directive , and why has your government led a considerable weakening of the acquired rights directive , passed overwhelmingly by this House two weeks ago , which seriously threatens many workers across Europe ?
If you could reassure us on those things , we might believe your concern about a people 's Europe .
Thanks to Europe 's best-fed ghost .
Mr Presidents , the conclusions of the Cardiff summit remain deliberately vague regarding the future of European institutions after enlargement .
We learn simply that we must , and I quote , " strengthen the democratic legitimacy of the Union and spell out the meaning of the principle of subsidiarity ' - a philosophy which , outlined in this way , remains highly ambiguous since it could result either in the enhancement of a super- state , or the emergence of a Europe of nations .
If strengthening democratic legitimacy means giving pride of place to a more distant European democracy and hence one that is less vibrant than any national democracy , if absorbing the principle of subsidiarity means giving monarchic jurisdiction to the Commission and leaving nations with the crumbs of power , then of course the citizens will be confused .
If , however , reinforcing democratic legitimacy means reassessing the role of national parliaments , submitting the decisions of the Court of Justice to a right of appeal by the people or exercising better control over the Commission , for example by not allowing it to vote on spending decisions without a legal basis , as we spoke about earlier , if applying the principle of subsidiarity means reinstating national control over Europe and making Brussels a complacent service provider , then I believe that the European Union will have reached adulthood .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the Cardiff summit failed to give an official opinion regarding the joint letter from Chancellor Kohl and President Chirac on the matter of subsidiarity .
This was a wise move , since any approach which announces from the outset that in order to apply subsidiarity we must avoid any re-nationalization , will not make a great deal of progress .
On the other hand , since you have reported on the satisfactory resolutions of the Council with regard to transparency , we are surprised that we have not heard anything of the letter that Chancellor Kohl sent you , Mr Blair , on his interpretation of the new Article 63 of the Amsterdam Treaty relating to the community-wide adoption of the immigration policy .
What is in this letter ?
The partners of Germany would very much like to know this before they ratify the treaty .
Mr President , will Council transparency continue through to the point at which we are informed of the contents of this letter ?
Mr President , ten days ago in Luxembourg the European Union 's Finance Ministers actually rejected the commitments requested by the Commission for a major improvement in the financial situation and substantially watered down and emptied the Waigel Plan of all meaning , a plan approved a month ago at the Summit in Brussels .
This is a step backwards , or even a false step that could prove very costly for a Europe united by the single currency .
In a word , economic and social policy has been forgotten .
Even the refusal to reduce the working week to 35 hours was sweetened by the very discretionary clause that the 35 hours could be applied as long as unit salaried positions do not increase .
Cardiff is an ambitionless Summit that only seeks to identify the problems without proposing any solutions .
The Kohl and Chirac initiative has reopened old issues on points of discord like the decentralization of Community decisions or even institutional reforms .
The Chancellor and French President 's joint letter in fact reopens the debate on subsidiarity , institutional problems and on the aims of European construction , and your proposal , Mr President-in-Office , of creating a top-level group to study the profile of the future Europe seems consistent with this .
To us it seems paradoxical that , at a time when the euro is an important factor of integration and the European Parliament 's role seems to be growing stronger , a lot of Member States want a pause for reflection , warning about excessive decision-making powers .
The National Alliance wants a Europe that is closer to its citizens , a Europe that is resolute in tackling the problem of reform .
But a Europe of 25 or 30 States requires a very strong political - I repeat , political - mechanism to offset the effect of number and the heterogeneity of its components , because the vaster the territory the more political cohesion will be necessary to give direction .
We have witnessed an unenlightening Presidency , if we consider the goals that it has achieved only for the framework programme for research and development and the liberalisation of the gas and electricity market ; it was a Presidency that was downright unilluminating when it decided to step aside at the decisive moment of the advancement of European construction to the single currency , giving of course its endorsement but comfortably preparing itself to adhere only when all the consequences are known .
Mr President , it was not so long ago that Britain was on the political margins of the European Union , often ignored , frequently seen as irrelevant , always complaining and whingeing , never being constructive .
I am delighted that all of that is firmly behind us .
Now we have a British Government that correctly believes that Britain 's future is in Europe .
Under the British presidency we have seen the government 's new approach achieving practical results : mutual respect , genuine partnership , constructive dialogue .
These have all been the hallmarks of the past six months .
Under the British presidency , as many people have mentioned , two achievements of enormous significance stand out : the agreement to launch the single European currency and the beginning of negotiations to enlarge the European Union .
The single currency has been established on a firm basis .
There is no doubt in my mind that the euro will emerge as a sound and stable currency .
Equally , enlargement is of tremendous significance .
The European Union has never been inward-looking and short-sighted .
I welcome the recognition that enlargement is essential for the wellbeing , stability and prosperity of all of Europe , both East and West .
Under the British presidency job creation has been , quite rightly , there at the very top of the agenda .
The presidency has recognized that if we are truly serious about achieving greater employment opportunities we have to embrace change .
This does not mean undermining the European social model .
It means making sure that the model is relevant to the needs of today .
The quality of our European workforce will be the single most important factor in determining our future competitiveness and therefore our future prosperity .
Now that the British presidency is concluding , all of us have a responsibility to ensure that issues such as employability , adaptability , equal opportunities , life-long learning and entrepreneurship are all taken forward and acted upon by all Member States .
Finally , I was delighted that the Cardiff Summit was a positive conclusion to the British presidency .
The summit confirmed the real progress of the past six months and has pointed a way to a new kind of European partnership .
I was absolutely delighted that such a successful summit should have been held in Cardiff , the capital city of Wales and the city at the very heart of my constituency .
Last weekend the Cardiff Summit was a landmark in Europe 's development - important for Europe , important for Britain , important for Wales as well .
Next year Wales will have its own national assembly .
That assembly will ensure that Wales , like Britain , will play a full part in our people 's Europe .
Mr President-in-Office , in the light of past experience I would like emphatically to acknowledge the willingness of the Council presidency to enter into intense discussion with the European Parliament .
For me one of the highlights of the British presidency was Mr Gordon Brown 's statement to the European Parliament on 2 May .
I might add that given the splendid explanation of the historic decisions , there was only one thing missing : the United Kingdom 's immediate declaration of accession to monetary union .
I wish to point out that I regret the Commission 's decisions to lift the export ban for the whole of the United Kingdom .
This is not in keeping with the exact wording of the Florence agreements .
And I just want to add that for two days now I have had in my hands a late report from the EU inspectors .
Here it states , and I quote : ' The level of non-compliance is rather high .
The official authorities do not check in the credible way , contrary to instructions . '
I could go on .
Against this background and also in view of a visit from the European Parliament , we were treated to a show at the time , but not to the reality of practical implementation .
I would like to state most clearly to Mr de Vries and Mr Santer : the issue the German Chancellor has raised concerning subsidiarity and the need for a more equitable system of income and expenditure , is supported by the large majority of the German population , and more recently by the Ministerial Conference of the Federal States .
And that is why , Mr Santer , it should be noted from the discussion on the agenda that the Commission is not only the engine of integration , but also very much a party in this affair .
If we wish to keep to the timetable in the course of the German presidency , there are two conditions that have to be met .
Firstly , the Commission must submit its agenda proposals in a revised form in autumn in the light of the current discussions also taking place in Parliament . Secondly , we need a Council presidency under the proven leadership of Chancellor Helmut Kohl if this is to be drawn to a successful conclusion , because we should not leave the matter to amateurs .
Mr President , Cardiff and the British presidency have clearly provided some justification for those who always thought that a Europe wanting to exercise less centralized control and leave more to the sovereign states is a better Europe - a Europe which will be better understood by its citizens and one which will also find greater acceptance .
If nothing was resolved in Cardiff , at least the European Council should have recognized that the limits of feasibility have been reached when some are paying less , others receiving a lot and all are having to finance enlargement jointly - and all this without increasing the budget ceiling .
The British presidency has prepared the way for the Austrian presidency to solve a series of problems that it could not solve itself and which the Austrian presidency cannot solve if it continues with the prearranged and present course of action .
Europe needs a new direction which can again give the Member States more weight .
Mr President , I would like to focus on the institutional debate that arose suddenly before the Cardiff summit , through the letter from Mr Chirac and Mr Kohl .
I would like to point out to Mr Böge that whenever domestic policy problems - in this case the German elections - arise within a major Member State , the subsidiarity issue is raised .
This is usually a veiled attempt to re-nationalize elements of European policy and thereby pander to unhappy voters .
So the hunt is on for scapegoats .
It is either the Commission , or the European Parliament , it is never the Council !
If there is one European institution that has missed the mark recently it is the Council , where some ministers and heads of government prefer to busy themselves with the allowances for Members of the European Parliament , rather than genuine European problems .
We also know that the institutional imagination is boundless .
So old ideas that have been discussed a thousand times resurface .
I learn that some think of the old deus ex machina of a senate of national parliamentarians to offset the democratic deficit .
These institutional digressions are not meant to reassure the citizens , who cannot make sense of it .
I therefore commend the wisdom of the European Council in Cardiff , which stressed that the first priority is to ratify the Amsterdam Treaty .
But , clearly , the European Union has a problem in terms of political visibility .
The citizens fail to grasp European policy , but that is not an institutional problem , it is a political problem , a policy-related problem .
If , for example , the President of the Commission , who holds a distinguished political position in Europe , is appointed by the European Council after a secret conclave , based on a complex alchemy without public debate , how do you imagine the citizens feel involved ?
Whence the motion that we have put forward to several people - including Jacques Delors - to open up the debate and allow the European citizens to participate through European elections .
Personalizing the electoral campaign also means politicizing it .
This approach would result in a greater cohesion of political forces , a more serious contemplation of the future political programme of the Commission and a genuine political dimension for Europe .
Mr President , it is certainly true that we find ourselves at the end of a presidency without spectacular results .
There were no reasons for this .
The Amsterdam Treaty and the Luxembourg Extraordinary Summit highlighted objectives and guidelines for action for which the debate and the assessment of results require time .
In terms of foreign policy , Mr President , we regret the failure of the troika mission to Algeria , a country which is very close to our southern borders and which deserves special attention , as the entire Mediterranean region does .
And we must welcome the agreement reached in the context of the Transatlantic Summit , particularly the agreement on the legislation on extraterritorial effects which , in the case of the Helms-Burton Act , is subordinate to the amendment by the United States Congress of Title IV of that Act , without the agreement changing , of course , the European Union 's perception of the nature and scope of that Act .
An important issue is that of employment , which received a strong impulse at the Luxembourg Extraordinary Summit chaired by Mr Junker .
Countries such as Spain , Mr President , have presented action plans which have been highlighted by the Commission itself for their toughness and for their objectives .
For the first time , specific measures and specific time limits have been presented .
It is still not time to carry out an evaluation on them and the general character of the Council 's study in this respect is understandable , although I would like to draw attention to two questions which have been commented on in this Parliament . The first is the need to bring into line the time limit for the presentation of these plans and the budgetary forecasts that the countries make each year ; and the second is the need to have officially approved , reliable socio-economic indicators available which allow for a comprehensive follow-up to their evaluation and results .
As the President of the Spanish government , José María Aznar , said only yesterday in the Chamber of Deputies , the best cure for the disease of unemployment is price stability , an improvement in public finances and an evolution of salaries in line with inflation and productivity growth .
And if this is complemented by an effort on the part of businesses to reinvest profits and , in a climate of social dialogue , to adapt labour organization and the needs of the market , we will be taking steps to ensure that citizens are aware that political decisions are moving in the right direction .
Finally , Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , there is no real convergence without employment and there is no economic and social cohesion without solidarity and without collective economic and social effort .
We want a European Union which is not in the form of " marketing ' but in the form of a free and competitive internal market where our young people , our women and all those who have a desire to work may move with freedom throughout a common economic and social territory .
Mr President , I would like as a German Member of Parliament to thank the President-in-Office in his capacity as the British Prime Minister for his tremendous involvement in the peace process in Northern Ireland .
I do so as a German MEP because I love Ireland and consider it one of my favourite holiday destinations .
Secondly , I would like to thank the Presidency - and especially the British one - for its involvement in the final steps towards monetary union , and I say as a German MEP : We want Britain inside of the currency union !
That is why I am especially grateful for the UK involvement , even if it should continue for a bit longer .
Thirdly , with the Treaty of Amsterdam a historic epoch has drawn to a close because the European unification process in the past was very heavily characterized by old-style diplomacy .
Progress has been made and now Parliament-controlled policy has the job of making more progress with unification .
At the same time , the European Parliament and the parliaments of the Member States will need to safeguard their rights .
Our rights must be further extended .
Each new step towards integration following the Treaty of Amsterdam needs to improve the contractual arrangements allowing European political parties to continue to develop so that the parliamentary system is also improved .
My fourth point concerns Agenda 2000 .
It will not surprise anyone - and I agree fully with Mr Böge 's factual statement - that the agenda is very tight , and the German presidency needs to bring this to a satisfactory conclusion .
The difference is that it will be a social-democratic President - the Chancellor to be precise - who will hold the office .
In other respects I share Mr Böge 's opinion .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , how could I fail to agree with your speech this morning .
I detected more socio-Christian sentiments than socialist , at least if I take as my reference point the words of the dyed-in-thewool socialists whose words we hear throughout the day .
It is true , the British presidency has done a good job .
More than others before , it has remained attentive to the wishes of this Parliament , thanks to the number of contacts your ministers have maintained with our committees and I can vouch for that personally .
I would like to come back to the concerns of Parliament and the Commission on the subject of coordinating economic policies .
We cannot , on the one hand , stress - as you did in your conclusions - the importance of this coordination and , on the other hand , allow the Committee on Monetary Affairs to prune away everything that the Commission recommendation contained that was relevant and of operational value in this respect .
You said - and we support you - let us seek to promote the accession of our citizens to the European fold .
Allow me to offer three very simple pieces of advice that I would just like to add to those of Gijs de Vries .
Stop the double-talk and put your money where your mouth is .
If you say that coordination is necessary , encourage it .
Then , make Europe more effective , this is what the citizens expect of Europe .
How do we make it more effective ?
Spread the vote to the majority .
Finally , you want the citizens to have a say in the matter . This is equally simple : extend the joint decision to everything of a legislative nature .
If you were to do that , you would very quickly gain the support of all European citizens in promoting an open , democratic and integrated Europe , which we all aspire to .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Great Britain on a well carried out Presidency , which should also be seen in the light of having completed a start for EMU and a strong and successful commitment to peace in Northern Ireland .
I would also like to express my gratitude for the clear answer we were given today on the question of legal grounds for certain expenditures with a strong social dimension .
It is that kind of expenditure , more than any other , which is associated with ' the people 's Europe ' , the theme of the British Presidency .
I am very happy to be able to pass on the answer we have been given today to the various organisations which have contacted me from Sweden , not least the organisations for the disabled - we have had some anxious telephone calls .
I can now tell them that they can look forward to next week with confidence ; it is hoped that Mr Tony Blair will see to this .
As to Cardiff , what I appreciate most of all is the clear willingness and ambition demonstrated also at the meeting to continue forcefully the struggle against unemployment .
We all know that it is not easy to achieve anything at the European level , as this is something which is supposed to be both a national and an ' EU-wide ' affair .
There is no absolute truth , there are no clear models for how we are to proceed .
We must , however , ' keep the pot boiling ' , and must not give up this struggle .
I would like to point out that those who criticise the Union for not achieving anything , for example on the employment front , are often those who are not prepared to create any common instruments towards progress , but who always , with horror in their voices , immediately cry ' Federation ! ' .
Allow me also , finally , to express thanks for the promise we have been given that the Council will carry further the issue of public documents .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office began his remarks with the statement that Model 14 / 1 is no longer practicable .
We should endorse this .
This is no doubt a good thing for Europe .
Yet besides the historic step towards monetary union taken at the start of May there has been progress in other areas too .
For example there are now ratified Europol conventions .
There are initial steps being made towards collaboration in justice and internal affairs .
The action plan to combat organized crime is gradually being implemented .
However , there are deficiencies too .
Why , Mr President-in-Office , is Europol not starting its work by 1 July ?
Why is it impossible for a German court to make initial contact with a British court in the interests of those seeking justice ?
That is to say , we have reached the stage of great cordial declarations .
They stir up our expectations , yet reality is lagging behind .
The concept of ' national sovereignty ' is held up as not approving of all this .
I ask you , Mr President-in-Office , how can national sovereignty be levelled against the requirements of citizens ' security ?
Why is progress not possible in a European area which the people would welcome with open arms , in contrast to other developments where they are more reserved ?
Europe 's citizens want Europol to commence its work against organized crime .
I think much more progress could have been possible in this area .
You have expressed your intention , which I welcome , of improving relations with Turkey as well as setting in place the financial framework of the Customs Union agreement .
I would like to point out to you that this would also be a way of combating organized crime and drug-trafficking in Europe .
Because it is via Turkey that a lot of the drugs are entering Europe .
Without improved cooperation successful crime prevention is not possible .
Hence I can only call upon you to continue on this course .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , as many of the previous speakers have remarked , I too am obliged to describe the Cardiff Summit as something of a disappointment .
It squares with the overall image of Britain 's presidency , which clearly started well , but then tailed off somewhat .
This means of course that the work involved for the Austrian presidency will be considerable .
Not least the informal special summit to be held in October of this year in Melk on the issues of transparency and subsidiarity must serve to ensure that a much-cited and almost as often misinterpreted concept like subsidiarity is finally given the correct substance .
Subsidiarity is neither an aid to self-help nor an exclusive relationship between the European Union and the Member States , but rather the political principle that the larger unit should never assume responsibilities which can be successfully dealt with by the smaller unit .
This also means , however , that policy areas such as foreign and security policy need to be established at European level so that they do not lead to inefficient fragmentation , and we now have the clear example of Kosovo , where more or less exactly the same mistakes have been made again as were made at the start of the civil war in Yugoslavia .
Unfortunately , the British presidency has made less progress on the issue of deregulation and de-bureaucratization , which had been heralded in numerous attractive brochures .
When I read in the President 's concluding statements about a Union closer to the citizens , I ask myself why the Cardiff Summit has failed to implement sufficiently the European Parliament 's report on information policy from May of this year .
For this called for an open information policy provided by common EU information offices instead of the previously separate offices for Commission and Parliament .
We need to press in Parliament for the unresolved , but nevertheless important issues to be implemented under the Austrian presidency .
Mr Nassauer has already dealt with security policy - this is a key issue because security policy needs to be one of the major aspects of the Union as a whole .
If security policy is not functioning , if the safety of the individual citizen is not guaranteed , then the other policies cannot really have any impact at economic and social levels .
Mr President , I join colleagues in welcoming Mr Blair to Parliament today .
My only regret is that he did not come here at the outset of the presidency because he will know , as I know , the key importance of working closely with colleagues within the European Community and Union and with Member States .
It is only through the closest co-operation that we can really achieve the results that we want .
I am just going to concentrate in the two minutes I have on a couple of points , one about Turkey and the other about human rights .
To a mild extent I part company from Mr Nassauer but I would wish to draw Mr Blair 's attention to the situation in Turkey itself .
Of course Turkey must be quite free to conduct its own policy within Turkey and on a bilateral basis with other countries .
But when we are talking about the possibility of Turkey becoming a Member of the European Union we are obliged to take a much closer interest at the way in which it conducts its affairs .
We do look to Turkey to meet the criteria which we , as the European Union , lay down for Membership .
Mr Blair knows perfectly well that there are many shortcomings within Turkey at the present time and there have been for many years .
There is the whole question of human rights violations , for instance , and the torture that is going on .
There is a lack of freedom of speech there and indeed Turkey has a government which is there by kind permission of the army .
So there are a lot of things wanting .
I do not think that we should entirely look to the Americans to influence our policy in that regard .
In regard to human rights , he made brief reference - and there was not much time - to the progress made with China and I salute that .
However , I do regret very much what appears to be the sniping which has been going on , on the part perhaps of the Foreign Secretary , against the European Parliament in respect of the many resolutions we have adopted which we think are soundly based on human rights .
I would like to see a closer understanding between the British Foreign Office and ourselves .
It is all too easy to pay lip service to human rights .
I have an article here from the Financial Times about an Amnesty International report which says that far too little attention is being paid to human rights issues in the 142 countries with which Amnesty is concerned .
I think we really must give this a lift up the agenda .
First of all I offer my congratulations to those who have stayed the course during our debate this morning which I have very greatly enjoyed hearing .
I will respond as briefly and fully as I can in the time that is available to me .
I thank people for what , in general , have been very kind and positive remarks .
Indeed some of the most negative remarks have actually come from British representatives but then , there are perhaps some British traditions that never change .
I should also like to say a word of thanks for everyone 's comments on Northern Ireland .
I would like to express my thanks to all the political leaders of the main parties in Northern Ireland and indeed to the political leadership in the Republic of Ireland for their work in bringing about at least some hope of future prosperity and peace for people in Northern Ireland .
( Applause ) I should like to say a personal word of thanks to Jacques Santer , the President of the European Commission .
He will know that one of the strange aspects of our debate in Cardiff about the future of Europe was my insistence that , although I believe strongly in the principle of subsidiarity , as I indicated in my speech , I believe that there are significant changes needed in the European Union to bring it closer to people .
Let us never forget there are good and bad reasons for being in favour of subsidiarity .
The good reason is that decisions that can be taken closer to the people should be taken closer to the people .
The bad reason is when the Commission does the job the Commission is actually supposed to do : in making sure , for example , that the single European market is driven through and there is progress and change in Europe .
I should like to extend to Jacques Santer my own personal thanks for the cooperation and work of him and his colleagues throughout our six-months presidency .
We have enjoyed close working relations .
I personally have enjoyed a tremendous and good relationship with him .
I shall deal with the comments that were made on the European Court of Justice .
I have indicated how we intend to take this process forward and resolve the legal base following the European Court of Justice 's judgment .
I would also like to welcome the comments that Mrs Green made about the terms and conditions of employment of European Members of Parliament .
That willingness to accept that it is in everyone 's interests to get these issues sorted out is something that is good for the European Union as a whole .
I should like to deal with the comments made by several Members .
There was some criticism here that I shall deal with as diplomatically as I can : the criticism that the British presidency has been too close to the United States in our foreign policy considerations .
I want to say to you very clearly indeed - I know this may not enjoy universal acclaim - that it is important that the European Union enjoys good and strong relations with the United States of America .
That is to our mutual advantage and interest .
( Applause ) I ask you to realize that there are forces within the United States who want to have an isolationist American policy , who want the US to disengage from its responsibilities in the world .
That is emphatically not in any of our interests .
I would also simply point out - as indeed I said when I addressed the Socialist Group earlier today - that in respect of Iraq it is simply not true to say that we did not contact , either collectively or individually , other European Union Member States .
We did . We contacted them very fully indeed .
I am afraid , however , it is rather worse than Britain simply following the line of the United States .
We did not really follow it .
We agreed with it and helped put it together .
My own belief is that we would not have seen the progress with the UN inspections in Iraq had it not been for the firm stand of diplomacy backed up , if necessary , by the use of force .
I believe that was the right policy .
I thank Mr de Vries and others for their kind comments on the normalization of relations between the UK and Europe and say that I agree very much indeed that we should try to complete the programme of reform to make the European Union more competitive and , in particular , to make its single market come about .
I should also like to deal with a point made by a number of colleagues that the national action plans and the employment guidelines have not yet delivered enough to people .
Let us make one thing quite clear : these national action plans are the first time that governments have actually put together employment programmes - action to tackle social exclusion and unemployment - and agreed a process whereby those are going to be reviewed , evaluated and then further steps taken .
We are at the beginning of that process but it is a long way from the old days when people said that these are not issues that the European Union need concern itself with - this is simply for Member States .
Jobs are one area where we can learn from each other and where action is essential to tackle the fundamental problems of social exclusion and long-term unemployment in our countries today .
Can I say to our colleague from the Green Party , who made some kind remarks but criticized us on the environment , our achievement in the Environment Council , concluded yesterday , represents a very significant step forward .
Most people thought Kyoto would never happen .
Then most people thought that it would not be possible to agree to implement Kyoto .
The European Union has shown : ( a ) that it can be constructive in approving Kyoto and ( b ) it has actually agreed a plan to take it forward .
We never aim for perfection but it is progress .
( Applause ) Can I say very gently to our colleague from the Scottish Nationalist Party that I support devolution in Scotland and decentralization within the UK very strongly .
From my own political perspective , and I hope he understands where we differ on this , I support devolution but I will always stand out against narrow-minded nationalism .
I do not believe that is the way to go .
( Applause ) I would also like to thank particularly Mr Edward McMillan-Scott for his contribution .
It is important to remind people what they were missing and I can only say , as kindly as I can to him , I think his problem is that he agrees with my position on Europe rather more than the position of his own party .
( Applause ) Finally , without making this too introspective a British summing-up , I would like to reply to my former colleagues , Mr Coates and Mr Kerr .

I think that Mr Coates said that the British Government was undemocratic .
I would like to respond by saying that they were elected as Labour Members of Parliament on a Labour ticket .
They left the Labour Party .
They still sit as Members of Parliament without any democratic mandate for doing so at all .
That is not my idea of democracy .
( Applause ) Finally I would like to deal with the points that were made on Agenda 2000 as well as several of the other specific issues .
On Agenda 2000 , let us be very clear and honest with ourselves , there is a very great deal more to do .
We have agreed a timetable .
The Agricultural Council in May agreed on changes to the common agricultural policy .
It is difficult and it will take time .
I will be quite open with you - I would prefer to have made more progress on this issue during the course of our presidency .
By agreeing the timetable , as I think President Santer was saying a moment ago , we have concentrated people 's minds and change must now come .
It may be that over the next few months , once certain issues are out of the way , we can get back to dealing with the substance .
I would like to say - in response to some of those who asked whether there was enough substance in the presidency - that what I find strange about this is that we launched monetary union and the process of enlargement .
Those are probably two of the most significant steps Europe has taken in its recent history .
It is worth pointing out that , though they may be glossed over as achievements we can take for granted , for those who were more closely involved and who were seeing it through , it was often a lot more difficult .
In relation to the launch of the euro and the presidency of the European Central Bank - yes it was an extremely difficult negotiation but I believe it was important to secure an outcome that was fully consistent with the treaty that people had agreed .
I believe that the ultimate test is that we have launched the euro with tranquillity and calmness , with people understanding there will be stability in the euro-zone .
It would have been a disaster had we launched it without a proper candidate and in circumstances where there was no proper control or authority .
Finally , can I say to colleagues about the other areas - in relation to the European social model and reform and change within Europe - I hope and believe that ultimately there are three main things that we have tried to do and achieve .
The first is , as I stated , to have launched monetary union and enlargement .
The second is to have begun the process of a new debate on economic and political reform in Europe - very important for Europe 's future .
The third achievement of our presidency has been the dramatic transformation in my own country 's relations with the European Union .
I hope that these three achievements mark a significant result for the British presidency .
But I hope more than that : that we can take on the arguments that we have developed during these past few months with confidence for the future .
President Santer said in his address - and I think Mr Martens said the same - that we must be careful of not making people pessimistic about Europe .
I am actually optimistic about Europe . I am hopeful for the future of the European Union .
It is hope and confidence that give us the ability to take on the case for reform .
We need not be frightened of reform .
We should welcome and embrace it .
It is right and it is the way that we will convince a new generation of people - younger people , who were sitting up there at the beginning of our debate , listening to what was happening in this European Parliament .
These are the new generation of people , who did not experience the Second World War , who do not know about the Cold War in Europe , and who have grown up in a different set of political and economic and social circumstances .
We have to persuade them that Europe means something to them .
We have to persuade them that Europe offers them a better future .
We have to persuade those young people that the ideals that our ancestors fought for in forming the European Union are alive and well today in the European Union of the 21st Century .
Do that and we will truly leave a legacy of which we can be proud .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mr President , just before the President-in-Office leaves the Chamber .
He asked about my position on Europe and whether I agreed with Mr Hague .
Most certainly I do .
Conservatives want to be in Europe but not run by Europe , and especially not run by Socialists .
Votes
Mr President , I proceed from the assumption that we only need to vote once on the amendment to paragraph 18 and that the House is agreed on an amendment .
All three amendments proposed are identical .
They have been submitted by the Socialist Group , by Mr Arias Cañete with 19 signatures and by the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
I think that only one vote is needed because consensus in this House on this extremely sensitive issue is very important .
I agree with you .
One vote will suffice .
Mr President , I just wish to say that I agree with the rapporteur on the necessity of one vote on Amendments Nos 5 , 6 and 14 .
Could we take the vote on my group 's amendments first ?
We took the trouble to get an internal consensus in our group - it is a group position - and it is the position of the left in this House ; whereas Amendment No 5 ( paragraph 18 ) by Mr Arias Cañete is simply a personal amendment , supported by 29 signatures , and he does not have the backing of his own political group .
I hear what you say but I cannot do that .
The convention in the House is that the lowest numbered amendment is taken first .
As they are identical I will take Amendment No 5 first and Amendments Nos 6 and 14 will fall .
Their objectives are all the same anyway .
Paragraph 18 :
Mr President , there has been a slight mishap in paragraph 18 due to the vote in the Committee and the drawing together of the various votes , with the result that the sentence has become totally illogical .
To rectify this I propose the following oral amendment , which I shall read out in German : ' Stresses the importance of the monitoring committees not only for balanced monitoring , but also for revision and adaptation , and expects the composition of the monitoring committees to reflect the new requirements of EU regional policy and to safeguard their authority and decision-making powers . '
The issue is to do with the powers of the monitoring committees .
This is the crucial issue .
All other texts are wrong as well and we have already distributed notice of this for clarification .
It is not the decision-making powers of the EU that are at issue here , but rather the decision-making powers of the monitoring committees .
This is what the oral amendment is concerned with .
( Parliament approved the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , there is actually a procedural problem with the compromise submitted on Cardiff .
I shall explain this as politely as I can .
The following has happened : We were presented with a compromise with the assurance , which was confirmed by the services at 9.00 p.m. , that in the Cardiff compromise the issues of Kosovo and the Middle East would not be included because there were separate resolutions on this .
We have separate resolutions both on Kosovo and on the Middle East .
The services told us that these were incompatible and therefore we signed a compromise in which paragraphs 16 and 17 did not appear .
This was confirmed at 9.00 p.m.
This morning we are now being told that a subsequent submission was made after 9.00 p.m. , by whom - if I might be allowed to explain - I do not know , but allegedly on behalf of all the parties who had signed the compromise .
No-one asked us !
Therefore I could not have supported this subsequent submission .
Furthermore , we gave no blank signature for use as an endorsement , as some would have you believe .
This is a genuine point of order and I think we should listen to it politely .
Mr President , the submission deadline was 9.00 p.m.
That is why I am asking how it is at all possible for a submission to be made after 9.00 p.m !
Just imagine if we Greens had done that .
We would have been beaten about the head with the Rules of Procedure or some such thing and been summarily told off !
Hence I would ask you to keep to the procedure and remove paragraphs 16 and 17 from this resolution .
I was not consulted and I am not prepared to give my name to something which in reality is different from that which was first presented to me .
We cannot withdraw these paragraphs .
As a compromise from the Chair I would offer a separate vote on paragraph 16 and 17 if it would be helpful .
Mr President , the clarity and strength of Mrs Roth 's point means that I do not have to give the same explanation .
We have the same problem .
I am not asking for the paragraphs in question to be withdrawn if it is not possible , nor for anyone to be blamed , but we cannot support them .
In any case , we want to vote on them separately .
And you should know that we do not support those paragraphs of the resolution .
Mr President , I chaired that conciliation meeting which drew up the compromise text .
Let us be clear , at that meeting , where the groups concerned were represented , we had a discussion about whether these two paragraphs on Kosovo and the Middle East would be acceptable .
As you know , we have two separate resolutions on those issues .
The deadlines for the resolutions that are concerned specifically with Kosovo and the Middle East were concluded before we had the conclusions for the Cardiff Summit .
Both those issues were covered at the Cardiff Summit .
We agreed in the meeting together that there should be a specific reference in one short paragraph to anything new from the Cardiff Conclusions on the Middle East and on Kosovo .
On that basis , the text was signed .
It must be said that I was there , and all the groups that were there agreed .
It was only later that , I have to say with full respect to the services of this House , they thoroughly confused everything by saying that these two paragraphs could not be included , and they removed them against the will of the political groups .
That caused confusion which allowed some groups to believe that they were not in the final text .
That discussion was held , and there were other Members there who will confirm that .
I regret the confusion and the fact that we got engaged in bureaucratic politics when it was clear there are new issues on Kosovo and the Middle East in the Cardiff Conclusions that should have been addressed , and are rightly addressed in this resolution .
I hope , therefore , that Members will agree to your proposal to take a separate vote on those two items .
I hope Members will see why they were added and the sense of their being added .
Other colleagues are now indicating that they wish to speak and this is the sort of issue we could spend the next hour debating .
I would suggest that there has clearly been a misunderstanding .
I do not think there has been bad faith .
As a way of trying to rectify the misunderstanding , we will vote separately on paragraphs 16 and 17 .
Mr President , since I was the one to negotiate the compromise on behalf of our group , I need to make one or two things clear at this point . It is correct - and we have since verified this - that Mrs Green , the other MEPs and myself were not present for a while , but rather our colleagues discussed among themselves what might be possible , and that is the way things were actually discussed .
When I then saw the resolution , the services assured me it was an alternative .
Either the paragraphs are included or there is a resolution , that is to say it would mean the resolution being deleted .
In response I only stated verbally - and I am being self-critical here - that I would be signing it there and then , proceeding from the assumption that both these paragraphs would not be included .
That is why I have now personally withdrawn my signature .
This does not mean that the group is withdrawing its signature because we still have a third signature involved .
Given my background , in Germany , I cannot support the wording used here .
Since 99 % of us were not present at that meeting , we cannot judge what happened and it is not our purpose to do so .
There has been a misunderstanding .
Let us accept that and move on .
Mr President , just on a point of clarification .
I take it that the resolution on Kosovo and the resolution on the Middle East still stand and both will be voted on in all their detail subsequently .
They will not fall as a result of the adoption of these two paragraphs .
I want to be sure of that .
That is exactly right .
They will still be voted upon .
Mr President , my point of order is on a different matter .
I missed the first roll-call vote simply because I went to the back of the room and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten took my card out .
She is a very busy woman running around whipping her boys into line .
So I missed the vote but I was present .
I promise not to tell your constituents you were chasing Mrs Oomen-Ruijten round the room .
Amendment No. 7 :
Mr President , might we possibly consider the two sentences of Amendment No 7 as separate entities ?
The first is an invitation to the Council , relating to the administrative regulations and the second is an invitation to us , since we are seeking to introduce a different set of rules regarding our allowances .
I know that my request reverts to a call for a split vote , but I would remind you that Article 125 of the regulations stipulates that when there are two separate provisions in a particular amendment , this normally produces two different amendments .
I therefore think it would be logical if you could conduct two consecutive votes .
I would add that , apparently , it is customary to accept roll-call votes after time .
You might therefore accept this request for a split vote after time .
You have a point , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
I accept your request for a split vote .
Amendment No 8 :
Mr President , this is about the Commission 's power to investigate a breach of the Treaties .
At Cardiff the Commission was criticized for alleging discrimination against football supporters from outside France in the sale of World Cup tickets .
On Tuesday evening Commissioner Van Miert confirmed to this House that he would pursue his action against a violation of European Union law , and this amendment seeks to support him .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Mr President , I should like to ask the Commission for its position on the amendments .
Mr President , the Commission is obliged , for legal and institutional reasons , to reject all the amendments relating to the Tomlinson report .
However , as Vice-President Marin stated yesterday , the Commission will invoke the spirit of these amendments in its second modification of the regulations , scheduled for October 1998 .
Mr President , in view of the fact that the Commission accepts our amendments in theory but rejects them in practice , which is an offence to this House , could I move , under Rule 60 ( 2 ) , that this matter be referred back to committee ?
( Parliament decided to refer the matter back to committee )
This report contains many good points of view , but basically , it expresses a disinclination towards reform of the common agricultural policy .
In the proposal to the report from the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development there is , for example , opposition to abolishing the system of intervention for beef and olive oil .
It is our opinion that a thorough reform and deregulation of the common agricultural policy will have to take place in 1999 .
We shall abstain at the final vote on this report , as the willingness to do this is not made sufficiently clear .
The budget for the agricultural policy is the largest in the European Union .
Consequently , it is quite normal and desirable that the European Parliament should contribute to it with respect to its major guidelines .
I would like to congratulate Mr Cunha for his work on this inordinately sensitive and difficult subject .
It is not a question of bringing to the fore the negative results following the implementation of the reform in 1992 , but rather of establishing a consistent and clear framework regarding European policy guidelines for agriculture , within the context of Agenda 2000 .
At the same time , we have every right to be astonished that certain practical provisions of the Commission have been distanced somewhat from the general intent and objectives defined by the Commission .
Yes , we should do our best to ensure that Community agriculture is competitive ; however , we have to give up everything for this single quantitative aspect .
Our agriculture is a creature of diversity , it is also a vital trump card , not only when we are confronted with outside competition , but even more to protect and preserve a balanced environment .
It seems to me to be important to take account of this latter factor in the future system of Community financing .
In the interest of future generations , we must be able to allow two different types of agriculture to co-exist and it is essential that the Commission should make allowance in its regulations for these two aspects of country life .
I am of the opinion that some of the wrath directed at the European institution is fed not so much by the allegedly inadequate budget allocations but rather by the unilateral imposition of standards .
Following the same reasoning , if we are to effectively ward off health risks , we have to remember that when a crisis occurs , it is most often the result of an increasingly vicious competitiveness in world markets .
Everyone wishes that we could define a European model for agriculture . This would please us enormously .
However , we cannot adopt high principles of a generous nature indefinitely and , as has often been the case , leave it at that .
This may seem a pessimistic view but , to enable Europeans to regain confidence in Europe , we come back to the simple policy of saying what we do and doing what we say .
I would like to indicate my total opposition to the proposals in Agenda 2000 relating to the reform of the CAP .
As currently framed they would be disastrous for Irish agriculture and the towns and villages of rural Ireland .
It was disappointing that Ireland did not receive an appropriate share out of the additional milk quota despite the commitments that were given to Ireland in 1983 .
Furthermore , the proposed price cuts without full compensation would have a devastating impact on Irish farming in particular and the Irish economy in general .
In the case of beef alone , prices would actually fall below the price of production .
These proposals must be changed substantially before they would be acceptable .
Nonetheless I welcome the rapporteur 's support for the principles of Community preference , financial solidarity and a single market , and his warnings about price cuts .
I hope his views as endorsed by Parliament will be heeded and reflected in the full version of the Agenda 2000 proposals .
We cannot support the Cunha report , since it paves the way for a continuation of the present common agricultural policy , a policy we strongly disagree with in many areas .
Our vote is based on the following principles :
Agricultural prices in the EU should and must come closer to prices in the world market .
It is artificial to prop up the prices of a particular category of products in order to safeguard one occupation .
We would prefer to secure farmers ' income directly.-Organic farming must be given a far better operating framework than has been the case up until now if it is to have a chance of surviving.-Agricultural production must not end up in storage as surplus produce .
Financial support for cereal production , for example , where cereal ends up being stored as surplus , is an absurdity ; this must be brought to an end .
Our group has tabled 25 of the 58 amendments we are now called to vote on in respect of Mr Cunha 's report , which is part of the major debate on the vital question of the future of the CAP .
This report , as presented to us today , following the vote by the Committee on Agriculture , is not particularly notable for its consistency .
An initial raft of amendments tabled by our group therefore raises yet again the fact that the Commission proposal , in its Agenda 2000 report , is inadmissible , not only because of the unacceptable nature of a price reduction across the board , but also because of the risks of a distorted sense of competition that would follow from a rampant re-nationalization of the CAP , fervently sought by many Member States , and from a suicidal anticipation of the results of future WTO negotiations , which begin in December 1999 , at the instigation of the United States and the Cairns Group .
Moreover , whilst the stated aims of the CAP reform as set out by the Commission do not invite any particular criticism , we are surprised to note that the specific proposals put forward totally contradict the explanatory memorandum .
In truth , this memorandum is governed by budgetary restraints and by a willingness to bow to the initial requirements formulated by our WTO partners , especially the United States .
By accepting this approach , the Commission is committing a serious error of judgement , since negotiations can only take place on the matters remaining to be negotiated , excluding the concessions already made on a unilateral basis , which are regarded as already on board and are therefore no longer included in the negotiating field .
Why does the Commission accept this strategy , the main result of which will be to further weaken Community trade preferences ?
The purpose of a common agricultural policy should be to maintain the European agriculture model , which ensures a territorial balance amongst the various Member States of the Union .
In contrast , the proposals of the Commission seem totally inconsistent .
On the one hand , they reduce the income of farmers , thus forcing them to increase productivity by intensifying or expanding their farming activities and , on the other hand , they put a ceiling on aid , thereby limiting their development .
The other amendments we have tabled remind us of the fact that agriculture has an economic purpose and it is the linchpin around which the rural world is organized .
We must at all cost brush aside the fads and fantasies of those who envisage a rural world in which agriculture plays only a marginal role .
This is why we need to upgrade products in the production areas themselves , so as to support economic activity in our regions .
A general lowering of agricultural production would bring about a de facto drop in business , both upstream and downstream of the agricultural sector .
It must be possible for us to make business in these sectors cost-effective .
But how can they be sustained if we recommend a general reduction in activity ?
Hence , the Cunha report poses a series of valid questions with regard to the necessary re-legitimization of the CAP .
But we should state , unequivocally , that the CAP is not destined to be watered down into a common agricultural and rural policy ( CARP ) , which some would like to see and which would simply marginalize the economic dimension of our agriculture in favour of a lumber-room policy for the rural areas .
I am glad to see that the arguments of the British presidency for reform of the common agricultural policy are echoed in these Commission proposals .
Whilst I am still concerned at the huge amounts of taxpayers ' money going into agricultural funding , I welcome the change from subsidies to keep consumer prices artificially high , towards support for farmers who may face particular difficulties .
They are also to be encouraged into environmental management of our countryside , which is another welcome step .
The new rural policy ideas which accompany this proposal are a step in this Green direction .
Both farmers and consumers will welcome the new emphasis on food quality .
This approach is fully in line with that of my own government which has had to grapple with the BSE problem it inherited and which in recent days has begun to see success in having the beef export ban lifted .
I trust that the governments of the European Union meeting this week in Cardiff will back the moves by the British presidency to get this reform under way .
The taxpaying public deserves a better agricultural policy from Europe in the future - one which helps keep consumer prices down and targets any subsidies at those farmers who really need help to stay on the land and manage it for future generations to enjoy .
Unfortunately the Berend amendment to the Cañete report attempted to establish a link between EMU participation and eligibility under the Cohesion Fund .
The vote on this amendment was surrounded by a fair amount of confusion in part created by the Chair .
As a result the impression was created quite wrongly that I along with others supported this linkage .
I am therefore glad to have the opportunity to correct this false impression .
I do not believe any country should be denied Cohesion funding simply because it was successful in meeting EMU criteria .
This would be unjust and unfair .
For these reasons I have supported Amendment Nos 5 , 6 , 14 and 25 .
I should also make it clear that in supporting these amendments I am voting for the original Spanish-language amendments which speak of GNP .
The English language text mistranslates this to GDP .
It is the reference to GNP which is the correct one .
Further , the reference year or years that are used to assess the criteria are critically important .
I believe that an average over a number of years rather than the figure for a single year would be more appropriate .
The report by Mrs Schroedter affords us a vision of the future concerning the challenges the European Union faces as we approach the end of the century .
It is for this reason that I approve of the rapporteur 's implicit wish to incorporate the objectives of the Treaty in the Structural Funds reform ( on-going development , jobs , support for SMEs , innovation , the use of new technologies , welfare protection , equal opportunities and the environment ) .
The Structural Funds must remain a European capital gain for the Member States .
What I cannot accept however , is her idea of splitting Objective 2 into two sub-categories ( industrial / urban regions , rural / fishing regions ) .
At this stage in the procedure , I am of the opinion that this type of motion should be incorporated in the report on the framework regulation for reform of the funds which our group has been appointed to prepare .
As regards the rest , I support our rapporteur and the compromise amendments that secured a unanimous vote to adopt the report from the Committee on Regional Policy and I would remind you that Parliament has already expressed its opinion on economic and social cohesion within the context of Agenda 2000 when adopting Mrs Izquierdo 's report .
We are therefore voting in favour of this report ( with the provisos mentioned above ) and are now awaiting the discussion on the framework regulations before proceeding further .
I approve the report submitted by Mrs Schroedter which allows us to state our position regarding the major principles underlying the reform of the Structural Funds .
I fully agree with the report 's conclusions on the continuation of priority aid to regions covered by Objective 1 , and the splitting of Objective 2 into an urban / industrial and rural / fishing category ; the extension of the staging period envisaged for Objectives 1 and 2 , Objective 5b and , finally , the reservations expressed regarding the viability of the 10 % reservation system .
I hope that the Council and the Commission will have taken note of our wish , along with the per capita GDP factor , to make significant allowance for the unemployment level .
Finally , I am pleased to note that the European Parliament continues to remind us , both during this legislative session and again in the report , of the importance of the role of the regions in generating , managing and implementing the Structural Funds .
As members of the European Parliament , we should also seek to make a more active contribution to the deployment of the Structural Funds in our region ( for example , through mandatory participation in the monitoring committees and in future management committees of the members of the European Parliament ) .
I have voted in favour of the report .
The Structural Funds , planned for the period 2000-2006 , will be organized around three objectives .
The first two objectives are quite different from the third .
They will concentrate their actions on less-privileged areas where economic and social development is appreciably below the average for other areas of Europe , either because they are disadvantaged , or because they require redevelopment .
These regions are either behind in development terms , or in industrial decline , or they may even be rural or urban areas faced with severe problems .
Large-scale financial aid will help these regions offset the vicious effects of an open market that is becoming increasingly deregulated .
The size of those regions should be sufficiently small for the effect to be visible .
Objective 3 is of an entirely different nature .
This no longer requires us to seek specific results , but rather attempts to stimulate a combined movement in society through the development of human resources , investing in manpower rather than infrastructures .
Clearly , Objective 3 supports the actions decided at the summits in Luxembourg and Cardiff ( national plans ) .
The development of human resources must play a central role in the European and national strategies to promote jobs .
We might rejoice at the juxtaposition of a general , across-the-board objective with vertical objectives which are centred on particular areas , almost as if they were sticking plasters .
However , we should be asking whether we have the means available to achieve such an ambitious goal .
Negotiations between national governments and the European Commission are under way with regard to the breakdown of the next round of EU Structural Funds for the period 2000-2006 .
As a Member of the European Parliament for the constituency of Connacht / Ulster I would like to reiterate my position here today that the border counties in Ireland and the west of Ireland must be accorded Objective 1 status for the purposes of guaranteeing that the maximum amount of EU Structural Funds is directed into these respective regions for the period post1999 .
Ireland as a country will lose its Objective 1 status shortly but this should not mean that the border county region and the west of Ireland should lose such status .
In fact I would go further and say that it would be wholly inequitable if the east coast of Ireland were to be put into the same bracket of classification as the border county region and the west of Ireland for the next allocation of EU monies .
Figures published from the Central Statistics Office have reinforced the arguments that I am making today as these figures clearly demonstrate that the average standard of living in the border county region and the west of Ireland is below 75 % of the EU average .
Objective 1 status entitles regions to the maximum amount of EU regional , social , agricultural and fisheries funds and it plays a very constructive and positive role in redressing regional imbalances and ensures that economic performance increases within regions in the EU which are lagging behind the rest of Europe in terms of their standards of living .
It is a well-known fact that regions within countries secured Objective 1 status for the period 1994-1999 even though their actual Member States were not accorded similar status .
For example , East Germany , Merseyside , the Highlands of Scotland and the Flevolands outside Amsterdam were all categorized as Objective 1 regions even though Germany , England , Scotland and the Netherlands were given a different classification for the purposes of allocating Structural Funds during this time .
There is nothing to stop the border county region and the west of Ireland being accorded Objective 1 status post-1999 and the east coast of Ireland being given a different categorization .
Tough decisions will have to be taken by the Irish Government and the European Commission on this issue but all the people of the border county region and the west of Ireland are looking for is fair play and equality of access .
If the EU is serious about promoting the principle of economic and social cohesion within the EU then the border county region and the west of Ireland will be given Objective 1 status post-1999 .
I welcome the main lines of the Schroedter report on economic and social cohesion in the context of the Agenda 2000 proposals .
The Structural Funds have been one of the success stories of the European Union .
My own country has benefited substantially from structural fund spending but , of course , we have a huge need to further develop our basic infrastructures such as roads , rail and telecommunications networks .
I very much welcome the Commissioner 's proposal to renew the Cohesion Fund for the four countries - Spain , Portugal , Greece and Ireland - that currently benefit from this facility .
It has been suggested that countries participating in the single currency should not benefit from the Cohesion Fund .
I take the opposite view .
Countries such as my own need every possible help and encouragement to continue their development and convergence economically with the more prosperous Member States .
The continuation of the Cohesion Fund is essential to Ireland and the other cohesion countries in the pursuit of this aim .
Finally , I hope the Commission will come forward soon with its detailed proposals on the revision of the Structural Funds .
The Schroedter report , which we support , is a first step towards meeting the challenges Europe will be facing in the next ten years , chief among which are those of economic and social cohesion and enlargement .
These are two fundamental objectives for the European Union , which cannot be mutually contradictory or prejudicial .
Enlargement will bring in nations which are historically European and will strengthen the European Union 's position in the world ; but failure to achieve economic and social cohesion may cause cracks that will jeopardize the whole process of European construction .
Structural Funds for cohesion countries are not merely a matter of philanthropy , but are also in the interests of the richer countries .
In Portugal , according to some studies , approximately 60 % of Structural Funds return to the richer countries of Europe in the form of services , technology and equipment .
The unrestricted opening-up of the Portuguese market to the single market has resulted in a deficit in Portugal 's balance of trade with Europe that outweighs the total amount Portugal receives .
Some countries have recently expressed the intention of not granting payments out of the Cohesion Fund to countries that have joined the euro .
In our opinion it would be unfair if Objective 1 countries which meet the convergence criteria can be penalized for the enormous effort they have made .
It is important to remember that those countries are a long way from achieving the real thing - genuine convergence .
We have abstained from voting on the report on Economic and Social Cohesion pursuant to Agenda 2000 .
It is our definite opinion that under-developed regions throughout Europe should be supported in their efforts to develop as they see fit .
Why should political riders such as greater integration and safeguarding European added value be prerequisites to being considered for financial support ?
We believe support should be given to needy regions , but that it should be given without political undertones and as a block subsidy , where the actual regions have the say .
A reform of the Structural Funds is essential .
Reducing the objectives from seven to three is a good thing , as is the reduction of Union initiatives .
Incorporating Objective 6 in Objective 1 and Objective 5b in 2 results in gross obscurity in respect of which rules are to apply to those areas in future .
This will have to be accurately defined without delay .
The phasing out of assistance to parts of these regions is worrying and unclear .
Certain urban areas , suburbs in particular , are in need of assistance .
This must not , however , be at the expense of rural areas .
Assistance to applicant countries is important .
Reform of support to present Member States must not entail a lesser effort on behalf of the applicant countries in central and eastern Europe .
This report has been much improved upon through amendment in committee although I still think it could have been further improved before reaching the plenary session .
Nevertheless , it is a reasonable contribution to the EU 's work to ensure that all regions enjoy the potential to develop socially and economically .
All of us want to see disparities between the regions reduced as much as possible .
A major contribution to this has been the Structural Funds programme .
Regrettably the Commission is proposing that some areas which still need as much help as possible to catch up with other regions have Objective 1 funding removed .
It is difficult to tell constituents in Northern Ireland , for example , that the EU is determined to bring all regions up to the same level , while also having to explain that the Commission thinks that a fundamental part of the financial support to achieve this should be removed .
I again urge reconsideration of the rigid adherence to the 75 % of GDP criteria .
I welcome the commitment in this report to finding ways of reducing unemployment .
This remains the European Union 's biggest social and economic problem and I recognize that the rapporteur has used the report to seek to address this .
We think it inconsistent , to say the least , to continue to discuss economic and social cohesion , whether for a 15-nation European Union or for an enlarged Union , without first keeping in mind the need to ensure that the Community budget is provided with the necessary and sufficient funds to satisfy in full the requirements of real convergence , that is to say that it should make a genuine contribution to economic and social cohesion .
We therefore consider it of fundamental importance that some alternatives should be presented that would give the report on the chapter on economic and social cohesion in Agenda 2000 the consistency required by some of its proposals in favour of cohesion , which , without the necessary clarification and financial framework , are at risk of becoming mere figures of speech .
Hence the amendment reaffirming the position of the European Union on the need to consolidate the EU 's efforts to promote means of cohesion by maintaining ( as a minimum ) , until enlargement , the quotas that should be attained by category 2 of the financial forecasts in 1999 ( 0.46 % of GDP ) , an amendment which was rejected , especially by Members of the European Socialist and People 's Parties .
Hence , also , the amendment designed to require the EP to subscribe to the Commission 's position for the Cohesion Fund after 1999 as set out in Agenda 2000 ( perhaps one of the few positive aspects of that document ) .
That amendment was also rejected by most members of the same political groups and supposedly replaced by wording which really says nothing new or specific about keeping that Fund available for countries that have joined the euro and have a GDP below 90 % of the Community average .
That wording insists on rules that are even more timid than the text of Agenda 2000 ; once again it imposes rules that postpone decision-making and prevent discussion and clarification ( by the complete subordination of the EP to the will of the present and future German Parliament ) ; it imposes rules which , objectively speaking , are only in the interests of those who do not want to renew the Cohesion Fund in its present form but , on the contrary , are trying to relegate economic and social cohesion to a secondary role , totally subordinate to the domination of financial interests .
The future of economic and social cohesion between the regions and the countries of the European Union may depend on the future we want to provide for the Cohesion Fund .
We must remember that the real criterion which determines whether or not a region is eligible to benefit from the Cohesion Fund is in fact only that clearly stated in the Treaty itself , in its protocol on economic and social cohesion . To be precise , the region must have a gross national product per capita of less than 90 % of the Community average , as specified in the amendment I have tabled .
Therefore , like the European Commission , we are in favour of maintaining the Cohesion Fund for those countries which form part of Economic and Monetary Union and which fulfill the requirements demanded in this respect by the Treaty .
Doing away with the Cohesion Fund from the year 2000 for those countries which form part of the euro group would only serve to harm , cancel or invalidate all the efforts and progress which have been made over the years , for the sake of a convergence which is not only nominal but real , thus endangering the Stability and Growth Pact .
I believe that these reasons are more than sufficient for us to continue to respect solidarity and the spirit contained in the Treaty and to support the maintenance of a Cohesion Fund which provides nothing more than a common advantage for everyone , and hence an advantage for the entire European Union .
The report by Mrs Schroedter is not without serious shortcomings .
So , on occasion , it lapses into a few unfortunate platitudes on the nature and democratic quality of the Structural Funds and even on the concern to encourage the participation of social partners , especially associations promoting equality between the sexes .
In addition , the rapporteur exaggerates the " cornerstone ' contribution of the structural policy in terms of combatting unemployment .
Moreover , Mrs Schroedter is unfortunately one of those parliamentarians who consider the financial proposals of Agenda 2000 unrealistic and would like to go beyond the stated figures of 1.27 % and 0.46 % of GNP .
This , obviously , does not appear in black and white in the report but it does permeate the philosophy of a number of paragraphs .
Mrs Schroedter betrays an invidious penchant for wishing to please everybody : the countryside , regions dependent on fishing , but also towns , States benefitting from the Cohesion Funds , outlying regions , states applying for accession , etc .
The reality of all this might well prove to be financially painful .
Our group would like the Community to avoid the wrongful allocation of public funds and to focus its budgetary efforts on those areas that are governed by a common policy : agriculture and fisheries .
Whilst Mrs Schroedter rightly stresses the faults inherent in the economic and social cohesion policy , emphasizing the scale of the disparities that remain , modesty forbids her to mention the pernicious effects that the single currency will surely have on the balance between regions .
However , the Europe of Nations Group of independents can only rejoice to see the rapporteur openly adopting such a defensive posture on behalf of the rural and fisheries-dependent areas .
We fear that these may suffer greatly from the reform advocated by Agenda 2000 .
Like our group , Mrs Schroedter proposes that the " new Objective 2 should be split into two subcategories - industrial / urban and rural / fishing - with specific eligibility criteria , individual objectives and financial quotas , in order to give the rural areas a real boost ... '
So , although the report has serious shortcomings , our group has chosen to take advantage of the opportunity to further the adoption of so favourable a text for the countryside and fisheries-dependent regions and , therefore , French interests as a whole .
This is why we have accepted Mrs Schroedter 's report .
I support the Schroedter report , in the form in which it was issued by the Regional Policy Committee , because it aims to maintain a framework of European policies that ensure economic and social cohesion between the various regions and Member States .
The abolition of economic frontiers and the creation of Economic and Monetary Union are incompatible with the preservation of the present inequalities in development , and therefore the inclusion of new political objectives , such as enlargement , cannot be achieved at the cost of reducing our structural policies , as in fact is partially proposed in the Commission 's text on Agenda 2000 .
Thus I have to express my reservations and concern at the attempts to reduce the proportion of the budget relating to Structural Funds in the context of the present 15-nation European Union and in the light of the ' innovations ' within the scope of the new draft Regulations , the result of which may be to make the Community Support Frameworks more difficult to implement in full .
We have in the end voted against the Schroedter report .
We do not consider the Commission 's judgements on how to reform assistance from the Structural Fund and the Cohesion Fund sufficiently realistic to cope with expansion eastwards .
We regard , for instance , the Commission 's prognosis of an anticipated annual increase of approximately 2.5 per cent , as too optimistic .
The risk of Member States being forced to increase their budget expenditure is obvious .
This contrast emerged clearly during the Summit in Cardiff , too .
The Edinburgh Treaty on the Cohesion Fund was a short term measure to help certain countries manage the EMU convergence criteria .
With these criteria now fulfilled , the assistance should be stopped .
The European Union ought to have realized that present assistance from the Structural Fund alongside EMU and the common agricultural policy is one of the real obstacles for a successful expansion eastwards .
The solution rests primarily in transferring decisions on regional and structural policies to the national level .
In paragraph 3 the intention is expressed that the Union be brought closer to its citizens .
We agree entirely with this .
According to the resolution , however , this rapprochement is to be achieved by ' strengthening integration ' on foreign and security policy and on legal and internal issues .
This is , if we may say so , quite absurd .
It is precisely the excessive integration , the constant transfer of power from Member States to the Union that is the basic reason for the growing distance from the people of the Union .
This and the excessive benefits granted to parliamentarians and officials are the main reasons .
Increased integration will increase the distance from the people , not decrease it .
We prefer to greet Mr Tony Blair 's and Mr Göran Persson 's declaration against a federal Europe with satisfaction and Mr Helmut Kohl 's and Mr Jacques Chirac 's move for the need to return political issues to the level of Member States .
There is nothing in the proposal on a compromise resolution that brings up the MEPs ' salaries and allowances , a question which has been dealt with by the media in several Member States .
There is only one good solution to the question of MEPs ' salaries and allowances : transfer these questions in their entirety to be decided by Member States , so that each country can give salaries and allowances according to the regulations and customs in each respective country .
One thing is clear , and that is that the Cardiff Summit was a Summit without any news .
The Summit came too late because the most important subject , EMU , had been discussed in May .
The Summit was held too early also , because institutional issues are still to be decided on in a future mini-Summit .
Agreements relating to the division of the burden between the Member States must wait until elections have been held in Germany , as there would otherwise be no guarantee that Germany would comply with the agreements .
The letter from Chancellor Kohl and President Chirac shows that the hard core of Europe wants to mark time : no further steps on the way to a federal Europe .
In addition , the powers of the European Commission must be curbed in order to close the gap between the citizens and the EU .
We are pleased that the further development of Europe will be discussed in October .
But we remain puzzled over the fact that subjects which could not be settled in the Treaty of Amsterdam are again on the agenda , although this Treaty is still to be ratified in many countries .
Finally a comment on the British Presidency .
The above developments indicate that the efforts by Prime Minister Blair at the start of his Presidency , i.e. to give Europe back to the people , have failed .
Despite these efforts , Europe is still just as far removed from the citizens of Europe as ever .
Nevertheless , we have voted for the joint resolution , as we had no sufficient reason to vote against the little it contained .
I do not wish to conceal , behind lengthy oratorical and diplomatic flights of fancy , my disappointment in this meeting of the Council which I found devoid of interest for the most part .
What happened to the debates that were announced ?
Let us face it , not a lot .
So , the question of unemployment has virtually disappeared , body and soul , and , because the issue was not debated , our leaders failed to reach agreement on all but what had been agreed before .
We are quite right to expect more of these people who are responsible for sketching the contours of Europe in the twenty-first century .
Unfortunately , we have been treated to nothing but a list of common positions on the euro , the Asian crisis and the fact that Europe must stand as a model in the eyes of the world .
In short , nothing new and , without wishing to point the finger at anyone , I find this most regrettable .
Happily , there is reason for hope in the proposed institutional reform .
But we should remain on guard since - and let me spell this out - what is proposed cannot be narrowed down simply to the amount of the contributions paid by the Member States .
Sadly , I have to say that the declarations of some do not give the partisans , such as myself , cause for optimism regarding a strong political Europe capable of speaking for itself .
We might also question the risks inherent in enlargement under existing conditions and the first steps forward which have been made in this direction .
Nobody wants to see future enlargement and its institutional corollary built on shaky compromises which might destabilize the Economic and Monetary Union to a dangerous degree .
The only moment of emotion came with the announcement by Nelson Mandela concerning his imminent retirement from politics .
This living symbol of the fight for the freedom and the rights of man , who has shaped his own destiny and that of an entire people , cannot be overlooked either by the African continent or by Europe .
Despite the burden of the years , he still inspires hope for reconciliation between peoples , hope for tolerance and humanity .
Since I am unable to thank our Heads of State and government , allow me therefore , as the Cardiff summit ends , to say thank you , Mr Mandela .
In common with all presidencies , the UK presidency has had its successes and its failures .
However , I do not intend to list either .
For me the most important achievement is the fact that the UK is now back at the heart of Europe playing a positive role in its construction .
The UK needs the European Union and the European Union needs the UK .
Furthermore , it is vitally important for Anglo-Irish relations that both Ireland and the UK pursue common European objectives .
Many of us had hoped that Europe would provide the framework for reconciling both parts of Ireland .
The current British opt-out of the single currency causes philosophical , political and economic problems for relationships between both parts of Ireland and between the UK and Ireland .
I trust and hope that the UK Government will pursue its positive European stance and that this problem , too , will be resolved sooner rather than later .
Finally , I would also like to record my support for Amendment No 7 tabled by the ELDR .
Large parts of this adopted resolution are unacceptable to me .
I have , therefore , voted against it in the final vote .
The reason for this is that I do not regard its direction to be the right one .
The fine words pronounced by several EU leaders at the Cardiff meeting about the EU getting closer to the people have not led to any concrete proposals from the summit , rather the opposite .
If these words are meant seriously , the EU must stop the construction of the ' United States of Europe ' , and instead work towards restoring power to the national parliaments , so that the EU only deals with clear-cut cross-border questions .
It is my view that the European Parliament with its democratically elected parliamentarians ought to have adopted these fine words from the EU leaders in their Resolution .
As the Resolution now stands , it points in the opposite direction by once again , among other things , demanding continued harmonisation and coordination of economic policy , defence and security policy and in legal and internal matters .
These are not demands likely to bring the EU closer to the people .
I have voted against the Amendment on a common statute for Members of the European Parliament .
In parts it might possibly be justified , but at the same time , one of the major driving forces in favour of a common statute is that Members be given a uniform salary , which , to my mind , is not such a good idea , particularly as the corridor gossip is of a salary of up to SEK 100.000 per month .
This proposal amounts to an insult .
The FPÖ is voting against paragraph 1 since rapid enlargement of the Union does not seem expedient given the current state of preparation .

Hence we are also against paragraph 2 and are therefore abstaining in paragraphs 2 to 4 , where there is block voting , since we welcome paragraphs 3 and 4 in principle .

As regards Amendment No 7 ( new paragraph 19a ) , this amendment puts forward the right idea , the essential idea of ending discrimination on the basis of nationality .
That is contained in the first part of the amendment .
I support it fully .
For instance , UK MEPs , unlike those from most other Member States , are not eligible for free travel to , from and within their constituencies .
That is only one example of the anomalies .
The wording of the amendment is , however , deficient in implying that , irrespective of progress on a common statute to remove discrimination , the European Parliament should undertake certain specific measures .
This would not solve the problem of discrimination on the basis of nationality .
Finding an overall solution should be the main task to be undertaken by Parliament and the Council together .
We have voted in favour of the Liberals ' Amendment No 7 , as it demands that MEPs ' allowances be tightened and only cover actual costs .
We would , however , like to emphasize that we firmly oppose the second part of the Amendment on establishing a common statute for parliamentarians .
If I took the liberty earlier of railing against the British Prime Minister , Mr Tony Blair , in the Hemicycle , this is because it is wholly unacceptable that we should hear the President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union claim that a positive decision had been made regarding the removal from our fishermen of one of the tools of their trade , namely the driftnet , whose development the European Community encouraged just a few years ago .
Is it not particularly scandalous to see such an irresponsible and arbitrary measure , which is plunging entire seaboard populations into a state of despair , being hailed by the presidency as a great event ?
Here to survey the achievements of his six-monthly presidency of the Union for the benefit of the members of the European Parliament , Mr Blair did not fail to point out , amongst the other great deeds of the British presidency in respect of the environment , the ban on driftnets .
Will he therefore turn a blind eye to all the devastating economic and social consequences that such a decision will have on a vast number of maritime , coastal and island regions in Europe ?
How can he glory in being the originator of such a disastrous decision ?
But in fact , in the European system as it exists today , the realities are basically of little moment : the prime driving force of this European decision is , once again , purely ideological .
The British government , doubtless believing it was pulling off a " big deal ' in media and ecological terms , confined itself to claiming the credit for the half-baked obsessions of the Commission and the conspiratorial strategies of manipulative and highly-organized pseudo-environmental lobbies .
I say this firmly to the British Prime Minister : your presidency will forever be stained by a black mark .
By changing camp , by reversing the traditional British position , by betraying your own fishermen and those of other Member States , bar one , by aligning yourself as an accomplice in a monopolistic thrust , by flouting the principles of the common fisheries policy , by ridiculing the principle of fair play , you have committed a crime and assumed a historic responsibility .
By placing yourself in the camp of injustice and discrimination , by deriding the scientific foundations of the common fisheries policy , you have given our sea-going populations the image of a distant and cavalier European Union , one that is indifferent and contemptuous .
Believe me , this is something they will not forget .
Of course , the problem of driftnets is not central in terms of the future of Europe .
But the manner in which it has been dealt with reveals the particular way in which the construction of Europe is conceived : a way that our fellow citizens wholly reject , because it is building a Europe that is hostile to Europeans .
The motion for this directive envisages the possibility of a free trade in devices for in vitro diagnostics , within the Member States of the European Union .
This impinges on the issue of public health .
At the instigation of Mr Pompidou , the rapporteur , the European Parliament has therefore insisted on greater protection of the public health .
The medical risks were rightly considered .
However , I was - and I am again - disappointed with the scant attention paid to the ethical aspects associated with the in vitro diagnostic technique .
This applies firstly to those devices which are made of products produced from tissues or cells of human origin , and secondly to prenatal diagnostics .
The consequences of disregarding the ethical aspects associated with the use of these medical devices and techniques are incalculable .
Certainly when you consider that the interests of commercialization prevail over the interests of the protection of the public health in both a physical and a mental sense .
I have voted against Amendment No 2 for the above reasons .
I am pleased to note the speed at which our European institutions have reacted to a dossier of " high strategic value ' .
Similarly , I would like to commend the accomplishments of my colleague , Camisón Asensio .
The GSM network has made unprecedented headway , due to the early recognition of these new methods of communication .
It is therefore consistent and desirable that the Union adopt common standards and rules as of now .
From this point forward , we might reasonably hope that the future UMTS network will be a success .
Over and above the significant technological support required , it is reasonable to expect that this House will get to grips with the problems of coverage .
Needless to say , I support the amendments which recognize not only the lesser-populated regions but also the total compatibility between the GSM and the UMTS systems .
Mobile telephony has taken off in the most spectacular way .
Europe is not lagging behind .
However , I believe we still have a long way to go in improving our position in the field of new information technologies , especially with regard to high-speed Internet connections .
Finally , this text emphasizes the fact that , since the will exists , we can now make rapid progress on the documentation front .
It would be ideal if we could " mobilize ' ourselves in the same way on other subjects .
Today we have reason to feel optimistic .
The success of the GSM mobile phone system over the past few years can be partially attributed to the rapid response of Europe in implementing an early policy of standardization .
By acting in a similar fashion with the third generation of mobile phones , the promotion of common rules and standards can once again ensure a speedy deployment of networks and services with the new UMTS system .
While the UMTS system will not be readily available until the beginning of the next century , prior planning and a Europewide coordination of policies such as licensing procedures can help smooth the transition from the GSM system to this new technology .
In addition to providing the same services as the GSM system , UMTS will offer its users fast Internet access along with other multimedia services .
These kinds of services are currently not available in a mobile format .
However , the rapid development of communication and information technologies in the latter part of this century has contributed to a transformation in the technological needs of individuals within Europe and the rest of the world .
A fast , efficient and easily accessible mobile network offering services like a reliable Internet connection can help meet the needs of individuals , businesses and other organizations in the coming years .
By acting early and creating a common framework throughout Europe for the eventual utilization of the UMTS system , we can help keep Europe at the forefront of technological advancement into the 21st century .
I would like to support the conclusions of the rapporteur .
Double taxation is unjust and unfair .
I would also hope that in future the Commission would also address the problem of the significant difference in the price of cars throughout the different Member States .
I do appreciate that an annual report is available highlighting this problem and that action has been taken against certain manufacturers for price fixing .
However , more needs to be done .
If there is a genuine single market the EU consumers should play exactly the same price for the same car ( including taxes ) irrespective of which country they live in .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted against the Watson report .
The report does nothing to change the central aspects of the Commission 's proposal , which in our opinion is riddled with problems .
We oppose the Commission 's proposal for the following reasons :
The Commission 's proposal implies , inter alia , that a citizen of one Member State who resides in another Member State for more than six months may bring a vehicle home without having to pay a registration fee in the home country if he or she has paid the registration fee required for the vehicle in the country in which it was acquired .
The proposal would put a great deal of pressure on EU countries that have a registration fee .
Further , the proposal fails to set a concrete figure for the number of vehicles an individual is permitted to bring in .
Thus , widespread speculation could be envisaged in bringing in vehicles for re-sale from countries that do not have a registration fee to countries that do have a registration fee .
The proposal would undermine excise policy in the eleven countries that currently have vehicle registration fees and could open the floodgates to widespread abuse .
The Commission 's proposal amounts to interference in national fiscal sovereignty .
The amendments tabled in the Watson report do nothing to change this .
Parliament voted today on a proposed Directive on governing the tax treatment of private motor vehicles moved permanently to another Member State in connection with a transfer of residence or used temporarily in a Member State other than that in which they are registered .
This proposal is of particular significance for Finland and Denmark , two countries with high charges before cars are allowed to be brought into use .
On many points the proposal will serve to clarify the rules , although it does not yet solve all the problems .
Finland forces returnees to pay unreasonable import duties on vehicles when owners return to resettle in their home country .
That is why the Commission has submitted an official complaint to Finland for offending against Article 95 in the Basic Treaty , which ultimately can lead to Finland being brought before the European Court of Justice .
There is , unfortunately , a risk that Finland will put a stop to this good proposal - possibly together with Denmark .
The question now is which role does Finland want to have ?
Do they want to stop a proposal which would be of great practical use to many citizens of Europe , particularly as it would contain ideas on how to introduce a more sensible vehicle taxation system in Finland , which would take into consideration environmental aspects and might also promote traffic safety ?
Having been appalled by cases of double taxation of cars encountered by my own constituents driving in other EU member countries , I am glad to add my support to this report today .
It is unacceptable in the single European market that people are free to move country in search of work but that often they are charged extra taxes if they want to take their car with them !
I know that people have in the past been encouraged to get on their bike and look for work , but if you are going to work in another country you should be able to drive your own motor vehicle there without being taxed a second time .
It is encouraging to see that the Commission proposal for an end to double taxation of cars for people who move around the EU has resulted from a number of petitions to this European Parliament .
This is evidence that the people 's elected representatives can have a real influence on problems facing people in their everyday lives .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.27 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0604 / 98 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the ELDR group , on the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan ; -B4-0619 / 98 by Mr Swoboda and others , on behalf of the PSE group , on the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan ; -B4-0638 / 98 by Ms McKenna and others , on behalf of the V group , on the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan ; -B4-0647 / 98 by Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE group , on the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan ; -B4-0657 / 98 by Mr Oostlander and others , on behalf of the PPE group , on the nuclear tests in the Indian sub-continent ; -B4-0663 / 98 by Mr Wurtz and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL group , on the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan .
Mr President , I assume the Commissioner 's staff will pass on my message .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party supports the broad condemnation in this Parliament of the nuclear tests by India and Pakistan .
So much is clear .
Both countries are experiencing a decline in regional stability . This does neither of them any good .
The costs to their national budgets , which are meagre anyway , are enormous .
India has unintentionally placed Kashmir on the international agenda again and the international climate for disarmament has taken a serious turn for the worse .
Our answer must not be in the same Pavlovian vein .
Sanctions are not the answer here
The enormous political support in both countries for the tests indicate that the popular will is not easily reversed .
We must look deeper into the underlying problems .
The regional security situation and the bilateral problems in the two countries should become the subject of an international conference .
The right mediator must be found .
The international community must then make a serious effort to arrive at genuine nuclear disarmament .
The NPT and the CTBT must be adhered to , to the letter .
That includes non-proliferation .
Speaking of sanctions , the Union might well commit itself to a ban on the export of arms to the two countries concerned .
They already possess more weapons than enough .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I should like to say that the nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan in May are a serious threat to regional and global security .
Apart from increasing tensions in the Indian sub-continent , the tests have broadened the nuclear club of nations , breaching the principle of non-proliferation .
Other countries may be inclined to pursue the goal of nuclear weaponization .
While more needs to be done to implement the terms of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty by existing nuclear states , further nuclear tests can only lead to global insecurity and the risk of nuclear war .
This is why India and Pakistan should adhere to the Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty immediately and unconditionally .
The European Union and the United States have rightly applied political and limited economic sanctions against India and Pakistan .
Until they become part of the international community 's drive to scale down and eventually eliminate nuclear weapons from the globe it is right that these sanctions should stay in place .
Nor should India and Pakistan export nuclear technology or continue to develop and deploy nuclear weapons .
EU Member States should ensure that neither country 's nuclear programme is assisted by European equipment or know-how .
There is also the question of Jammu and Kashmir .
This problem has persisted for too long and lies at the heart of the hostility and suspicion between New Delhi and Islamabad .
It is time for the EU to support the good offices of an intermediary in the tragic division of Kashmir which has caused two wars between India and Pakistan and cost thousands of lives .
The conflict continues to this day but it is time for it to be solved for the benefit of all the people of Jammu and Kashmir , with their consent .
There is an urgent need for confidence-building measures between India and Pakistan and for jaw-jaw , not war-war .
Mr President , we all have to totally condemn the nuclear testing by both Pakistan and India , but we also have to look to ourselves - the responsibilities that the European Union holds and the fact that France , not so very long ago , carried out its nuclear tests despite opposition from right round the world .
All of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council have to accept responsibility for the present situation .
The nuclear five blocked all agreement on even small moves on nuclear disarmament at the NPT Treaty Prepcom meeting in Geneva .
Also , bearing mind that our own Irish Minister , David Andrews , has launched a campaign for a nuclear-weaponsfree world , backed by one other Member State of the European Union , it is also important that other Member States of the European Union back David Andrews on this initiative to get rid of nuclear weapons totally .
The UN General Assembly meeting back in January 1946 , in its first resolution , unanimously called for a commission to make proposals for the elimination from national armaments of atomic weapons and all major weapons of mass destruction .
Atomic weapons are still here .
Not only have they not been got rid of , but there is a massive proliferation .
Two Member States within the European Union - Britain and France - bear a huge amount of the responsibility for that .
They have to accept that .
It is about time that they , along with other countries throughout the world , got rid of their nuclear arsenals .
I am pleased to welcome Mrs Cresson who has just arrived .
I hope her associates will be kind enough to summarize everything of great interest that has been said in her absence .
Welcome , Madam !
Mr Dell 'Alba , you are in luck , you have a Commissioner !
Mr President , I was just about to say the same thing .
But I was slightly embarrassed by the fact that , in truth , there are not many of us either , it has to be said .
Therefore I have not tabled a procedural motion and , like you , I am pleased that we now have someone to address .
I simply wanted to say that while we are not grudging in our endorsement of this the umpteenth resolution , which does not say a great deal , it is certainly not given with any real sense of joy .
We might have been a bit firmer .
I believe that these nuclear explosions in India and Pakistan are an exceedingly serious matter and that we are taking them rather too lightly , with rather too much diplomacy .
In my opinion , we should have hardened our tone .
Since the CFSP is quite able to prevent members of Parliament taking part in delegations to international conferences , since it is totally ineffective from a foreign and security policy standpoint , let us settle for the wording we have and await with interest the reply the Commission will give regarding this affair .
Madam Commissioner , Mr President , Pakistan wasted no time in responding to the Indian nuclear tests , thereby reviving the spectre of atomic war .
Of course the risks for Asia are immense , but they are too for the security of the world as a whole .
These tests , which our group immediately condemned , could easily revive the spread and proliferation of nuclear weapons worldwide .
To prevent other States with a similar capability following the example of these countries , we must take urgent steps to ban tests totally once and for all - including laboratory tests , which some nuclear powers continue to conduct - and to eliminate all nuclear arms and weapons of mass destruction .
We must put an end to this horrifying threat , as proposed by the " Abolition 2000 ' international network which embraces over a thousand organizations worldwide .
This network has set itself the goal of reaching an agreement on the elimination of nuclear weapons by the year 2000 , which would enable us to use the budget allocations , currently squandered on military spending , for the benefit of the environment , health , education and development .
In order to promote the success of this campaign , I support the proposal of the Japanese government to create an international forum which , for obvious symbolic reasons , would hold its first meeting in Hiroshima and which would seek to define ways of ridding the planet of all nuclear weapons forever .
Mr President , I want to say to the Commission that , in my view , any talk of imposition of sanctions on the peoples of the Indian sub-continent in response to the recent testing of nuclear weapons would be wrong .
It is a very simplistic response which amounts to little more than punishing the powerless for the seeming sins of the powerful .
Such a development would also make a nonsense of these countries ' achievements in providing basic health and education support , which have contributed so much to furthering the well-being of their peoples .
I of course deplore what has happened , but we in Europe must face up to the reality and continue our development efforts to support the one million poor of the Indian sub-continent .
To this end , I have proposed an oral question to the Commission , to which I hope to get a response at some stage : would it not agree that the arms race is directing resources away from development and the reduction of poverty to the military-industrial complex , and would it not agree that the imposition of sanctions in these circumstances amounts to no more than the punishment of the powerless for the sins of the powerful ?
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , five underground nuclear tests by the Indians in Rajastan were answered by six nuclear tests by the Pakistanis in Baluchistan .
The reaction in the West : anger and dismay .
In Asia overwhelming enthusiasm .
Who the winners will be in this dreaded arms race is unclear .
The current losers are millions of people .
They do not hunger for power and national prestige , but for opportunities to escape from poverty and to enjoy the training and education that has been denied them .
India 's nuclear tests are the response to China which has been developing its nuclear arsenal for years .
Where is the Western protest here ?
Even in Tibet atomic weapons are being stockpiled , and China is supplying Pakistan with weapons know-how and rocketry .
Will Islamic Pakistan and the largest democracy in the world , India , be prepared to sign an international nuclear agreement if they are recognized by the industrial countries as negotiating partners ?
When we can rely on the monitoring committees of the nuclear states and when nuclear safety can be finally guaranteed , then it will be easier to sign both the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Test Ban Treaty , which needs to be finally ratified by the US Congress .
Mr President , during the previous sitting many of us spoke heatedly in the debate in our condemnation of the nuclear tests in India .
And the consequence , as we now know , was that a few days later Islamabad imitated New Delhi , despite the attempts of the Council , the United Nations and the United States to make it think again .
After several decades of difficult relations , the question of Kashmir remains a bone of contention between the two countries .
We are still waiting for India to make a gesture which will stop this problem becoming an international issue and to offer reassurance to the 30 000 people living in permanent terror on either side of the frontier .
We must put a stop to the furious arms race - generated mainly by intense nationalist fervour on both sides - which will inevitably lead to escalation and regional and international instability .
As the largest democracy in the world , India must demonstrate its wisdom and bring to an end the vicious spiral in the proliferation of nuclear weapons .
But China , too , should adopt a more conciliatory attitude in this particularly vulnerable region .
Every effort must be made to re-establish dialogue and it is for this reason that I commend the initiative of the Council in organizing a regional summit on security in Asia .
The Union earnestly urges India and Pakistan to sign and ratify the nuclear test ban treaty and the non-proliferation treaty unconditionally .
Mr President , one cannot but lament the inconceivable - that eleven nuclear tests have been detonated in India and Pakistan .
This means that we have to accept a huge responsibility , does it not ?
I regret that we are not willing to get to grips with the export of weapons and parts of weapons to both India and Pakistan .
My own country , unfortunately , exports parts of weapons to India .
In Southern India military expenditure has increased by 25 per cent in the last ten years .
The Indian Government devotes more than a quarter of the country 's research funds to military research , funds that could be put to much , much better use for the poor in that region .
Moreover , the new Government in India has now proposed an increased budget expenditure of 100 % over the next five years .
The crisis behind it is of course Kashmir .
It is regrettable that India and Pakistan have not managed to reach a solution to this problem by diplomatic means .
We have to act through the UN to find a diplomatic solution through regional conferences and encouragement before things go too far .
Mr President , the world reacted to the nuclear testing by India and Pakistan thinking that we had returned to the strategy of dissuasion , with the threat of reciprocal destruction ; there was talk of the desire to acquire nuclear power status and of the possibility of a conventional war leading to a nuclear war .
It seems to me that all these war scenarios are old hat , outdated , congruent with the Cold War .
With this diagnosis , we will certainly not succeed in reducing the risks of proliferation .
The reality is very different and more complicated , more modest but perhaps also riskier : the reality is that nuclear weapons are used to intimidate , to prevent political actions by other countries and to blackmail .
Yesterday , the Herald Tribune reported that Korea was threatening to export missiles if it was not granted substantial economic assistance .
This technique has already been used , and probably can be used again .
There is a problem of national pride - Pakistan 's Prime Minister said that he had to give in to public opinion - and there is perhaps also the problem of dissuasion .
If we understand this and come up with a good diagnosis , then the disease may well be curable . If not , it will simply persist .
Mr President , the nuclear tests by India and Pakistan have made us realize that we in fact live in a situation in which we cannot just criticize these countries but must also criticize ourselves .
It is , of course , scandalous that the present nuclear powers have not done enough to reduce their own arms manufacture and their own stock of arms .
This leads other countries to believe that the possession of nuclear arms means an important increase in status .
And when one country in the Indian subcontinent successfully conducts nuclear tests and develops arms , then the other country is of course compelled to do the same , as there is no guarantee that they are protected from nuclear attacks by the other side .
It is therefore of the utmost importance that the Western world and Russia and China understand that they must take the issue of continued disarmament in respect of nuclear arms seriously .
Recently we encountered the impossible problem of France , which itself conducted nuclear tests in Mururoa .
I am therefore in favour of a condemnation of Pakistan and India which is no harsher than the condemnation of France . The fact that France conducted nuclear tests was actually much worse .
I naturally hope that our action will soon lead to the signing of the non-proliferation Treaty by the two new nuclear powers and that in this way the continuing cycle of arming and more arming will be halted before it is too late .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Members of this House , the nuclear escalation in Southern Asia has major political and geo-strategic consequences which some of you have already outlined .
It revives the question of the non-proliferation policy and the risk of contamination for other countries .
The objectives of the European Union are , firstly , to restore the credibility of the non-proliferation system , to obtain the ratification by India and Pakistan of the non-proliferation pact and the CTBT , in other words the Complete Test Ban Treaty , in order to re-establish a substantial dialogue between India and Pakistan and especially to find an acceptable solution to the Kashmir problem , which represents an explosive situation in Indo-Pakistan rivalry .
In this regard India , which until today had been on the point of opening up dialogue on the conflict , committed a major error .
We should make the most of this new opportunity .
We should then support the creation of regional security procedures which , until now , unlike other regions in the world -and I am thinking here of the ASEAN - have been sadly deficient .
We need to set up a positive dynamic enabling not only these countries but also the international community to escape the treadmill .
From this standpoint , given the uncertainty that reigns in India and Pakistan at present , it seems somewhat unwise to follow a path which might lead to a breakdown in the dialogue with these countries - and I say that for a certain number of speakers who would like to go further , indeed who would like to see retaliatory measures introduced .
We think we should continue to maintain a dialogue with these countries .
It is important that we make them understand fully that the nuclear solution can only damage them .
In this context , the European Union has declared its readiness to take the necessary steps by treating India and Pakistan as equals .
This type of approach must not , however , close the avenues to dialogue .
The European Commission is ready to contribute to the international community 's efforts to seek and implement initiatives aimed at increasing regional stability and halting nuclear proliferation .
Mr President , can I take it that there is no question of sanctions being imposed at this stage ?
No , as I just said , there is no question of sanctions , we must simply continue the dialogue with these countries in the most effective way possible .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0605 / 98 , by Mr Fassa and others , on behalf of the ELDR group , on the war betweenEthiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0620 / 98 , Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the PSE group , on the conflict between Ethiopia andEritrea ; -B4-0631 / 98 , by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE group , on the conflict betweenEthiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0637 / 98 , by Mr Günther and others , on behalf of the PPE group , on the territorial conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0644 / 98 , by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the V group , on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0649 / 98 , by Mr Hory and Mr Macartney , on behalf of the ARE group , on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea ; -B4-0664 / 98 , by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL group , on the conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea
Mr President , the war between Ethiopia and Eritrea for possession of territory measuring 400 km2 is another exceptionally good example of the destructive power of incorrect consultation , of war , of senseless violence , when preventative diplomacy might perhaps have accomplished something .
Unfortunately these destitute countries , which as neighbours got along well until about three months ago , are not themselves able to prevent this mutual destruction .
Yet all border disputes can be resolved by mediation , with give and take on both sides .
The parties must be encouraged to accept a cease-fire . I therefore welcome the commitment and the willingness of the Rwandan government and the Egyptian President .
The Union must show itself willing to offer all the help needed and certainly emergency aid for refugees .
These poor countries must be made to understand that a military solution is never the real answer for small and large conflicts of this kind .
A military solution cannot be a durable one .
Mr President , I was in Ethiopia and Eritrea just a few weeks ago , and I met both the Prime Minister of Ethiopia and the President of Eritrea , along with many other politicians and people .
I find it absolutely unbelievable that these two countries could find themselves in this particular border conflict .
History is littered with a whole series of pointless wars but this particular one must be one of the most pointless wars in hundreds of years .
These are two countries , the leadership of which actually fought alongside each other in trying to get rid of the evil regime of the Dergue - the communist regime in Ethiopia .
When you consider that , of the 175 countries in the world on the UN index of human development , both Ethiopia and Eritrea are in the bottom five , and that this conflict will lead not only to much greater poverty in both countries but to far greater instability in the entire region , we have to call on both countries to pull back from the brink of war and engage in talks .
I shall be putting forward an oral amendment , which tries to bring this resolution up to date , because there is a cease-fire at the moment brokered by Rwanda , the OAU and the United States .
We have to do everything in our power to make sure that this cease-fire lasts .
I call on both sides - the Ethiopians and the Eritreans - to pull back from the brink of what would be an enormous tragedy and to go forward with mediation .
I call on the European Union to do everything in its power to make sure that we see a peaceful resolution to what I have described as both a tragic and a pointless conflict .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the President of Eritrea recently replied , when asked about the reasons behind what had happened , with a very simple statement : " It is very difficult to give an easy answer ' .
And the President of Ethiopia , referring to the incidents , said : " I was surprised , shaken and disoriented ' .
I am sure you will understand that the most surprised and disoriented people seem to have been we Europeans , because there is not the slightest doubt that , despite having had strong historical relations with that part of the world - particularly some of the Member States of the European Union - , it appears in this case that nobody knew anything .
And one of the points in our motion for a resolution underlines the fact that the Council has limited itself to uttering fine words of condemnation and has not even taken part in the efforts aimed at negotiation which should bring an end to the hostilities .
As we know , it is the United States , Rwanda and the OAU which have intervened .
The Council 's passiveness and lack of action in this matter are a scandalous reflection of the lack of a common foreign policy , as is the fact too that these two countries are neighbours , not only in terms of geography , but also in terms of ideology , history and , more recently , belligerence . They are neighbours , yet a war is taking place between them , although for the moment it seems as if a cease-fire has been achieved .
It is one of those " wars of the end of the world ' , to use the expression from an extraordinary book by the Peruvian-Spanish writer Vargas Llosa , which you will surely have read , called " The War of the End of the World ' in Brazil ; a terrible war which he skilfully described in novel form .
I believe that we cannot in future , or even at present , limit ourselves to offering fine words and even generous humanitarian aid . Instead , it is essential that from this experience - which , after all , is relatively small in the general scale of things - we understand the consequences which must lead us , Mr President , to put an end to our lack of action and our passiveness .
Mr President , this conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea has surprised and disturbed us all .
We are worried that the region will be further destabilized .
We are worried that a tragedy is waiting to happen .
Those affected are first and foremost the people in this region .
They are already badly affected by belonging to one of the poorest regions in the world , and now war is to be added to their lot .
Border conflicts of this kind are often the expression of internal political conflicts and differences , in both Ethiopia and Eritrea .
We are of the opinion that this conflict should not be allowed to escalate .
The European Union is called upon to support the diplomatic efforts .
We welcome the efforts of the OAU , the USA and Rwanda .
The Council said in its last statement on the Cardiff Summit that it condemns the conflict , that it wishes to support the diplomatic solutions and that it is also prepared , should negotiations come about , to lend material assistance .
We should support this as a Parliament and you too , Madam Commissioner , should support it on behalf of the Commission .
We must try to find a diplomatic solution and assist the people in the region directly through material aid .
Mr President , could I speak partly as the person who chaired the meeting drawing up the composite text ?
I would like to support Mr Cunningham 's point but we were rather overtaken by the swiftness of events .
We did not make an explicit reference to the efforts made by Rwanda and the United States and the peace plan that was accepted by the Organization of African Unity in Ouagadougou on 4-5 June .
I think it would strengthen this resolution enormously if we could make some reference to that and I would support Mr Cunningham if he is willing to draft something .
The resolution that we have adopted makes three references which could be taken to apply to it .
We talk about the peace plans in paragraph 1 , we talk about the OAU and the Council of this Union in paragraph 3 , and in paragraph 5 we ask that the resolution be transmitted to Rwanda and the United States .
The eagle-eyed amongst you might wonder : why these two countries ?
I have just explained the reason but I apologize if we were less than explicit .
We should put that right because all of us want to see an end to the conflict .
The parties , too , have accepted the mediation put forward by these two countries and agreed by the OAU and I think that this House would want to support that , to get a speedy end to the conflict .
Mr President , as has already been said , this conflict is serious not only because of the military and civilian victims and the destruction in what are already poor countries but because it has damaged a relationship of collaboration and friendship between two States that seemed strong and weakened a relationship that could have become a model in Africa of stability and cooperation without fanaticism .
Unfortunately , the habit of going to war and the fragile democracy of the political systems that have emerged from dictatorship and independence probably prevailed in this phase .
It is now important that Eritrea and Ethiopia have agreed - at the initiative of the United States and Italy , to be precise - to stop the shelling .
Now the European Union , together with the international community , must make a strong commitment to lend assistance to the people affected and the refugees , to find a peaceful solution to the conflict and to create the conditions for a genuine peace plan .
The European Union must demonstrate here too that it wants an international role and that it wants a foreign and security policy .
Mr President , along with Tony Cunningham , I recently had the opportunity to visit both of these countries .
I have to say that while I was there , there was some evidence of tension .
Since the war of national liberation which created Eritrea , they have had disputes both with the Yemen over the Hanish Islands and with Ethiopia over the particular area of land we are talking about now .
It seems to me that this particular war was not triggered by the land dispute but more by economics .
The recent separation of the two currencies has created a major disruption to trade and this has led to soaring prices on both sides of the border as commodities that used to be traded between the two countries are now in short supply .
That is one of the reasons for the thrust towards the Assab port by Ethiopian forces towards the end of the war .
We cannot afford to allow this situation to continue .
We need to use whatever pressures we have to try to make sure that the cease-fire that now exists holds .
I hope that we can amend a resolution orally to bring it up to date and to make sure the Council and Commission continue to exert pressure on the two potential combatants .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen Members of this House , the Commission is extremely preoccupied by the recent military confrontations which have occurred on the border between Eritrea and Ethiopia .
It deplores these incidents between neighbouring countries and shares the anxiety expressed .
It strongly urges the two countries not to resort to violence , to cease all hostilities and to resume negotiations .
It stresses the need to resolve the conflict peacefully .
It commends and encourages the efforts of the United States , Rwanda and Italy and , indeed , any other national or regional organization seeking to ease the situation and offering a conciliation procedure with a view to finding a peaceful solution to the current crisis .
It hopes sincerely that these countries and organizations will succeed in their endeavours and is ready to assist them .
The Commission is prepared to offer humanitarian aid , if required .
It is now investigating the possibility of responding to the Ethiopian request for assistance for the dispossessed populations in northern Tigré .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Moratorium on the death penalty -B4-0595 / 98 , by Mr Dupuis and others , on behalf of the ARE group , on the question of the death penalty and the institution of a universal moratorium on executions ; -B4-0615 / 98 , by Mr Cars and Mr Frischenschlager , on behalf of the ELDR group , on a universal moratorium on capital punishment ; -B4-0621 / 98 , by Mr Imbeni , on behalf of the PSE group , on the question of the death penalty and the institution of a universal moratorium on executions ; -B4-0642 / 98 , by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V group , on the question of the death penalty and the institution of a universal moratorium on executions ; -B4-0658 / 98 , by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE group , on the question of the death penalty and the institution of a universal moratorium on executions ; -B4-0665 / 98 , by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL group , on the question of the death penalty and the institution of a universal moratorium on executions .
Equatorial Guinea -B4-0600 / 98 , by Mrs Ferrer and others , on behalf of the PPE group , on the death sentenceimposed on fifteen people in Equatorial Guinea ; -B4-0618 / 98 , by Mr Gasòliba I Böhm and others , on behalf of the ELDR group , on Equatorial Guinea ; -B4-622 / 98 , by Mr Sauquillo Pérez del Arco and Mr Pons Grau , on behalf of the PSE group , on the death sentences pronounced in Equatorial Guinea , -B4-0632 / 98 , by Mr Pasty and Mrs van Bladel , on behalf of the UPE group , on the deathsentence imposed on fifteen people in Equatorial Guinea ; -B4-655 / 98 , by Mr Hory , on behalf of the ARE group , on the death penalty imposed on fifteen people in Equatorial Guinea ; -B4-0667 / 98 , by Mr Puerta and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL group , on human rights : death sentences in Equatorial Guinea ;
Indonesia-East Timor -B4-0624 / 98 , by Mr Marinho and others , on behalf of the PSE group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia and East Timor ; -B4-0635 / 98 , by Mr Pasty and others , on behalf of the UPE group , on East Timor ; -B4-0662 / 98 , by Mr Cunha and others , on behalf of the PPE group , on the human rights situation in Indonesia and East Timor ; -B4-0668 / 98 , by Mr Ribeiro and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL group , on human rights in Indonesia and East Timor ;
Chad -B4-0623 / 98 , by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the PSE group , on the withdrawal of parliamentaryimmunity of Mr Ngarlejv Yorongar ; -B4-0636 / 98 , by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the PPE group , concerning the violations of human rights in Chad ; -B4-0646 / 98 , by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the V group , on Chad ; -B4-0651 / 98 , by Mr Macartney and Mr Saint-Pierre , on behalf of the ARE group , on the human rights situation in Chad ;
Pakistan -B4-0614 / 98 , by Messrs Blokland and van Dam , on behalf of the I-EDN group , on human rights in Pakistan ; -B4-0659 / 98 , by Mrs Lenz and others , on behalf of the PPE group , on the law against blasphemy in Pakistan ;
Guinea-Bissau -B4-0654 / 98 , by Mr Hory and others , on behalf of the ARE group , on the situation in Guinea Bissau-B4-675 / 98 , by Mr Cunha , on behalf of the PPE group , on the situation in Guinea Bissau .
Moratorium on the death penalty
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to thank all the other groups , without exception , who have supported this resolution - which is not the umpteenth resolution on the question of the death penalty , I think it is important to stress this .
The resolution has a quite precise goal : it urges the Council to assign to the future presidency - the Austrian presidency - the responsibility for coordinating Union initiatives within the United Nations General Assembly to ensure that the question of the moratorium is finally put on the agenda with some chance of success .
Hence we are extending an invitation to Mr Schüssel , Minister of Foreign Affairs and to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs , in the hope that they might already be in a position to give us certain indications on the Wednesday of the next sitting , here in Strasbourg .
We hope that they may be able to tell us whether they have received a mandate from the Council in this respect .
I think it is important .
It is a specific initiative .
These are not idle words .
The resolution seeks to encompass an objective in international law that many Members of the European Parliament have shared for a long time , in other words the abolition of the death penalty and , at all events , an initial step towards the final abolition of capital punishment .
I believe this is a positive way of celebrating the fiftieth anniversary of the universal charter on human rights .
There is a majority in favour within the international community .
Approximately 90 states have already shown themselves to be in favour of a yes to the moratorium through the votes submitted to the Council , to the Committee on Human Rights last year and again , this year , in Geneva .
We simply have to convert an existing majority into actuality .
I think that Parliament , by extending a specific invitation to the Council and the Commission to take this cause , might , yet again , provide the finishing touches which could well be decisive .
Mr President , first of all I would like to say that I agree with Mr Dupuis .
While Great Britain was governed by the Tories , there was opposition to capital punishment becoming a joint concern for the European Union .
That has now changed .
Today Europe stands more united than ever in that struggle .
We are , in fact , the strongest force in the world driving the question of capital punishment , which is greatly to our credit .
As Mr Dupuis precisely said , the Resolution seeks to induce the UN to introduce a worldwide moratorium .
This is important , as there are a number of countries , China , the United States , Iran and Iraq , for example , which still put their citizens to death in great numbers .
It is a disgrace that this happens .
The fact is , Mr President , that Europe 's fight against capital punishment is an expression of the humanism and culture which now characterises our continent , much to our own credit .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the European Convention on Human Rights with the protocol abolishing the death penalty belongs to the legal bases of the European Union .
The EU is therefore obliged to raise its voice in the international dialogue calling for this penalty to be abolished .
I endorse what the previous speakers have said , that this House should unanimously support and enact the concrete measures proposed .
We must do everything to ensure that the death penalty , which is an archaic remnant from the times of sacral law , disappears from our legal system , which is based on human rights and hence cannot tolerate a type of punishment which eliminates the human being as a legal entity .
Mr President , the great Swiss national economist Felix Somari said in his book ' The Crisis and Future of Democracy ' the following : ' To apply the death penalty to a multiple murderer means only atoning for the first murder . All the other murders go unpunished . '
This was one of a whole series of his arguments against the death penalty .
One thing is clear to me from this : the death penalty is , all legitimate moral scruples apart , nothing more than a trivialization of the crime for which this punishment is often given .
A genuine life sentence is in most cases surely the more humane solution , while also the stiffer penalty .
That is why I am very happy that this resolution will hopefully be adopted today by the European Parliament without amendment and without any fuss .
This is very much in keeping with the activities of our Parliament , even though I would be especially pleased if we could finally address the question of the death penalty on the basis of a clearly defined moratorium without the customary deviousness so often found .
If the State in question is a very minor one , it is quickly condemned .
But if the State is more important , then this is usually more difficult .
I am thinking , for example , of China , where we once tried to deal with the issue of trade in human organs taken from prisoners condemned to death .
I would like to draw attention to something else too .
Whenever we talk about the actual death penalty , we should focus on the form of execution that is most frequently practised here at home , namely the termination of unborn life .
It is now high time to look at this from a new perspective , since this is carried out in most cases , sadly , without recourse to legal proceedings .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the European Parliament is once again calling on the Council , the Member States and the new Austrian Presidency to try to ensure that this moratorium on the death penalty is included on the agenda at the next session of the United Nations General Assembly and that it is a universal moratorium .
It is also asking for a resolution to be tabled in this respect .
Even if only one innocent person had been executed , this universal moratorium and the abolition of the death penalty would still be worth fighting for .
However , dozens of innocent people have been executed and so it is unacceptable that at the end of this century the death penalty has still not been abolished .
We are going to go on to discuss Guinea and the 15 people there who are condemned to death and who have not had the remotest possibility of having an adequate defence .
We therefore support the position of our colleague , Mr Manisco , who has resigned from the Delegation for relations with the United States due to the fact that the next meeting will take place in Texas , a state which has the dubious honour of having executed 10 people since March .
Mr President , I would like to make it clear that personally speaking , I am against the death penalty on principle , for a number of very different reasons . Like everyone in this Parliament I was shocked by the brutal disposal of human lives in countries such as China and Pakistan , to name but two from a very long list .
Nevertheless , I will not vote in favour of the present resolution : I will abstain .
Because I emphatically do not want to send the wrong signal to my own country , including to my own continent .
The problem in our continent , in Europe , is , of course , not the death penalty , rather the problem is the reverse .
It is the lax and even very lax treatment of hard criminals .
The death penalty for a felony has also been officially abolished in Belgium .
Unfortunately , this was not accompanied by the introduction of sentences with no reduced term , such as real life sentences for the most serious types of offender - in fact , quite the reverse .
We now have the situation where in Belgium , for example , convicted paedophile sadists , child abusers and child murderers are systematically released into society after only a few years .
Regrettably , this situation does not just exist in my own country , but in many European countries as well . Recent dramatic lawsuits , particularly in Germany and in France , show this to be true .
Moreover , the infamous Dutroux affair has taught us that these child murderers and child abusers are not merely released , they are in addition assured of social benefits .
Marc Dutroux was paid BEF 80 000 net monthly in benefit , an amount which many well-behaved , needy people who have never done anyone any harm can only dream of .
We might say , perhaps controversially - but accurately , that the death penalty for these multiple recidivist monsters might have saved the lives of many children .
The day that I am able to say , to the best of my knowledge , that in my country - and this applies to all countries in Europe - children and innocent citizens are adequately protected and that the most heinous crimes will be punished appropriately , that will be the day I will vote with conviction in favour of any resolution against the death penalty . Unfortunately , I regret to say that this is not yet the case .
Equatorial Guinea
Mr President , this Parliament must unanimously condemn and reject the events which have taken place in Equatorial Guinea . These include the repression to which the Bubi people have been subjected there as a result of the chaotic events which took place on the island of Bioko last January , the torture of 117 members of the Bubi ethnic minority , accused of terrorism , secession and treason , and the long sentences imposed and the death sentences received by 15 people after a summary trial which did not provide the minimum guarantees required to allow justice to be served .
But we cannot limit ourselves to a passive condemnation ; instead we must adopt an active attitude faced with these facts and faced , in particular , with these death sentences .
Therefore , we must also use all our authority to request that the death sentences be commuted and that in this connection a fair retrial be staged .
Parliament believes at the same time that the people of Equatorial Guinea have the right to live in a democracy and be guaranteed the respect for human rights ; we regret that no progress has been made in the democratization of Equatorial Guinea , despite the fact that President Obiang made a commitment to this effect when he visited President Santer last autumn .
Therefore , this Parliament must call on the Commission , and we are doing so with all our might , to suspend the cooperation programmes for this country - except for humanitarian aid , of course - while there is no concrete evidence that advances are being made on the road towards democracy .
It is only in this way , by responding vigorously to the government of Equatorial Guinea , that we will help the people of that country to regain their freedom and their dignity and the European Union to regain its own credibility in the eyes of the world .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the events taking place in Equatorial Guinea are part of a long history of absurdities in that former Spanish colony .
At the moment , this issue has reached a particularly serious stage with 15 people having been sentenced to death and a considerable number of people having been given prison sentences of more than 20 years .
In this connection , an accusation has also been made against the members of the Bubi ethnic minority , who live in one part of the territory of Equatorial Guinea .
This process which has taken place in Equatorial Guinea has not had minimum guarantees , and the proof of this is that certain Western journalists have been expelled from the country because possibly the information they were providing did not satisfy those in power .
In this respect , I agree with what Mrs Ferrer has said : it is necessary for the European Union to determine the aid which might lead to the democratization of this country and therefore to enhance its reputation in the eyes of the African countries and particularly in the eyes of Equatorial Guinea .
Mr President , unfortunately this is not the first time that Parliament has had to give its opinion concerning events in Equatorial Guinea .
Not long ago , this very Parliament also denounced similar situations involving a lack of democracy and respect for human rights , and the European Union 's cooperation with this country was suspended .
However , it is also true that the Malabo regime has always been very good at making false promises and , on many occasions , at convincing Western authorities with its fallacies .
It even managed to convince the French government of its desire for democracy and to convince Commissioner Pinheiro and President Santer himself to show signs of comprehension by lifting the sanctions which this Parliament had promoted .
Now we see that the actions of the Commissioner and the President of the Commission were somewhat hasty in that they were not supported by this House .
We are now witnessing a Kafkaesque situation where 16 people have been condemned to death ; fortunately , the sentences have not been carried out , but the accused are left like hostages of that very regime .
Our first action must therefore be to provide impetus and to apply pressure so as to ensure that these death sentences are commuted and that this ersatz trial is held again since , according to international organizations , all sorts of attacks have been made on its judicial neutrality .
To return to my starting point , Mr President , we must again call for a further freezing of cooperation aid to this country - except , of course , for emergency and humanitarian aid - until , once and for all , decisive steps are taken towards democracy .
Mr President , immediately after demanding a moratorium on executions , we are faced with yet another reason to deplore capital punishment , in the form of the 15 death sentences that have just been pronounced in Equatorial Guinea .
But , on reflection , is it enough simply to protest from a sort of moral standpoint , or even to suspend a meagre allocation of development aid for that country ?
For their part , the radicals consider that such barbaric actions should be sanctioned immediately , first by cutting off all international relations .
But in order to resort to this sanction , the EU would again have to deploy a diplomatic service and its relations with Africa would not only have to be the lowest common denominator among the bilateral diplomacies of the old colonial powers .
If this is so , we must vote for the compromise resolution in order to exert firm pressure on the authorities in Equatorial Guinea to commute the sentences and not to resume the bloody violence of the past and the totalitarianism that this country has experienced for twenty years .
In other respects EU support for the draft moratorium would , in all other circumstances , be the best backing we could offer the victims of all despots .
Mr President , the people of Equatorial Guinea have been suffering under dictatorships for 30 years .
In fact , the European Union has introduced the democratic clause as an important instrument in its relations with all other countries in order to give an example , in comparison to other powers , of our unmistakable desire to help establish a different international order .
All of the circumstances surrounding the farcical trial which took place are extremely suspicious and it is not clear how the uprising itself began or developed .
Therefore , we believe that the sentences which have been passed are totally unjustified .
In this respect , the democratic opposition in Equatorial Guinea is placing all its trust in the European Union . This is because the people of Equatorial Guinea have a total lack of confidence in what we would call the democratic paths of pressure and claims for democracy , and we are seeing the appearance of dangerous , yet understandable , temptations to resort to violence if there is not a fundamental change leading to the restoration of democracy in Equatorial Guinea .
I therefore believe that the European Union now has a unique and important opportunity .
Along with the demand for the democratic clause and for firmness in its relationship with the dictator , it has the opportunity to be able to ensure as soon as possible - and with its sights set precisely on the next elections which will take place after the summer - that , in addition to the sentences being commuted , democracy is restored . In that way , this troubled continent might finally begin to hope for human rights and for democracy .
Mr President , we have just talked about the death penalty .
In a farcical trial , 15 people have been sentenced to death in Equatorial Guinea and 117 people have been judged and also given varying sentences , in addition to being tortured .
This has been the result of a process which has been completed without any form of guarantees and which has taken place in a context in which the Guinean people live with only limited democratic rights , particularly the Bubi people who live on the island of Bioko . This is the ethnic group to which these people belong ; it , too , has the right to democracy , its own cultural rights and its own political rights .
The European Union can still carry out actions and make gestures to save the lives of these people and to help ensure that a regime which provides all democratic guarantees is established in Equatorial Guinea .
We therefore have an instrument at our disposal : the suspension of the European Union 's cooperation assistance to Equatorial Guinea , if the democratic clause is not complied with , maintaining only emergency humanitarian aid .
So , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I ask that we support this resolution which will help to save these lives and establish democracy in Equatorial Guinea .
Mr President , we all know that Equatorial Guinea is a dictatorship , where human rights are not respected and where 15 death sentences have just been passed . But the question is : how do we prevent this situation from continuing ?
Why did President Santer allow Obiang to visit him last autumn ?
Which governments urged him to do so ?
Why is Article 5 of the Lomé Convention not applied to the regime in Equatorial Guinea ?
These are questions that need immediate and constructive answers .
Cooperation must naturally be suspended .
Equatorial Guinea cannot be considered a normal party to the Lomé Convention .
But there are governments which should adopt a positive attitude to counteract the multinational economic interests present in Equatorial Guinea , which are those that , at the moment , form the foundation of the dictator President Teodor Obiang 's position .
In this respect , we must call for clear responses from two governments , namely those of France and Spain .
Are those governments prepared to act in accordance with their historic responsibilities in favour of democracy in Guinea ?
We are now demanding that they do .
Madam President , for the last ten years or more this House has been monitoring the political situation in Indonesia nearly every month , and more particularly the dramatic situation of the oppressed and brutalized people of East Timor , a country which , we should not forget , is formally under Portuguese administration according to United Nations law .
There is no denying , therefore , that this House 's historical powers include the unquestionable right to draw European politicians ' attention once more to what is happening in East Timor , and the vital need to solve this problem .
Because we are convinced that we must continue and persist in making sure that the defence of one of the most enduring and difficult of causes , that of democracy and human rights , is not forgotten , in order to provide an indisputable political basis of international solidarity to find a peaceful solution to the problem of East Timor .
I would also like to add that , with rare political balance and common sense , the pressure of the popular movement and resistance in Indonesia has wrung from the new Government which succeeded the fall of the dictator Suharto a set of declarations which , although contradictory , offer the prospect of light at the end of the tunnel .
For that reason , because everything can still be resolved democratically and without further unnecessary violence , the signatories to all the motions acknowledge that the first condition for resolving the problem is the release of the historic Timorean leader , Xanana Gusmão .
We are convinced that no-one can escape the hand of History and that , sooner or later , the new Indonesian authorities will have to free him .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , once more the problem of Timor has come up at this Plenary Session , and now , it seems , in a more open and hopeful context .
The new President of Indonesia has begun to release political prisoners and , for the first time , the Government of Indonesia is prepared to accept a solution for Timor within a framework and laws that respect Timor 's interests .
The international community , and especially the United States , are including Timor in their political agenda , and I am delighted to say that the Cardiff European Council Summit touched on the subject of Timor , taking a position by declaring that a just and internationally acceptable solution must be found .
We are delighted about this and hope that a solution to the problem can thus be found .
In the meantime , it is important that Xanana Gusmão should be set free .
It would be a political signal and I consider that the European Union could play an important political role in the matter , because Xanana Gusmão is not in prison as a common criminal .
The common criminals are those who continue to kill unarmed and defenceless young people in a graveyard in Dili . The common criminals are those who continue to kill young demonstrators who are fighting for a just cause .
Xanana Gusmão is a political prisoner who must be released , and his release would be an important political signal .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Portugal and the Portuguese Members of the European Parliament are under a political and moral obligation , for both historical and current reasons , to insist that the European Parliament call for full compliance with United Nation resolutions , and the observance of international law and human rights in East Timor .
Up to now , the new Government of Indonesia has made no move to free the people of Timor and their political leader , Xanana Gusmão , and is continuing the violent repression of peaceful and legitimate demonstrations by a people who are fighting for their freedom .
We are delighted with the position adopted by the Council in Cardiff in relation to the problem of East Timor and we ask the European Parliament to confirm that position of condemnation of the present Indonesian Government .
Madam President , the heroic resistance of the people of East Timor against military occupation has become one with the Indonesian people 's fight against dictatorship .
The dictator has fallen . The dictatorship had to fall and the military occupation must end so that the Timorean people 's inalienable right to self-determination may be asserted .
For our part , we need only maintain that pressure which has forced the European Parliament to exert pressure of its own .
We were on our own , or almost , but the Timorean people 's refusal to give up has now made it possible for others to join us .
This includes the European Parliament , the European Council , the United States and others .
We only have to persist until we ensure that the question of Indonesia and East Timor is not reduced to , or submerged in , an economic-financial problem , where the European Union , the IMF and other bodies try to give them aid to enable them to help themselves .
Where we have respect for international law and the right to self-determination which is , and continues to be , the central issue .
Madam President , probably nowhere else in the world since 1965 has a greater proportion of the population been killed or suffered flagrant human rights violations at the hands of the authorities than in some of the territories under Indonesian rule .
In East Timor an estimated one-third of the population has died since the Indonesian invasion of 1975 .
Now that the economic collapse has forced the resignation of President Suharto , there is at last hope of fundamental change .
President Habibie has promised reforms and the army , low in morale and divided as a result of the crisis , has begun to exercise some restraint in dealing with opposition demonstrations .
Some reports indicate the possibility of serious food shortages which could produce great waves of violence .
It is vital for the President to take immediate action to resolve issues which could trigger off clashes , perhaps directed against the Chinese , who have already been victims .
This means immediately releasing all political prisoners , especially Xanana Gusmão in East Timor , and recognizing the right of the East Timorese people to self-determination .
Earlier this week , despite restraint shown by troops , tension in Dili was heightened by reports of a shooting of a civilian elsewhere .
In Indonesia itself , the population will demand genuinely free elections and , with so many people under the age of thirty , completely new forces could emerge to participate in a far-reaching transition which we must hope will be peaceful .
In the dire economic crisis the dangers of an appalling catastrophe are considerable , but without extensive political change they will be much greater .
The European Union must support change and a complete end to all repression .
It must be prepared to ensure that its very considerable economic aid is used to assist the transition .
I call upon the House to support this resolution .
Madam President , finally there is a chance for renewal and democratization in Indonesia .
The apologies by the Indonesian military leadership yesterday for killing a twenty-one year old boy are a characteristic sign of these changes .
The present release of fifteen East Timor political prisoners sends another positive signal .
More is , of course , needed .
We now have an opportunity to arrive at a durable solution to this lingering conflict in East Timor .
This requires continued international pressure .
The promises of the new President , Mr Habibie , in regard of a special charter for East Timor are welcome but they do not go far enough .
The right to self-determination must be guaranteed , political prisoners must be released and violations of human rights must be investigated .
This can be the only basis for a durable solution of this dispute .
The Indonesian President must not think himself rich yet : the foundation for trust by the public and investors and a healthy economy and the public interest can only come about as a result of genuinely fundamental reforms .
But not too fast .
Madam President , the democratic forces in Indonesia have managed to oust the dictator Suharto .
They have forced the new government to implement the first political and economic reforms .
These are breaches which the democratic forces will seek to widen .
The vice that formerly strangled any freedom of expression , information and association is beginning to lose its grip .
Trade unionists and political opponents have been freed .
But this political breakthrough remains limited and the freeing of political prisoners is relative , since it does not include the communist prisoners condemned to death in 1965 by Suharto and those who have been sentenced for their opposition to the occupation of East Timor .
Our group offers its total support for the democratic forces in their fight for genuine economic and political change , fragmenting the economic and financial power of the Suharto clan and responding to the needs of the people .
We also demand the organization of free , democratic elections and the release of all political prisoners , without exception , especially those who have been in death row for 32 years and who originate from East Timor , such as Gusmão .
I am pleased to see that this proposal from our group has been incorporated in the joint resolution and by the European Council on 15 and 16 June in Cardiff , calling for the release of all political prisoners .
Madam President , the people of East Timor have had the unreserved support of the European Parliament .
It is now or never that we have to get involved .
Now would be just the right time to send a European Parliamentary delegation to East Timor .
If it still is not appropriate to send an official delegation , it can just as well send an informal one , but it is important that one is sent .
We must resolve to ensure that funds for East Timor in the EU budget are used for the purposes they were intended , whether it be development cooperation or humanitarian aid .
It is also reasonable to insist that the European Union support the democratic movements in Indonesia and East Timor .
Unfortunately , there seems to be some conflict within the Commission as to how the budgeted funds should be spent .
I fear this has been a sign that they would sooner deal with relations with Indonesia , but right now we all have reason to suppose that decisive and courageous action must be taken .
Madam President , it is clear that the real objective here is the removal of the Indonesians from the occupied territory of East Timor and the East Timorese right to self-determination .
We have to welcome some of the positive things that have happened in recent times .
For example , as Mr Berthu mentioned , it was historic to have an apology for the tragic shooting of a 21-year-old student .
That shows that things are moving to a certain extent .
But the East Timorese resistance leaders are still in prison .
We need to see the unconditional release of Mr Gusmão .
All the political prisoners have to be released .
It is quite clear that they were wrongfully imprisoned in the first place : they were fighting for self-determination , their human rights have been abused over and over again , and they have to be released , because they have spent a long time in prison for no real reason other than asserting the right to self-determination .
I would also like to draw attention to another point that has to be investigated , that is , the rape of many Chinese women in Jakarta during the uprising .
This has to be investigated as well .
It is an appalling situation .
Chad :
Madam President , all is not well in a number of African countries .
A few years ago it was still thought that stability and democracy and respect for human rights and minorities would become widespread in most of Africa . But it is becoming increasingly obvious that we must make critical annotations in respect of a growing number of African countries .
Today they are joined by Chad .
My Group does not wish to distance itself in advance from the plans being made by the three respective oil companies to construct a pipeline in Chad and Cameroon .
We should not deprive those countries of the economic benefit and advantage of such a project , when all the necessary social and environmental conditions are complied with under the guidance of the World Bank . Many other countries could also profit from oil production .
But it is clear that considerable problems have been created in certain regions in Chad , as it would seem that whole villages are displaced by this project and people are losing their place of residence .
We also see that politicians such as Mr Yorongar are arrested for defending the interests of these people .
Moreover , the people involved are minority groups , who are already under pressure in Chad in this respect , and repression is increasing . Comparison with the Nigerian problem , namely in Okoni land and the arrest and death of the Ken Saro Wiwa , cannot be avoided .
After Nigeria , history threatens to repeat itself on a lesser scale in Chad .
This resolution is not intended as a severe condemnation , but rather a strong signal to the Chad government and to the oil companies involved that they should not go the way of Nigeria , but to show respect for democracy and human rights .
The Chad government should immediately release Mr Yorongar and consult all other activists who are concerned about the minority groups involved so that they will be able to make their points in parliament and not to go the way of repression , arrests and worse .
That is the objective of this resolution and the reason we demand action by the Commission and the Council .
I sincerely hope that at this early stage we may be able to prevent something which might otherwise threaten to go horribly wrong .
Madam President , we have often debated human rights violations in Chad .
We had hoped that the situation would change once the President assured us , after the human rights violations in October 1997 , that these would not happen any more .
This year , in March , 100 civilians or village elders were massacred by the military .
The latest case of human rights violations we witnessed in connection with an event of the European Parliament , the 2nd P7 Summit , for the Poorest Seven , which took place in Brussels last week .
A member of the Chad Parliament was supposed to deliver a speech on the oil project in Dobabecken at 9.30 a.m. on the Friday .
The colleague from Chad , Mr Yorongar , had a court appointment at 9.30 a.m. and was given an extended prison sentence .
He has been in custody since 3 June simply because he criticized this project .
The project provides for 300 oil wells in the south of Chad , a 170 km long pipeline in Chad and a 700 km pipeline in Cameroon .
In our opinion analysis of whether this is socially compatible has been insufficient , or rather the population has not been involved .
Likewise where the environment is concerned , not enough precautionary measures have been taken .
We are not against this in principle , but a democratic development , the involvement of the population and the observation of environmental standards , which are required by the World Bank , ought to be assured .
The World Bank has earmarked some 55 million US dollars for Chad and 58 million for Cameroon and claims it is creating jobs .
4 , 000 jobs in a region where 28 , 000 live off a subsistence economy cannot be real jobs for the region .
If 8 , 000 litres of oil are escaping into the environment each day due to leakage , then the environmental compatibility tests cannot be adequate .
We ask both the World Bank and the EU , along with Shell , Exxon and Elf , to reconsider this project and only to continue with it once a situation which respects human beings is guaranteed .
Madam President , since independence , Chad has unfortunately been caught up in insurrections , armed uprisings and a civil war that does not merit the name since it opposes only tiny military factions .
It was thought , and it was widely stated , that this drastic situation was due to the extreme poverty of Chad , one of the least developed countries on earth .
And now we have new outbreaks of violence , civilian massacres , the arrest of political opponents , journalists and human rights activists and extortion of all kinds .
This time there is a different reason .
The convulsions in Chad are due to its potential wealth .
It is said that the Chadian soil reeks of petroleum .
American and European companies together are prospecting for oil and the authorities in Chad prohibit anyone opposing this .
As Mrs Maij-Weggen said , it is not up to us to condemn these actions categorically , but to deliver a stern warning .
Mr Yorongar , a member of the opposition , who is due to address us concerning the reservations of the population as a whole regarding this project , has been arrested and we cannot tolerate this .
We must use the facilities provided by the Lomé Convention and all the means of pressure that can be exerted by the Commission , and also by our international audience , to demand that the government of Chad release those imprisoned and obtain from the companies involved a commitment to subject their projects to a genuinely democratic inspection .
Madam President , over a year ago I spoke in this House to expose the flagrant disregard for human rights in Chad , a country marked by thirty years of war and aggression .
Despite the promises of the leaders of Chad to respect human rights , the situation has continued to worsen and today it is particularly disturbing .
Journalists are indicted for libel and thrown into prison for denouncing the evils committed by senior politicians .
The opposition member Yorongar has been arrested for the same reasons .
The government of Chad must realize that it cannot pursue this policy of repression with impunity .
It must also stop military activities in the south .
Moreover , if it wishes to continue with its project to extract oil , it can only do so if human rights are respected and if environmental protection rules are complied with .
Otherwise we must think about sanctions , because the Union cannot close its eyes indefinitely to the atrocities perpetrated in this signatory to the Lomé Convention .
Madam President , more than ten years ago I received daily press releases at my paper 's editorial office on the titanic battle between Hussein Habré and Mr Debry , with alternate support from Libya and sometimes France , as the minerals in the Auso zone were ready for exploitation .
To some extent the country experiences stability under Debry but unfortunately , Madam President , the country still ranks fifth on the list of the poorest countries ; it is understandable that such a country intends to exploit its resources .
Hence the proposal by an international consortium following consultation with relevant organizations , to which the World Bank ultimately must give her approval .
I have been assured that advanced technology will be deployed in the realization of the project , so that events in Nigeria will not be repeated .
However , I cannot help but conclude that opinion on this project is influenced by the negative effects of the Nigerian drama .
In my opinion the involvement of the World Bank guarantees a sound implementation .
Madam President , I have meanwhile heard from reliable sources that the two imprisoned journalists have been freed .
I naturally plead for the release of our fellow Member also .
Madam President , would it not be a good thing if the relations on this land could be organized through ACP channels ?
What is their responsibility , if not conducting the correct dialogue at the right time ?
Madam President , I also believe that this resolution is not supported by both sides and I can therefore not vote in favour of it .
Pakistan :
Madam President , Socrates was given the poisoned cup because he was supposed to have insulted the gods .
Such an accusation was at that time an effective way of condemning someone with whom you were at odds .
Slandering the gods was punished with the death penalty .
Although Socrates lived in ancient Greek times , such legislation would still seem to exist .
In Pakistan , for example , Islamic laws are regularly misused in order to settle personal vendettas .
The death penalty may be imposed on the basis of a single accusation of having slandered Mohammed .
Such a religious law goes , of course , against our sense of justice and ideally we would prefer it to be revoked .
We should in any case condemn the improper use of these laws , which allow innocent citizens to be condemned to death .
Pakistan would like to be respected as a modern nation , yet seems to ignore elementary rules of law .
A country which wants to participate in the community of people should at the very least show respect for the minority groups living in its territory , including religious minorities .
1991 saw the introduction of religious laws in Pakistan , which in practice pose a serious threat to the country 's minority groups .
Many Christians have been imprisoned after being accused of abusing the name of Mohammed .
A number of these were even murdered in prison by fanatical Muslims .
However , this law is not only a threat to Christians .
Other non-Muslims and even Muslims who experience their beliefs in a different fashion to the Ahmadies live in constant fear that they will be entrapped by the religious laws .
These accusations prove in practice useful for settling personal vendettas , similar to ancient times .
Once people are accused , they have little chance of escaping a conviction .
I refer to the recent example of Ayub-Massih , who was accused by his neighbour of blasphemy .
This neighbour had been having a dispute with him for years over a piece of ground .
He was recently condemned to death by the judge of first instance , following imprisonment .
He has since appealed , but unfortunately judges at higher courts are often also afraid to acquit someone who has been accused of blasphemy .
One judge who did this last year was murdered not long after , probably for just that reason .
It was announced this week that the Christian Shafik Massih was accused of blasphemy at the end of May , following a row over an electricity connection .
It is true that there is much opposition against these blasphemy laws in Pakistan itself .
But the Muslims who demonstrated in favour of the law were left in peace , while the Christians who protested against the law strangely enough were manhandled by the riot police .
Through this resolution , which we hope will be carried broadly by the European Parliament , we intend to call on the Pakistan government to revoke the blasphemy law or at least to moderate it .
The Pakistan government should ensure in any case that all citizens in their country are granted a fair judicial process .
The cooperation agreement between the European Union and Pakistan , which is presently under preparation by the European Commission , speaks of respect for human rights and democratic principles as the basis for the agreement .
We ask the European Commission to emphatically draw attention to this violation of the right when signing the cooperation agreement , and also later to monitor it scrupulously .
Cooperation between the European Union and Pakistan can continue if Pakistan meets these conditions .
Should Pakistan fail to comply , and let us all hope that it does , then sanctions should be imposed on the trade between the European Union and Pakistan .
The European Commission must not maintain good relations with a country where religious minorities are systematically oppressed and discriminated against .
Madam President , I would like to endorse this .
It is not the nuclear tests that preoccupy us , but rather an evil which often likes to creep up slowly , which sometimes begins quietly , but often ends badly , namely discrimination against religious minorities .
The evil is not just caused by state religions , but also by a misunderstood fundamentalism , which for example takes advantage of a blasphemy law that is fiercely applied .
In Pakistan this evil is virulent and has become apparent through the death of the Catholic bishop John Joseph , but the situation in Pakistan was also the subject of a working party at the Conference of the German Catholic Church last week , and without anyone suspecting what would happen .
Minorities are often characterized by various factors : ethnic differences , varying religions , languages or cultures .
At the same time some aspects always come together .
Religion is misused to suppress freedom of opinion and information , to influence courts and legal judgements and to exercise violence through the police and fanatical groups .
We would like to express to the Pakistan government our grave concern , before the currently postponed , yet still imminent consultation of the European Parliament on the cooperation agreement .
We would like to support all efforts to create the laws in such a way that human rights , democratic endeavour and law and order are guaranteed and religious freedom is provided for all who want to live in peace in their country .
I have been told that the Pakistan government would be making suitable efforts .
Certainly we see that the death penalty has currently been suspended .
If that is the case , then we would like to know that our resolution is seen as support for those who want to turn Pakistan into a modern state in an admittedly difficult political situation .
But please let this be done without the atom bomb !
Might I also remind you that the founder of Pakistan , Mohammed Ali Jinnah , supported the idea of equality for all religions .
I hope that modern Pakistan will take this to heart .
Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to welcome this resolution .
I know that my colleague Anita Pollack , under the auspices of the South-east Asia Delegation , has raised this issue on a number of occasions during visits and delegation meetings with officials from and in Pakistan .
Last year I went to see the Pakistan Ambassador to the European Union and raised with him a number of cases .
His reply then was , ' Look , we have this vast population , several million people , and you are only able to bring up six cases ' .
But over the last 12 months it has become abundantly clear that Section 295 © of the Pakistan penal code , which provides for the death penalty , is being misused : often to settle family feuds ; often on very dubious legal bases with just four witnesses ; and it is often being used to persecute not just the Christians but the other minority groups in Pakistan .
Some of the reports of what happens when these cases are brought to court are quite horrifying .
At one court a group of local people turned up and began to build a gallows outside the courtroom to make it absolutely clear that whatever actually happened in the court , the people would subsequently be lynched .
So we face a serious situation .
I want , though , to bring this right back home .
Next month we will be discussing the Berger report on cults and sects .
Next month we will be looking at the Oostlander report on Muslim fundamentalism .
I would hope that , when this Parliament looks at those two reports , we act in a sensitive manner and make sure that we do not pass any resolution or any proclamation that can be used as evidence that here , in the European Union , we are anything other than an example , a shining beacon to the world of religious tolerance .
Madam President , since the blasphemy law of 1986 , religious minorities in Pakistan , such as the Christians and Amadi Muslims , have had their civil rights curtailed .
The law provides for the death penalty and life imprisonment for profaning the name of the prophet Mohammed and is mercilessly exploited to persecute religious minorities .
The Sharia law of 1991 only applies to Muslims and justifies attacks on dissenters , while women - and here it is particularly non-Muslim women who are badly affected by fundamentalist politics - are completely ostracized socially .
A further source of discrimination is the divided electoral system .
I have obtained information on this in my role as vice-president of the SAARC delegation of the European Parliament .
Here Muslims have the chance to vote only for Muslim candidates , while minorities can only vote for representatives from their ranks , and the effect is : Christian villages lack proper roads , electricity and water supply , and access to clean water is totally impossible .
The blasphemy law should not just be toned down , but abolished .
We expect from Pakistan that it finds its way back to the vision of its founding father , Mohammed Ali Jinnah , and finally makes human rights a reality .
Guinea-Bissau :
Madam President , a conflict has lasted ten days and nobody knows how many deaths have occurred on either side .
This conflict drags on , with its trail of despairingly foreseeable consequences : epidemics raging through the towns , population movements that frighten neighbouring countries and regional instability that gets more worrying in the course of time .
Furthermore , this conflict is being acted out in a sadly familiar context , scarred by poverty , limited educational facilities , health care and other public services .
But , like Janus , poverty is two-faced .
It fosters a culture of ingenuity and solidarity , whilst at the same time it nurtures the soil in which all manner of shady deals find sustenance .
Of course , decent living conditions do not entirely eradicate the traffic of evil - we need only consider the healthy state of drug trafficking in Europe , as well as other black markets - but at least they partially drain the bogs in which they proliferate .
One of the major difficulties , and also one of the great risks that this conflict poses to stability , is that it bolsters secular ethnic solidarity , whereas the African nations are less than forty years old and those persistent feelings of solidarity grew out of a decolonizing policy introduced at the end the period of European military expansionism which mainly consisted in drawing geo-strategic lines on maps , rather than taking account of human realities .
One of the most recent causes has been the stagnation of joint development policies .
At all events , the boundaries of these countries are firmly established and recognized internationally and we can only believe that the conflict and the restoration of peace in Guinea-Bissau have taken place under the auspices of the democratically elected Heads of State , the Senegalese head of State and the goodwill of the Gambian head of State .
Our Parliament must apply its moral authority and political weight to persuade a regional institution such as the Organization of African Unity to intervene in this conflict and bring about a cease-fire and maintain peace .
Madam President , Guinea-Bissau was already one of the poorest countries on earth , and has therefore sometimes made an ideal subject for documentaries on Third World misery .
For twelve years , against a sound background consisting of the rockets and machine-guns of a military rebellion against the constitutional Government and its allies from neighbouring countries , Senegal and Guinea-Conakry , Guinea-Bissau has been front-page news for the world 's media .
The results could not be more devastating : the country 's capital well nigh destroyed , massive flights of refugees into neighbouring countries - we hear of six thousand having fled to Dakar , while Lisbon and Cape Verde are still receiving refugees - the drastic lack of food and medicine , hundreds of civilians and an unknown number of soldiers killed .
The fact that the armed struggle is still going on also shows that the recapture of Guinea , although making progress , has been difficult , which may indicate a considerable imbalance of strength .
We must obtain a bilateral cease-fire as a matter of urgency as a pre-condition for negotiations , but we must ensure that the current mediation initiatives do not suffer from excess or multiplication .
There is a mission from The Gambia in the country ; the Official Organization of Portuguese-Speaking Countries has offered to mediate in the conflict ; in this Resolution the European Parliament calls on the European Union and the UN to intervene .
But a conflict between Africans ought to be resolved between Africans , and hence the OAU seems the organization in the best position to do so .
Guinea-Bissau has been a democracy , albeit a flawed one , for some years .
Stability in West Africa depends on the restoration of the constitutional order , the principal figurehead of which is President Nino Vieira .
But we must at all costs avoid replacing a normal military conflict with the old type of endless guerrilla warfare - a lesson which our colonial history ought to have taught us by now .
The only ones who profit are the arms dealers , and the only losers are the people .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , the situation in Guinea-Bissau is complex , fluid and subject to constant political changes .
Hence this resolution had to be read with the prudence appropriate to those who reaffirm principles and above all else appeal for peace .
Peace is essential if we are to provide practical aid for the thousands of refugees , because it is only today that the first humanitarian aid is expected to arrive via Bafatá , thanks to the endeavours and the generosity of the Portuguese Armed Forces , the Red Cross and the religious and Social Security institutions , with the active support of the European Union .
Peace has already been called for by the Council , especially as a result of efforts by Portugal , France , the President and other Member States of the Union ; peace has been called for by His Holiness the Pope and a number of international organizations ; peace for which the Official Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries mobilized yesterday at its meeting in Lisbon ; peace , for the sake of which the Gambian Minister of Foreign Affairs has gone to Bissau to attempt to mediate there .
The European Parliament calls for the re-establishment of constitutional order , for arms to be laid down and for a peaceful solution to a serious internal and regional conflict , the establishment of democratic constitutional order within the framework of Guinea-Bissau 's political institutions and respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of that country .
Hence the reference in the resolution to the role of the OAU and the United Nations .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to mention the immediate willingness of the Commission to provide humanitarian aid and to underline the part played by Portugal , in co-operation with Senegal and Cape Verde , in the repatriation of foreign refugees , most of whom come from Member States of the Union .
Those refugees , and the Guinean people , are after all the main reason for our concern .
Madam President , anyone familiar with Guinea-Bissau in the past is aware of the reasons for the present crisis .
A few decades ago the people still lived relatively well . Perhaps they were not rich , there was no great development , but the Portuguese really achieved something to be proud of there .
The country then collapsed through corruption and international intervention .
I think you just have to admit that environmental protection , for instance , is today nothing short of terrible .
When I was there , a long time ago now , people could really live on islands like Bijagós .
They had enough to eat , whereas now everything has been destroyed by pollution .
That is the price that has been paid for government without conscience - the present one has been much better , but up to now it has had to settle the bill .
We should be doing everything we can to help the extremely likeable people of Guinea-Bissau to get back on the right track .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I begin by thanking my honourable friend Otto von Habsberg for his kind words on the work of the Portuguese in Guinea-Bissau .
I would not wish to offer an opinion on the internal political problems of Guinea-Bissau , nor to comment on the participation of the Senegalese and Guinea-Conakry armies in this conflict , their legitimacy or any territorial claims they may have on Guinea-Bissau .
What is important , as has already been mentioned , is that institutional order should be restored in a country that is growing poorer and poorer , that democracy should be able to survive and that the opposition parties may have practical conditions in which they can exercise their democratic rights on equal terms with the party in power , which has not actually happened .
But what also matters is that the European Union should be able to help in this crisis .
I would like to remind the House at this point how quickly the European Union has provided aid , releasing funds for refugees , and I would ask the European Union to go on giving attention to this problem , not only from the political but also from the humanitarian point of view .
There are thousands of refugees still fleeing from Guinea-Bissau , settling in neighbouring countries and , in particular , coming to Europe . These people deserve our support and that of the Commission .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , although we do not yet have sufficient information to enable us to make a detailed and objective analysis of the recent situation in Guinea-Bissau , nevertheless we would wish at this point to express our sadness at the serious events that have been taking place in that country , and especially the high number of deaths that have resulted from those events .
We would also like to express our hopes that the Guineans - and not any third parties - will quickly be able to find a lasting democratic solution by political means , without further bloodshed .
In the meantime , we are delighted that it has been possible to repatriate many foreign citizens at the appropriate time , particularly Portuguese citizens whose lives were in danger .
At the same time we are aware of the very serious situation in which many Guinean citizens find themselves and it is therefore essential and a matter of urgency that the European Union should demonstrate its solidarity with them , by increasing humanitarian aid and particularly by providing more food supplies .
Ladies and gentlemen , I will try to reply to the questions you raised .
Firstly , on the serious matter of the death penalty .
During its sitting in 1998 , the United Nations Human Rights Commission adopted a new resolution on the death penalty , which was jointly sponsored by all the Member States of the Union .
In particular , this resolution commits all those states that have not yet abolished the death penalty to - and I quote - " gradually limit the number of offences that carry the death penalty , to impose a moratorium on executions with a view to the final abolition of the death penalty and to publicize information about the application of that penalty ' .
Currently , the Union , which deems the abolition of the death penalty to be an integral part of its policy in support of human rights , is continuing its work with a view to adopting guidelines on the procedures to adopt with regard to other countries .
I now come to the second question , regarding Equatorial Guinea .
The Commission is most concerned about the way the situation has developed in this country .
Following an armed attack against a number of military installations on the island of Bioko in Equatorial Guinea on 21 January 1998 , 117 people were detained , accused of rebellion and tried by a military tribunal in session from 25 to 29 May at Malabo .
The military tribunal reached its verdict on 1 June .
It condemned 15 of the accused to death , as you yourself stated , and several others were given prison sentences of between 6 and 26 years .
The Commission will continue to follow developments closely , in collaboration with the Member States in situ , and will maintain the dialogue with national authorities to prevent violations of human rights and to advance and consolidate the fragile democratic process in the country .
The Commission is standing by the conditions imposed for the gradual resumption of cooperation with Equatorial Guinea , especially the use of resources from the seventh EDF .
These conditions call for genuine progress with regard to respect for human rights , democratic principles and the de facto State , in accordance with Article 5 of the fourth Lomé Convention .
I now come to the problem of Indonesia and Timor .
The Commission commends the decisions taken by President Habibie , seeking to reform the political landscape of Indonesia and hold elections in 1999 .
It does , however , think it important to speed up the pace of reform , to guarantee rapid recovery of the Indonesian economy .
I attach particular importance to the openness which the Indonesian government seems to show with regard to the question of East Timor .
I hope that this demonstration of openness will soon result in a just , overall solution that is acceptable internationally .
The Commission has always participated fully in the work of the CFSP in the search for a solution to the question of East Timor .
In particular , it has supported the endeavours of the Secretary General of the United Nations and his special envoy , Ambassador Marker .
The Commission has also supported the call from the " General Affairs ' Council held on 8 and 9 June , demanding the release of Xanana Gusmão and all other political prisoners , a visit by the troika to East Timor and an immediate resumption of the discussions under the auspices of the United Nations .
I now come to the question raised about Chad .
The Commission is following with some concern developments in the human rights situation in that country .
The arrests of Mr Yorongar and some journalists , in particular , have been monitored closely .
A delegation adviser is attending the courtroom in which the trials are being held .
According to the latest information , the two accused journalists have been released and the position of Mr Yorongar is now being examined in the light of comments his lawyers have formulated regarding the irregular nature of the waiving of his parliamentary immunity .
More generally , the Commission is investigating the possibility of planning and implementing specific actions to promote respect for human rights in this country .
In addition , with regard to concerns about security problems in the south of the country , according to our information , following the agreement reached between the parties early last May , there was nothing serious to report .
Hence , military activities seem to have been suspended while negotiations continue .
I now come to Pakistan .
The Commission is aware of the problems of harassment that the devotees of other faiths impose regularly on Christian religious minorities in particular .
The Commission , through the mediation of its delegation in Islamabad , and the Member States represented in Pakistan are examining these matters close at hand and investigating particular incidents with the responsible authorities in that country .
Freedom of worship is guaranteed by Article 20 of the Pakistani constitution and by Article 1 of the cooperation agreement between the European Community and Pakistan , which was signed on 22 April 1998 and contains the following statement : " the respect for democratic principles and human rights , as defined in the universal declaration on human rights , underlies the domestic and foreign policies of the Community and the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and constitute a vital element of this agreement ' .
The Commission will continue to maintain vigilance regarding all matters relating to human rights .
Through its development aid programmes it will provide aid for the poorest and most underprivileged populations in Pakistan .
I now come to the last question concerning Guinea Bissau .
The European Commission shares the comments contained in the motions for resolution tabled by the European Parliament .
The Commission is monitoring attentively developments in Guinea Bissau and is aware of the difficulties confronted by the civilian population at the moment , due to the lack of food , medicine and water .
The Commission and its Humanitarian Office gather information from various humanitarian organizations serving in the field to enable them to offer an efficient and speedy humanitarian response to displaced populations .
The European Commission supports the mediation efforts initiated by individual Member States and regional leaders and appeals to the parties in conflict to negotiate a final cease-fire .
The European Commission is ready to resume cooperation with Guinea Bissau as soon as the country returns to the path of democracy .
Thank you , Commissioner Cresson .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the following six motions for resolutions :
B4-0599 / 98 by Mr Oostlander and Mrs Lenz , on behalf of the EVP Group , on the International Criminal Court ; -B4-0606 / 98 by Mr de Vries , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the International Criminal Court ; -B4-0625 / 98 by Mr Swoboda and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the International Criminal Court ; -B4-0639 / 98 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the V Group , on the International Criminal Court ; -B4-0648 / 98 by Mr Dell 'Alba and others , on behalf of the ARE Group , on the International Criminal Court ; -B4-0673 / 98 by Mr Puerta and others on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the International Criminal Court .
Madam President , each time initiatives such as this are on the agenda , we are reminded of the fact that it all started with a flight from responsibility by certain Member States at the time the issue of Yugoslavia was on the agenda .
An international court of law was then proposed for Yugoslavia - it was pure window dressing . Nobody expected much of it , except the late Member , Alexander Langers , who at that time had compiled an excellent report on the matter .
We have made progress since then , thanks to the serious commitment by judges and public prosecutors who have been involved from the time of the Yugoslav court , and we are now so far that we are even preparing to set up a general international criminal tribunal .
This is more than anyone had expected , in my opinion .
Our progress is a slap in the face for all Realpolitik which believes that morality and justice are irrelevant in foreign policy .
This is basically why the whole area of foreign policy is so far removed from the citizens , who experience justice and morality in their daily lives .
This court brings to our attention that the borderline between conducting Realpolitik and war crimes is often and easily transgressed .
The establishment of this court is a great preventative measure . It will make government leaders and ministers realize that such a Realpolitik motive does not lead them far and that they may be convicted if they continue on that track .
It is good that this court will be able to guarantee its independence . This will make it impossible , for example , for veto carriers in the Security Council to get off scot-free per definition .
The Amsterdam Treaty sets a good example in this respect in that it reminds all Member States that the legal order must be safeguarded , otherwise they can expect sanctions .
The offer by the Dutch government to establish the Criminal Tribunal in The Hague is , of course , admirable .
It is also practical , due to the presence of other international courts of justice .
I hope , however , that this will lead the Dutch government to realize that this offer also commits it not to continue further with the national hobby of navel contemplation , but to become the real standardbearer of the tradition of Hugo de Groot , and thus keep in mind its international responsibilities .
Our Group is delighted to support the resolution , including both amendments submitted by Mr De Vries .
Madam President , the Liberals in Europe are deeply engaged in trying to get a permanent International Court of Justice for War Crimes established .
We are happy to see that the matter has advanced as far as it has .
We do not understand why the majority of this House do not share our view on two points .
We think that all war crimes should be judged equally , regardless of whether they have been committed in a civil war or in a conflict between two states .
Why does the Chamber not wish to support that ?
We think that the prosecutor should have a natural right to decide whether or not to instigate a prosecution .
If he or she has the same material and knows that he or she faces a criminal , it is then in all normal legal practice the duty of that prosecutor to commence prosecution .
Why does the majority of this House not want to support the Liberals ' demand in this respect ?
I call upon those who speak after me to give a satisfactory answer to that question .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , I have here a card which affords me admission , as a member of the delegation from Senegal , to the FAO buildings where the diplomatic conference is being held concerning the institution of the International Court of Justice .
I am grateful to Mr Jacques Baudin , Minister of Justice and Head of the Senegal delegation , for bestowing such an honour and rendering such a service on my behalf .
However , neither the Commission nor the Council have allowed observers to attend this conference , other than those from this Parliament .
This is a most serious precedent that I would like to bring to the attention of my colleagues .
Apparently , I am told , the Council of Ministers , at the instigation of the Commission , would not have allowed us to sit for three days in Rome to witness the commitment which this Parliament continually trumpets in favour of the Court : we adopted a resolution three months ago ; there is a group known as the Amici Curiae with a fellowship of more than 60 members ; we have drawn up budget headings ; we have always supported the efforts of the Commission and the Council .
Well , it seems , we cannot go to Rome , the capital of a Member State , because the issue relates to the second and third pillars !
This is what I judge to be the gravity of the situation .
I hope that this Parliament will be able to take this into account during the three-way discussions and all our negotiations and inter-institutional contacts , because this seems to me to be a very , very serious precedent in which , I believe , the Commission has played no small part .
On a rhetorical note , then , a matter that seems to me to be important .
With regard to the underlying principles , of course , we must support this resolution .
It is important that the Court be set up in Rome .
We must support the amendments of the liberal group , especially that dealing with the jurisdiction of the Court in internal conflicts which is greatly disputed by the Arab countries and certain Asian countries , who would like to oppose it , whereas those conflicts are an integral part of the Geneva Convention and must be included in the jurisdiction of the Court .
The Court must be independent and effective : this is the task and the commitment of the Union .
Frankly , we might have spared ourselves this blunder .
Madam President , the preamble to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , approved 50 years ago , stated amongst other things that disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in acts which have outraged the conscience of mankind .
Now , finally , the Rome Diplomatic Conference is taking place to establish a permanent International Criminal Court .
Given this historic opportunity to provide ourselves with an institution capable of punishing these outrageous acts which are still being carried out , I read with horror in the press that the OSCE suspects that concentration camps are being established in Europe .
The international community has taken up the challenge of completing its legal system by providing an institutional channel for a universal conscience which revolves around human rights .
The task is difficult because no text has been agreed on .
There is not even a global agreement on the universal competence of the future Court , and in this respect China 's retreat once again into its entrenched arguments of cultural exception is of some concern .
We need the conviction , without any selfishness , of the maximum number of countries ; not only of Western countries , but also of those countries whose conviction is certainly not as yet guaranteed .
It is difficult because the universal history of disgrace has extended the catalogue of crimes over which the Court should have jurisdiction to include sexual crimes against women during times of war , the recruitment of minors , the use of certain types of weapons , ethnic cleansing and so on . And , from the legal point of view , too , it is difficult because the statute will have to be the fruit of an effective combination of the Latin and Anglo-Saxon legal traditions .
All these difficulties could mean that the debates at the Conference are prolonged endlessly and that the Conference itself is interminable and unproductive , but , faced with these difficulties , there are some positive aspects .
Firstly , the previous unsuccessful experiences demonstrate the need to make sure that things are done properly this time .
The results of the ad hoc tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia are not satisfactory .
The reality of what has happened in Cambodia , Argentina and Chile for example , and what is happening in Kosovo at the moment , clearly demonstrates for us the need to establish a permanent and effective criminal jurisdiction which will overcome the errors made in the past .
Secondly , the project can rely on social backing .
The mobilization of non-governmental organizations has translated the International Law Commission 's draft statute for a court to street level , and it has been converted into an unavoidable demand .
The 800 NGOs represented in Rome keep the flame of civil society lit ; its mere presence serves to make the authorities aware that they are defending , on the basis of populism and demagogy , a concept of national sovereignty which at times is obsolete , one that does not have the support of its people .
Therefore , we Socialists , who believe that there can be no peace without justice , consider the success of this Rome Conference to be a duty , and we support this resolution and the two amendments that have been tabled .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , since the Nuremberg Tribunal first began its work it has been clear that , as part of the new international legal system which had to be created after the two World Wars , there was also a need for a court where the offences of state criminals could be prosecuted , tried and if need be punished .
However , it is only now that we have taken steps to turn this court from an ad-hoc initiative into a permanent institution .
I am extremely delighted , and it is a great satisfaction to me , to see from the text of the resolutions , especially the joint resolution , that there is unanimity in this Parliament over three central issues .
Firstly , the prosecutor 's independence , both from the Security Council and from the national courts , which finds expression in the definition of the core crimes under the new international penal code and the relationship of this International Criminal Court with the United Nations .
This relationship cannot , of course , mean subordination to the Security Council .
Let us hope that this initiative on the part of this House may help to make this century not just the century of state crime , of the destruction of law organized and executed by organs of the state , but also a century of legal regeneration .
Madam President , I believe that from now on we should support primarily the international coalition of more than 800 non-governmental organizations which , in a true exercise of civic diplomacy , has managed to ensure that the governments sit down to negotiate the creation of an International Criminal Court .
It is an International Criminal Court which will naturally perform an effective role of preventive diplomacy in that firstly , it will be fully independent of the United Nations Security Council , secondly , it will have a prosecutor who can carry out investigations and present indictments on his own initiative and thirdly , it will have inherent , universal jurisdiction .
It is regrettable that certain countries , such as the United States , are set on spoiling the results of the Diplomatic Conference which is taking place in Rome .
However , it would be even more regrettable if certain Member States of the European Union , ignoring public opinion , were to join with those efforts of the North American government .
We have already had a negative element in the fact that the Union has not held a common position , in accordance with the Treaty , regarding this Diplomatic Conference .
Parliament should have been present at that Conference , as Mr Dell 'Alba has said .
To conclude , I want to say to Mr Cars that he has our support for the amendments he has tabled because they are aimed at ensuring that the International Criminal Court becomes an effective reality .
Madam President , we have already said on many occasions that our planet needs an International Criminal Court capable of putting an end to the impunity of those who turn the civil population into an object to be destroyed and who use torture and mass rape as weapons of war . It should also be capable of promoting forgiveness and reconciliation among peoples through the exercise of justice .
That is why we have set our hopes on the Rome Conference .
We know , however , that there are still many obstacles which need to be overcome in order to reach agreements , particularly in matters relating to its independence and jurisdiction .
Therefore , it is fitting that this Parliament let its voice be heard once more , calling , on this occasion , on the Member States of the European Union and on the Commission to support the approaches that this Parliament has repeatedly defended .
However , it is also fitting that Parliament let its voice be heard - it is essential that it let it be heard - in order to protest and express regret , as previous speakers have done , at the fact that Parliament will be the great absentee from this Conference . Indeed , since the beginning , we had asked that we be permitted to consider a formula that would allow us to be represented and to take up the place we deserve due to the determination we have shown over the years in favour of this Court and in favour of international justice for peace .
Mr President , the National Alliance Group will vote in favour of the proposal for a joint resolution to appoint an International Tribunal for War Crimes .
It goes without saying that this is a historic opportunity , but it is a decision that comes late and that is certainly not enough to rehabilitate a Europe whose image has been that of an ostrich with its head in the sand and which so far has refused to take any concrete initiative not only to prevent the occurrence on its own territory of genocides , crimes against humanity and war crimes but also to condemn and punish with an unrelentingly will the authors , direct and indirect , of such crimes .
Strangely , Europe seems to have wanted to stop the clock of history at Nuremberg , as if since then European soil has not absorbed the innocent blood of hundreds of thousands of victims - women , children , civilians - while many of those responsible continue to run free and unpunished , even receiving honours and respect , including from that official Europe which has so far limited itself to occasional verbal condemnations .
It is our hope that the diplomatic Conference in Rome , convened with the purpose of appointing an International Tribunal for War Crimes , will be the last step towards this fundamental , albeit late , achievement .
We will have to neutralize and repel any attempts to obstruct this by those who have an interest in maintaining the status quo , even if we object to the absence of the European Parliament which could have had an important , leading role in this conference .
It is also our hope that the appointment of the Criminal Tribunal , while representing an effective integration of national legal systems , can be part of a new political context where Europe finally has its own foreign , defence and security policy .
If this priority objective had been pursued with the same tenacity as with the single currency , Europe certainly would have seen , right here on its doorstep , many fewer victims these past few years .
And I am referring to those same innocent victims who are now asking the European Parliament for justice , not revenge .
Ladies and gentlemen Members of this House , the diplomatic conference in Rome is due to close and approve a convention seeking to set up the International Criminal Court .
Since the conference opened just three days ago it is difficult to comment on any of its results .
As you know , the diplomatic conference will continue through to 17 July .
The Member States of the European Union are participating actively in the negotiations to ensure that a convention is adopted that will establish an independent and powerful Court .
The Commission is represented at the conference in Rome by an observer .
On many occasions , she has declared herself in favour of the institution of an independent and effective International Criminal Court .
In a speech to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights on 17 March , the Commission - through Mrs Bonino - stressed the importance of adopting decisions in Rome rather than settling for procedural approaches .
I think we can safely say that this first step which has been taken - and which has been insisted on by a large number of NGOs - is a very important one .
Of course , this is a situation which remains fragile and it is one which we should endeavour to consolidate .
I have taken note of the words expressed by Mr Dell 'Alba and I shall not fail to pass this on to the Commissioner responsible , but it is true that we could doubtless conceive of procedures in which better information and greater transparency might be brought into play .
Thank you , Commissioner Cresson .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the debate on the resolution ( B4-0609 / 98 ) by Mr Bertens and Mrs André-Léonard , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Cambodia .
Madam President , maintaining the status quo in Cambodia is not in the interest of anyone .
The European Parliament demands that Cambodia comply with the Paris agreements , in other words the conditions which that country has itself endorsed : no more , no less .
These conditions include the holding of free elections this year , the setting up of an electoral register and the ability of political parties to participate in the democratic process , rather than be excluded .
In saying this , I am simply repeating the comments I was able to make before the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , which appointed me as draftsman of an opinion , regarding a new generation agreement between the European Union and Cambodia .
We have already suspended work in this direction , until Cambodia is ready to comply with the principle it endorsed itself in the Paris agreements .
We are not asking this country to do anything impossible , we are simply reminding them of the conditions which , just a short time ago , opened up such encouraging prospects .
It is now the turn of Cambodia to restore the former situation .
The same comment applies with regard to support in the democratic process , in other words the free elections scheduled for this year .
The Commission is urged to block the funds until the conditions for free elections , worthy of the name , are met .
Mr President , I have been appointed as the EU 's special envoy to the forthcoming Cambodian elections .
This is not only an honour for me but also for the European Parliament .
I am naturally anxious that these elections should be a constructive step towards democracy in that country and , certainly , they should not be a meaningless gesture on the part of Hun Sen 's regime .
I am unlikely to be complacent since I will ultimately have the responsibility to give the EU 's position on that election .
But what we must remember is that , whatever the current political situation in Cambodia , this is the first election to be called by Cambodia : it is not an internationally enforced initiative but one that came from Cambodia itself .
It is this factor that we in this House have to recognize ; and we , as part of the international community - the European Union - have been asked to lend the essential support that election needs .
We are there to ensure an effective registration process , to rigorously monitor the vote , and to give all political parties access to the media .
Eighty per cent of voters have already registered and fifteen long-term observers are already in place .
Eighty short-term observers from the EU and eighty-five bilaterally from Member States will be deployed throughout the whole of Cambodia .
Further observers offering technical assistance will come from other states .
The UNDP is coordinating technical assistance and the UN election assistance secretariat is coordinating the observation team .
We have already negotiated access for the media , and EU media experts have been put in position to ensure that takes place .
These are achievements .
But I am very conscious that we have a long way to go .
The EU is not monitoring these elections for the purpose of rubber-stamping the process : we are there to ensure that it is a free and fair election .
If that is not the case , then it will be our duty to say so , and I will not hesitate to do just that .
As Derek Fatchett , Minister of State at the Foreign Office , said last week in the UK parliament : it will be a fine judgement we will have to make , and one that the EU must be prepared to make .
I , for one , will be prepared to make that judgement , and I intend to lead a team of observers committed to ensuring that the European Union takes an independent and fair position on these elections .
Madam President , Commissioner Cresson , I think that the urgent and topical debate here is possibly our last chance to reconsider exactly the financial investment being made by the European Union in the Cambodian elections , which after all amounts to almost ECU 10 million , and to look at the conditions under which this money is to be used .
When I read from the list of investments made , for example , that a large part has been used to support and educate journalists in the region of Cambodia and in the country itself , then I have to say - as someone who knows something about the situation - that this is tremendously difficult because the latest news is that in the last state purge the final opposition journalists were murdered and there are currently only journalists there who are loyal to the government .
I am very glad to hear Mrs Kinnock say that there are experts from our side there , too , trying to sort out the media .
However , I have certain doubts about this , and we should really consider the exact nature of our involvement in this area .
I think another point requires careful consideration too , and that is our collaboration with the United States of America .
The latter have taken a clear stance on their involvement in the Cambodian elections and have adopted a very distanced attitude to them .
They are no doubt interested , like us , in a genuine democratic process , and I think in this case we should collaborate with them and agree a common position .
Madam President , the Union is prepared to make a considerable contribution , not only to the elections but also to democracy in Cambodia , as mentioned by Mr Habsburg .
This also applied to the elections in 1993 when I was part of a delegation of Euros led by Mr Cheysson .
It also applies at present and I would say to Mrs Glenys Kinnock : good luck , see you in the headlines , I hope .
In return we are entitled to demand something from the Cambodian rulers . Elections are only meaningful when they result in a credible authority .
The Union should only support these elections if , at the very minimum , conditions for holding genuinely democratic elections are met .
To be honest , these conditions are not yet in place in Cambodia . The reason is not the practical difficulties in the country ; the impossibility of democratic elections is currently being caused by the unsympathetic attitude of Hun Sen , who does not comply with the Paris agreements .
Mr Goerens has already mentioned this .
The Union should be quite explicit .
The elections on 26 July can only be recognised if a minimum number of conditions are met .
The Commission must not contribute to fraudulent elections .
Otherwise Hun Sen would wrongly be accorded legitimacy . Sending a delegation of observers and even ECU 10 000 does not mean that we also sanction the policy .
Nevertheless , I hope the result will be a good one .
Ladies and gentlemen Members of this House , the European Union has condemned the ousting by force of the Prime Minister , Prince Ranariddh and the violence perpetrated in July 1997 .
The action in support of the electoral process , decided by joint agreement between the Commission and Member States and amounting to ECU 10.4m , seeks - subject to strict conditions - to provide the Cambodian government with the resources required to institute successfully an electoral process which , on this occasion , will be implemented under the sole responsibility of the Cambodian people , with the support of the international community .
If the conditions of freedom and impartiality required are not complied with , the European Commission reserves the right to suspend its aid after formal consultation with the Member States , based on the terms of the financing agreement signed in Phnom Penh on 16 January 1998 .
The diplomatic action by the European Union , initiated in conjunction with the initiatives launched by the countries in the " Friends of Cambodia ' group , the ANSEA troika and the United Nations , especially with regard to the observance of human rights , will continue to concentrate on the most appropriate methods of bringing about pluralistic participation in the elections .
In this context , the European Union will remain especially vigilant regarding matters of procedure , the registration of parties , the workings of the constitutional council with regard to the inspection and regular conduct of the elections and the risks of a resurgence of acts of violence against members of the opposition .
Events in recent days , following the trial of Prince Ranariddh , and the granting of a pardon by King Sihanouk , therefore represent crucial stages in the process of assessing the development of the political situation and enabling the international community and European institutions to adopt the appropriate policy guidelines with a view to the forthcoming elections .
Consequently , the next meeting of the " Friends of Cambodia ' , due to take place towards mid-June 1998 in Phnom Penh , must bring to the fore the elements required to enable the international community to determine whether the preparations for elections meet the stipulated conditions , enabling all the political forces involved to express themselves freely in the crucial phase of the electoral campaign .
Mrs Kinnock spoke earlier of the electoral aid device .
I will therefore not raise the matter again .
Long and short-term observation is guaranteed through the provision of 95 observers .
The Member States will appoint , on a bilateral basis , more observers operating under the auspices of the European Union observation device .
Close collaboration with the United Nations at all stages of the organization and progress of the elections is guaranteed in the field by European consultants , operating on the instructions of the departments of the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner Cresson .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5.25 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Votes ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the votes from noon .
Report ( A4-0207 / 98 ) by Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the Communication from the Commission on energy for the future ( renewable sources of energy ) - White Paper for a Community strategy and action plan ( COM ( 97 ) 0599 - C4-0047 / 98 )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , after consulting the various Parliamentary groups - and if it is not inconvenient - I would like to propose orally that Amendment No 3 to paragraph 3 of this joint resolution be voted on firstly as an addition to paragraph 3 and secondly that we only vote on the section from the beginning , which states : " ... calls on the governments of Lebanon , Syria and Israel ... ' up to the first reference to the Middle East . In other words , we should vote on it as an addition and we should vote only on the following part of the amendment : " ... calls on the governments of Lebanon , Syria and Israel to revive and resume the peace negotiations at the point they had reached when they were broken off and in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the United Nations Security Council and the principles laid down at the Madrid Conference on the Middle East ' .
So we would then leave out the rest of the text .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I would like to ask whether the Rules of Procedure of this Parliament allow us to define new borders in Europe , because this is what this paragraph is about .
Parliament in its infinite wisdom has defined a new border in Europe .
Mr Sakellariou , that was a speech on the debate and this is now closed .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
We share the opinion of Mr Kohl and Mr Chirac that far too many decisions which could have been reached on a national level have now been transferred to the EU .
Like the two persons mentioned above , we regard it as important that the principle of subsidiarity be given real meaning .
This report deals with the development of renewable sources of energy in far too detailed a manner .
It becomes somewhat absurd when it suggests that the sign ' golden sun ' be handed out to various holiday resorts and such like in order to encourage the use of renewable sources of energy .
Is it really the EU 's task to deal with such matters ?
It is our opinion that energy policies are to be dealt with at national level .
There is nothing to be gained from making policy on energy at supranational level .
We therefore vote against this report .
My vote in favour of the Rothe report on renewable energy is based on a national and regional reference framework , which I take the opportunity to emphasize .
It will only be possible in practice to achieve the reduction in CO2 emissions fixed at the Rio Summit , and to comply with the obligations we assumed at Kyoto , if every Member State operates a rational energy management scheme and encourages the production of renewable energy , which in the European Union represents only 1.3 % of the total energy produced ( 5.3 % if we add hydro-electric power ) with figures of 6 % and 15.7 % ( with hydro-electric power ) respectively for Portugal .
The European Union proposes to increase its overall percentage of renewable energy , including hydro-electric power , from 5.3 % to 15 % by 2010 .
This target will only be achieved with new support schemes for renewable solar , wind , bio-mass and photovoltaic energy sources - hence the importance of the support fund called for by the majority of Members of the European Parliament .
In the Algarve region , with solar radiation between 1782 KwH / m ² ( Sagres ) and 1896 KwH / m ² ( Tavira ) and an annual sunshine total of 2800 to 3100 hours , a privileged area for wind-generated power - between Rogil and Sagres - and enormous potential for biomass production , particularly associated with pig-farming and forestry , in the case of Monchique , renewable energy sources represent a policy option that should be exploited .
Hence the importance of the initiatives in that direction that have been launched by the European Union , the Government , local authorities and the community in general .
May I first of all commend my colleague Mechtild Rothe for the quality of her work and her sense of realism .
I also wish to say that I will be voting in favour of the motion .
I am one of those who openly welcomed the intentions of the Kyoto summit .
Now we have to take steps to make credible the good intentions expressed at this conference .
Like Mrs Rothe , I am of the opinion that the objective set by the Commission with regard to renewable energy sources is the minimum and that we should seek details of the plans and strategies of the Member States and , in particular , determine their willingness to comply with the Commission requirements .
I also share the concern of my colleague on the subject of the efforts we need to make in the field of solar energy and agricultural-based alternative energy sources .
With regard to the latter , we must check their ecological effects which , dare we say , has not always been the case .
So , in view of the urgency of the situation , both in environmental terms and with regard to the increasing scarcity in the medium and long term of renewable energy sources , we need to envisage steps that encourage the participation of public and private operators engaged in this essential and vital sector .
Finally , I will close my address regarding the political nature of this proposal by saying that in terms of political ecology , the European Union should also establish itself as a model for the rest of the world .
This does not mean setting itself up as a tutor , but rather showing that Europe states its resolve and acts for the benefit of all , and seeks to find solutions for future generations .
I am coming close to believing that our survival depends on it .
During the past few years , it has become apparent that non-renewable sources of energy cannot alone meet our future needs in a satisfactory manner .
Both Member State governments and other groups within the EU have raised questions concerning the continued availability of fossil fuels and the finite nature of the supply of resources such as oil .
Furthermore , unchecked consumption of non-renewable energy can directly and indirectly contribute to environmental problems like global warming , air pollution and other potentially disastrous scenarios .
Because of these reasons , I support the development of renewable sources of energy within an EU framework .
The proposal to double the rate of total energy consumption from renewables by the year 2010 can have a considerable impact on the future direction of EU energy policy .
The more our dependence on non-renewable energy sources such as fossil fuels is diminished , the closer we are to creating a sustainable and environmentally friendly energy programme .
Therefore , I welcome this proposal to increase our investment in renewable energy .
The need to steer economic development onto a path that does not endanger future generations is becoming more and more apparent to everyone .
The White Paper we have to discuss today is further proof of this .
Fossil fuels , the source of the extraordinary economic and industrial development of our societies over the past one hundred and fifty years , now pose an acknowledged risk for mankind , now that their unbridled use and the exponential production of CO2 are likely to alter our climate appreciably in the coming decades .
Whence the importance of promoting renewable energy sources by lending all the support necessary to assist their breakthrough into the market , in the context of what the White Paper calls the " lift-off campaign ' .
From this standpoint , I am pleased to point out that despite its incompatibility with the proposed reforms of the CAP in Agenda 2000 , the notion of tripling the use of biomass energy sources is intended to provide some sort of response to those European farmers who are worried about their future and are now thinking about possible reconversion .
With regard to the possible exploitation of the biomass , there is certainly one path we should explore further , since it lies at the crossroads between a number of priority concerns within the European Union : stable development , the common agricultural policy and enlargement .
That said , our rapporteur has wisely pointed to the need , raised many times in this Chamber , for Community-based taxation on non-renewable energy .
Indeed , there might be a CO2 tax one day , let us hope so !
To conclude , I would also like to express my conviction that the emergence of renewable energy sources and the unfettered deployment of a genuine programme of stable development together constitute a source for jobs of all types and all grades .
I therefore unreservedly declare my support for the White Paper , as amended by the motion for resolution as tabled .
I am urging the European Commission and the European Council to coordinate their efforts in a structured and streamlined manner so that a long-term energy policy can be formed which enhances Irish and European agricultural and rural development policies .
This should be brought to fruition as negotiations take place between the national Member States and the EU on the future of the common agricultural policy post-2000 .
It is clear that renewable energies continue to play a more direct role in many businesses and industries in our society .
We should recognize that the use of renewable energy as an agricultural development also offers great potential .
If renewable energies are used for agricultural and rural development in an environmentally friendly manner , there is great potential for the creation of sustainable jobs as a direct consequence of maximizing the use of our land resource .
We cannot deny that alternative energy programmes based on the proper use of renewable energy offer innovative ways for farmers to make money from their land .
This should come about as the inevitable reform of the common agricultural policy highlights the importance of producing non-food crops .
If we are serious about enhancing rural development measures and protecting the maximum number of family farms on our land then we must put in place a coordinated renewable energy policy which will assist in enhancing Irish agriculture and creating employment in rural areas .
It is stated that a positive impact of introducing comprehensive renewable energy programmes is the reduction of CO2 emissions , which should fall by 402 million tonnes per year .
Within the EU , renewable sources currently account for 6 % of total energy consumption .
This figure is simply too low and substantial investment will be needed if wholesale expansion in this sector is to occur .
The Rothe report is quite agreeable in many respects .
However , there are several problems embodied in its proposals .
First of all , its lack of realism in relation to the EU internal energy market .
The solution the report outlines with regard to the internal market is an energy-related tax model set by the EU .
I cannot endorse this solution .
Apart from the fact that I am an opponent of EU taxation , an energy-related tax model would have precious little chance of being implemented at EU level , since industry would submit that it cannot afford such escalating expenses .
At best , this factor would mean that the renewable energy sector would be given an increase in its tax-funded EU and national subsidies .
At the same time , major energy users could continue to purchase cheap coal and atomic energy in the liberalized EU energy market .
Thus , there would be little incentive for them to implement energy-saving measures .
The only prospect of implementing the positive intentions of the Rothe report in the area of energy and the environment is to go the way of allowing Member States to determine and implement national objectives in the area of energy .
It is useless for an EU country to require its energy producers to produce a certain amount of energy by means of renewable energy sources while the largest energy users in that country are free to import cheap energy from abroad - that is tantamount to undermining national producers financially .
For this reason I cannot support the Rothe report .
The report contains a good proposal on an overall plan of action to double the renewable energy share of the energy consumption .
Bio-energy , solar power and wind power must form the backbone of this .
Atomic power will have to be phased out .
Overall objectives on a European Union level and other levels , such as United Nations , is a good thing , but policies on energy are and should primarily remain national issues .
It is important that Sweden controls its own natural resources and does not sell off energy and natural resources which may govern Swedish development from outside Sweden .
We have voted for the report , as we share its positive attitude to alternative and renewable sources of energy .
There are , however , also parts of the report that we oppose .
They include the demands for a common policy on taxation , a common policy on forestry and the demand that a special chapter in the Treaty be devoted to energy .
Situation in the Middle East
There is no doubt that there are various areas of conflict in the Mediterranean which urgently require a path towards peace , including Algeria , Palestine , Israel and so on .
Supporting , encouraging and being concerned about the development of the peace process in the Middle East is not a sufficient reason to manipulate the facts or to " put one 's own interests first ' .
Many of us and many others too need to reflect on the road we have travelled , on the reasons for the backward movement and on the apparent incompatibility and autism of those currently in power .
Consideration must also be given to the tangible result of the financial support provided by the European Union , the status of Palestine , and the democratic control of its institutions and of the use made of the economic aid received .
We must talk to Jordan ; we must look for solutions to the European incompetence regarding Algeria ; we must understand Islam better ; we must promote direct dialogue with the population and , perhaps , initiate processes to follow on from this .
I already declared this when President Rabin came to Brussels .
It is not possible for that tragedy not to have served any purpose ; similarly , we cannot allow a situation whereby European funds do not benefit the public .
It would be inexplicable and alarming if the West Bank and Gaza were to continue in the same social and economic situation in which they currently find themselves .
In conclusion , then , all of us must think things over once again .
The Austrian Freedom Party is of the opinion that the agreement on agricultural trade needs to be prepared carefully , but enlargement towards the east should be rejected at the present time on the grounds of inadequate planning .
That is why the FPÖ is abstaining with respect to paragraph 10 .
With regard to the common resolution on the WTO which has just been adopted , I note that Parliament , which was generally and oppressively enthusiastic at the time of the signature of the Marrakech agreement , has gradually become aware of its extremely serious negative consequences for European countries , which a few of us denounced at the time .
Mr Rocard himself , at the last meeting of the ACP-EU joint assembly , distanced himself from it , speaking of the Marrakech Treaty as a poorly negotiated agreement , signed in haste , with serious shortcomings , which it would be necessary renegotiate at least in part .
This belated lucidity makes it difficult to improve a treaty adopted by most members of the international community . It is apparent in the text of this resolution which shows a marked change of tone on behalf of Parliament , which appears to have discovered that the WTO is systematically calling into question the main provisions of current external commercial policy .
How can we protect the European cultural exception against WTO mechanisms ?
How can we protect European development aid policies ?
How can we prevent unbridled international competition from systematically favouring producers who are the least respectful of indispensable social and environmental standards ?
The first arbitration decisions by WTO panels do nothing to reassure us in this respect .
What we see in operation is the crude logic of the system the Commission joined in Marrakech and which it helped to develop .
My group has supported most of the amendments which emphasized the need to defend regional commercial preferences as instruments of development .
The WTO wants to get rid of these , on the pretext that they represent an unacceptable violation of the principle of commercial non-discrimination and that they introduce distortions of competition .
The evidence of four Lomé Conventions refutes that theory .
My group has also supported the various amendments which denounce the leniency of the policies adopted by Community institutions within the WTO , making concession after concession without any significant returns .
Secchi report ( A4-0228 / 98 )
Madam President , as crucial as it is to insist on common principles of taxation in a single market , it is as vital , however , to adopt a clear position against the dominant tendency in the States of the European Union towards creeping tax increases .
For example , the benefit derived from closing tax loopholes , as we so nicely term them , will only be slight if sufficiently attractive financial centres exist simultaneously throughout the world .
In fact , mobile risk capital will escape from Europe while its honest and hard-working citizens continue to be fleeced of their savings .
The enormous increase in risk capital can be attributed to , among other things , the high taxation of money entering the production process .
It is not the tax oases that have a distorting effect on the internal market , but rather the excessively high corporation taxes and excise duties .
I have spoken out against parts of the report because it skirts around this very real problem .
We have countries in the present Union where the level of taxation is approaching the 50 % mark .
Our clear aim therefore must be an obvious reduction in this tax burden .
There is the principle here that , within the meaning of subsidiarity , the State does not have the right to increase the tax burden and then to re-distribute gifts to its citizens indirectly by way of an expensive bureaucracy .
In this context one should recollect the American economist Arthur Laffer , who proved that above a taxation level of 25 % concealment of income increases progressively .
The black economy is a logical consequence of this .
Madam President , I want to point out that this report basically accepts the whole idea of globalization , the internal market , absolute free trade and the free movement of capital .
We are trying to work with the problems that all this creates .
We need to reintroduce some level of capital control and not turn ourselves into a completely open space for multinationals , which is what Europe is being turned into .
With the creation of the single market it is now basically up to Brussels to control everything : indirect taxation , national budgets , interest rates and corporate tax .
Next it will be income tax and fiscal harmonization .
I have serious problems with all of this , and think we are taking the wrong approach .
We cannot support the Secchi report because it paves the way for fiscal harmonization which would divert tax money from Denmark .
Conversely , we believe it is sensible to co-ordinate rates of taxation between Member States , but only by way of minimum regulation and not harmonization .
There is no such thing as harmful tax competition in the EU .
The idea behind the single market was to encourage competition by removing barriers to the free movement of goods , services , money and people .
The results have been clearly beneficial .
So if free competition is beneficial in these other fields , why should it be harmful in tax ?
The European Commission 's communication ' A package to tackle harmful tax competition in the European Union ' is the wrong prescription for a non-existent malady .
Some Member States complain about the low level of Irish Corporation Tax , about the lack of a Withholding Tax in Luxembourg and about the zero social charges ( taxes on jobs ) in Denmark .
Some even complain about the unfairness of the relatively low level of income tax in the UK ( they overlook the increased tax burden on UK citizens since the election of a Labour Government ) .
You never hear the British complaining about the low level of excise duties in France , Spain , Italy and Portugal though it could be argued that low taxes on alcohol and tobacco are harmful - principally to the health of our fellow citizens .
For me , the correct analysis of tax competition is not that some countries have too low taxes .
It is that the countries who complain loudest , notably France and Germany , have too high taxes .
As a British Member of the European Parliament , I would like to see the tax burden reduced in those countries to British levels .
High taxes and ' social charges ' destroy jobs .
Much as I appreciate the rapporteur 's work , I , with my colleagues in the British section of the EPP Group , will be voting against the report .
The motion for resolution we now have to discuss raises a fundamental question regarding the future of the single market and , more generally , the European Union as a whole .
Introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 , in eleven of the fifteen Member States , actually calls for greater coordination of policies , including those relating to taxation .
This is actually a mandatory path to follow for all those who , having raised the matter of unemployment and jobs in Europe unambiguously , consider it essential to ease employment taxation .
Like most of us , I consider that the lack of tax harmonization between the Member States has led them into a tax competition that is potentially harmful for all , to the extent that it has resulted in significant losses of tax revenue for public authorities who are otherwise occupied rebalancing their budgets . And this is at the cost of sacrifices that are sometimes difficult for populations to bear .
It is therefore with some satisfaction that we note the adoption by the Council of a resolution on a good conduct code in terms of company taxation and we have carefully observed the series of proposals formulated by the Commission in terms of tax harmonization .
It must be said that the proposal by the Commission and the agreement reached within the Ecofin Council on a community solution governing the matter of taxation on savings income paid by the Member States to individuals living in another State are particularly heartening for a Belgian politician like myself .
In our opinion , all of these measures should be regarded as the first steps on the path to further progress .
This is especially so in the area of indirect taxation , but also with regard to the taxation of non-renewable energy sources or , indeed , to tax definitions .
Clearly , tax harmonization should be one of the main objectives for those who wish to proceed on the path towards a federal Europe that is economically prosperous and socially just .
Although as yet far from incomplete , the measures outlined to us today are moving in the right direction .
This is why I support the resolution proposed .
The alignment of taxation systems at European level is a key factor towards the enhancement of the single market .
The Commission proposals and the report by Mr Secchi seek to remove the barriers to satisfactory operation of the single market .
The report states - rightly , in my opinion - that it is important to harmonize certain elements in our taxation systems .
Two arguments militate in favour of improved coordination of our taxation systems : firstly , the distortions that might arise in different taxation systems concerning the optimum allocation of funds and investment , whether from financial or production sources , within the European fold ; secondly , the drying up of some tax revenues , which could pose very serious budgetary problems for certain Member States .
If a degree of tax competition is to be maintained - because this is useful in order to impose certain disciplines on states - it must be conducted within the framework of the tax rules , especially with regard to taxation on savings and cross-border taxation .
This is the view adopted by the Secchi report and I can only approve it .
However , it is perhaps regrettable that the Commission and the Secchi report do not seem to have put forward any proposal regarding certain elements of direct corporate taxation , such as the way the rate for corporate taxation is calculated .
Apart from this reservation , I am pleased to note the proposals for a good-conduct code and minimum deductions at source with regard to the taxation of savings by European non-residents in a Member State .
However , the rate of deduction at source must not be so high that it discourages saving or results in relocations outside of Europe .
I am also pleased to note the measures designed to eliminate deductions at source on cross-border payments of interest and dues to companies which create distortions that are harmful to growth and jobs .
In the field of relations within a group of companies , we should also go even further , especially in terms of calculating corporate tax in a consolidated way at European level .
For all the reasons set out above , I therefore vote for Mr Secchi 's report .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the Secchi report on tackling harmful tax competition in the EU .
We have elected to vote in favour of the report because :
it places positive emphasis on the Council 's adoption of a code of conduct for company taxation and establishment of a code of conduct group to evaluate national taxation measures that are harmful to the interests of the Community.-it refers to the fact that differences in systems and levels of taxation based on social or environmental factors and aspects of health and consumer protection are legitimate.-it recognizes a need to achieve a common minimum level of taxation in areas where tax competition results in harmful conduct.-it emphasizes the need for the code of conduct to be carefully adhered to in company taxation.However , the Danish Social Democrats cannot agree with the section of the report dealing with fiscal harmonization .
The fiscal structures of Member States are widely divergent , each having different ways of protecting its citizens .
Thus , bringing taxes more into line is unacceptable .
However , we can endorse common minimum levels , inter alia with regard to company taxation and capital gains tax .
At the recent summit in Luxembourg , the Heads of State and government reached agreement on a code of conduct relating to tax competition which seeks gradually to do away with harmful practices in this area .
On that occasion , Luxembourg stressed the fact that any action relating to taxation on capital income should be offset by a similar action with regard to corporate taxation .
Luxembourg was of the opinion that this should be a binding commitment imposed by a Community directive : tax dumping can only harm European companies and create all types of distortion in the Common Market .
With regard to the range of tax systems prevailing in individual Member States , there is no reason to change it now .
In truth , tax competition can be an asset when it is practised between tax systems : some are more efficient and lower tax rates can be applied , whereas others must offset a lesser degree of efficiency by imposing higher taxes .
The Commission proposals regarding corporate taxation signal an initial step forward in the right direction towards better coordination of tax policies .
The procedure is acceptable since it consists of a package of measures rather than isolated proposals .
The scope for action remains huge and there is still a great deal to be done before taxation is no longer a barrier to the four freedoms .
The Secchi report encourages Member States to work towards the scrapping of the tax havens that exist within the Union .
Luxembourg is not named specifically , but there is no doubt that it is targeted , although all the Member States try to attract business with enticing tax exemptions ; although all the Member States attract private investors with tax arrangements that favour non-residents , some Member States harbour genuine sanctuaries that are totally deregulated .
For this reason it is wrong to target Luxembourg alone , which has a financial centre that is subject to strict regulations ( on the laundering of money from drug trafficking , for example ) and an efficient tax system that enables it to impose relatively low rates .
Hence any future harmonization of tax policies should encompass all Member States and their dependencies , as well as an immense panoply of tax domains .
Given these comments , I have voted for the Secchi report , in the knowledge that it is simply a parliamentary recommendation and that the final decisions are to be taken unanimously by the governments of the Member States .
We have voted in favour of the sections of the report dealing with banks : their duty to give information , code of conduct , minimum level of business tax and measures against the so called tax havens .
The report does , however , also include harmonisation of taxes on a grand scale .
This encroaches on the prerogative of the national parliament and on citizens ' rights to decide their countries ' taxation policy via the ballot box .
Besides , it is a threat against the countries ' financial stability .
We have , therefore , voted against the report in the final ballot .
This also marks our reservation against the demands , so often recurring in the debate , to abolish consensus in matters of taxation .
In our opinion , such a measure is contrary to the Treaty .
As the rapporteur , Mr Secchi , said , the process of coordinating the European Union 's tax systems according to the commitment made by the Council of Ministers in this regard must be speeded up .
I am in fact firmly convinced that the current distortions and differences in tax systems could thwart the efforts made to achieve economic and monetary union , eliminating the potential advantages and opportunities that the single market can offer in terms of economic development and the gradual reduction of today 's structural unemployment .
If left intact , the current system may actually lead to a gradual loss in the power and sovereignty of individual Member States to tax .
Furthermore , I endorse the composition of the package of anti-competition tax measures which is an effective way to first plan and then implement the entire strategy .
I congratulate the rapporteur and therefore give him my full backing for his report .
Situation in Kosovo
It is a matter of the greatest urgency that the European Union not only condemns Serbia 's actions in Kosovo , but also employs the economic , political and diplomatic methods the Union has at its disposal .
We do , however , object to preparations for a military intervention .
Military action can only be possible after a decision in the UN Security Council .
Yet again this House has adopted a resolution on Kosovo .
Firstly , we should bear in mind that this build-up of resolutions does not seem to have resulted in any lessening of political tension in the region : quite the reverse .
We should also point out that this resolution , like its predecessors , is typified by its absurd dualism , by a frenzied attack on the Yugoslav Federation and Serb Republic , by a single lack of historical perspective in its assessment of the situation in Kosovo and by a serious lack of regard for the local , regional and international consequences of the lavish inducements extended to the Kosovan breakaway militia .
We do not in any way underestimate the democratic shortcomings of the former and existing Yugoslavia , or the excesses of the various nationalist groups confronting each other in this region , or indeed the suffering of the civilian populations taken hostage by these nationalist groups ; we feel compelled to deplore the superficiality and partiality of the positions adopted by the European Parliament .
Guided by the dictates of American diplomacy , under the influence of two EU Member States and under pressure from a powerful parliamentary lobby yearning for the old style of political organization in the Balkans , the European Parliament has , for eight years , declared a sort of political and legal war against one of the signatory States of the United Nations Charter , which should have guaranteed the integrity of its borders .
In total contradiction to that guarantee , we have encouraged the dismantling of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ; we have urged the " friendly ' federated republics to align themselves individually with the European Union ; we have begun the accession process with Slovenia , thereby rewarding its leaders for their self-aggrandizing conduct ; we have raised all those who crafted the partition of Yugoslavia to the rank of allies of the European Union and " democrats ' , sometimes in defiance of the evidence ; we have multiplied sanctions , blockades and embargo procedures and military threats against the Srpska Republic , which stands accused of all the evils committed during the events taking place in that region .
Since that immense destructive effort was apparently not sufficient , it was the territorial integrity - forged by geography and history - of Serbia itself that has been attacked by urging on , even before the end of the war in Bosnia , the Albanian secessionists of Kosovo .
This encouragement has been so excessive and lacking in political intelligence that it has resulted in the marginalization of the moderate leaders of Kosovo who were looking for an even-handed solution in the Yugoslav Federation , for the benefit of the ALK extremists who , weapons in hand , are today struggling for the independence of Kosovo and tomorrow will push for its return to Albania .
The European Union has encouraged Croatian independence , an independence that all Croatian communities have paid for in Vukovar or Knin .
It " guaranteed ' the independence of Bosnia and secured the partition of that region , together with the massacres at Mostar , Ilidza and Srebrenica .
It fuelled the flames in Kosovo and provoked the terrorism of the independenceseekers , resulting in its inevitable and probably disproportionate repression .
Tomorrow , the blindness and partiality of the Union and the United States - let us make no mistake about it - will give rise to widespread frontier disputes in the region - especially those of Albania and Macedonia - as well as serious disorder in Vojvodine and Sandjak .
The Yugoslav Federation was founded on a conventional subjective view of nationality , the very same as that which led to the European integration process .
Instead of promoting this vision of nationality , we have settled the political problems - unquestionably real problems - that existed in the Yugoslav Federation , by applying another conception of nationality , both romantic and objective , which favours ethnic loyalties and which has already inflamed Europe twice in the course of this century .
Through its accumulated errors , the European Union has turned its back on its own history , misunderstood its culture and visited an outrage on its future .
We still have time to avoid committing the irredeemable sin and to reintegrate the Serbian people in the European Community to which it belongs because of its great contribution to the freedom of all peoples in its region .
This is why I intend to vote against the resolution .
Safety of transport of nuclear fuel and waste
We cast our vote for the compromise resolution .
When nuclear waste is transported , all populations of areas affected are put at grave risk .
All local and regional governments of such areas should be entitled to have full details as responsibility for dealing with emergencies would rest upon them .
We object to risks taken in transport to Dounreay for the following reasons :
1 ) the standard of cask carried by the US aircraft was sub-standard ;
2 ) the Dounreay facility is scheduled to close because of safety faults below international safety norms ;
3 ) the UK violated requirements for all reprocessing to be returned to the country of origin ;
4 ) the UK overturned the Nuclear Inspectorate 's ban on transport of nuclear material to Dounreay .
The transport of dangerous waste is a difficult problem which cannot be lightly dismissed .
In this respect , I am in favour of many of the excellent points contained in the common resolution on which we have expressed an opinion .
It would even have been possible to go much further .
However , these good points must be seen in the light of certain criticisms .
From an organic point of view , we are against the interference of supranational structures in environmental policy .
Prevention and increased supervision and control are in fact necessary in the Member States .
But national political authorities must first of all shoulder their responsibilities , so that progress can be made in the right direction .
Furthermore , if certain countries show weaknesses or delays with regard to environmental protection , such shortcomings should be resolved by means of the normal mechanisms of diplomacy and international agreements .
As for the amendment tabled by the PSE , it is surprising on the part of a group which calls itself left-wing and prides itself on defending the weak .
To refuse to allow nuclear waste to travel though densely populated areas , is tantamount to allowing it to travel through less densely populated areas .
That is a scandalous notion .
All populated areas must be avoided .
That is all .
Last but not least : we do not accept the imputations against EDF in this proposal for a resolution .
If any such problems exist , they must be resolved by means of national internal mechanisms .
We have therefore voted against the whole of this resolution .
Herring for industrial purposes - fishery resources in the Baltic , Belts and Sound - industrial fisheries
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0142 / 98 by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation specifying conditions under which herring may be landed for industrial purposes other than direct human consumption ( COM ( 97 ) 0694 - C4-0041 / 98-97 / 0353 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-013 / 98 by Mr Kofoed , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending for the seventh time Regulation ( EEC ) No 1866 / 86 laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the waters of the Baltic Sea , the Belts and the Sound ( COM ( 97 ) 0675 - C4-0017 / 98-97 / 0354 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0201 / 98 by Mr Kindermann , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on industrial fisheries .
Madam President , my report concerns an issue that has been the subject of much public controversy .
I hope we can make clear to the public the reasons for our decision today .
Behind the somewhat complicated title is the issue of permitting the industrial fishing of herring in the Baltic .
So far this has been forbidden in Community waters .
Industrial fishing represents a major line of business .
The industry handles over 30 million tonnes of fish , which corresponds to 30 % of the world catch , at a value of ECU 3 billion .
From this , some 6.5 million tonnes of fish meal and 1.3 million tonnes of fish oil are produced .
Both are high-quality products .
Fish meal is used principally as animal fodder for livestock and fur animals .
Fish oil is used in aquaculture , though you will also find fish oil in margarine and cooking fats .
There do not seem to be any plans to abandon this at the present time since there is no equivalent substitute .
Industrial fishing has been criticized for a number of several reasons .
On the one hand , there is the basic question of living creatures being used only indirectly for human consumption .
In addition , it is no doubt the case that with the removal of fish for industrial purposes the food source for other predators , such as cod , is reduced .
The same applies to sea birds and marine mammals .
More serious still is the problem of the by-catch .
This is particularly acute with the industrial landing of sprats , since these are often found with herrings in a shoal .
Despite all misgivings , we in the Committee on Fisheries have come to the view that industrial fishing is nevertheless acceptable , providing it is carried out in moderation , and in a proper and controlled manner , especially since we would not wish to dispense with its products .
We have been constantly reinforced in this view by the scientists .
What we are concerned with today is a follow-up act from the enlargement of the European Union in 1995 .
Under the Acts of Accession , Finland and Sweden were allowed to catch herring in their waters for industrial purposes since this is the traditional activity there , and without today 's report these two countries would have to discontinue this activity .
The proposal is a means of allowing industrial fishing in the Baltic to continue , while maintaining the ban on the industrial fishing of herring in all other Community waters .
I am in agreement with these two basic principles .
This has created a way for the two countries affected to keep going without disadvantage to their traditional fishing activity .
I particularly welcome this .
The ban on herring fishing for industrial purposes in other Community waters , especially in the North Sea , is important because the herring stock there is in a bad state .
This led in mid-1996 to the quota for landing herring being halved , and in 1997 this drastic action - drastic for the fishermen - was continued .
Since the stocks are already heavily exploited through fishing for human consumption , the herring stock should be not be burdened by the addition of industrial fisheries .
In the Baltic , however , the situation is quite different .
The herring stock here - according to the scientists - is in a very good condition .
In 1997 , moreover , the rate of utilization was only 50 % .
Germany , for example , used only 13 % of its quota .
However , to prevent Baltic stocks declining in a similar manner to North Sea herring , and since theoretically Germany and Denmark could now operate industrial fisheries too , certain areas of the legislative proposal need to be tightened up .
This is what I have suggested .
The regulation should not have unlimited validity , as is being proposed .
By 2003 we will need to review the effects of the regulation and adjust things if need be .
We also want to make a final appeal , in the light of the measures , to industrial fisheries in the Baltic .
The fishing industry here is called upon to be creative and , in the longer term , to enable Baltic herring , for which there is no great market at present , ultimately to be used for human consumption .
I would ask for support for the amendments and the report in its entirety .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal , which has been adopted by the Commission and is already in effect , is a result of negotiations in the Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission .
In principle , I can say that we agree with the measures taken , but I do have a few comments , mainly for future reference .
We are not altogether happy about the proposal being brought before Parliament for consultation at such a late stage .
We should have been finished by Christmas so that we could have had a debate that would have influenced the final Council decision .
I would like to touch on the actual administration of resources in the Baltic Sea .
Firstly , there is the matter of salmon fishing .
I cannot understand why salmon fishing should be curbed as severely as it has been , since we know that juvenile salmon are being released corresponding to a catch of 700 , 000 salmon ; nevertheless , the quota is set at a mere 400 , 000 .
Our own experience in the Baltic Sea is that the salmon are plentiful , but some underlying political decisions are involved .
One gets the impression that - in order to protect so-called wild salmon - the idea is to restrict the catching of any salmon .
In one particular country , Sweden , there is a tourism factor involved , since it is felt that salmon should be caught in the rivers for the benefit of the tourists .
I believe that approach to be flawed .
The basis of this framework has not been proved scientifically .
That is one point .
Another point concerns fishing for cod and herring in the Baltic Sea .
I am extremely concerned about trends in both these stocks and I therefore believe the Commission should consider this very carefully and endeavour to place limits on capacity .
We have proposed restricting horsepower per vessel to eliminate the huge trawlers that come down to the Baltic Sea in the cod season , resulting in over-fishing .
Regarding herring fishing in the Baltic , I am not in favour of fishing in the Baltic for herring destined for use in fish meal because herring stocks are not particularly plentiful in the Baltic ; thus , fishing there for this purpose should be avoided .
I can understand Sweden and Finland fishing for this purpose in the northern part of the Baltic Sea .
But it is my belief that even this affects herring stocks in the rest of the Baltic , so I recommend to the Commission that more caution should be exercised in future with regard to this type of fishing .
I must also stress that more attention should be paid to conservation measures .
A direct ban on fishing should apply during breeding seasons and in waters where the fish are breeding , to allow fish stocks to replenish freely .
That is how to cultivate a stock .
My next comment concerns the so-called floating trawl .
This is a highly effective tool which , however , also takes with it types of fish other than those being fished for .
This factor contributes to the problems of fish stocks in the Baltic .
Finally , I must mention that the ecological balance in the Baltic has not been studied .
I have the feeling that when 1m tonnes of fish are caught in the Baltic and brought ashore , nutrients are too depleted to feed the stocks that are supposed to be building up .
I believe biologists have taken far too little account of the need to nourish fish stocks .
Production is not possible without this .
In agriculture , it is an accepted fact that a quantity of nutrients must be put back into the soil equivalent to the quantity removed through farming .
No-one considers this in terms of fishing policy .
I therefore recommend to the Commission that it should let biologists study the ecological balance in these waters , because we need to " cultivate ' the waters , too , if they are to be capable of producing good food for our citizens .
Otherwise , Madam Commissioner , I can report that we support the motion as it stands , but that new elements will need to be incorporated in next year 's negotiations .
Madam President , Madam Commissioner , the Committee on Fisheries , on whose behalf I have drawn up the present report , deemed it necessary to address the issue of industrial fishing in an initiative report . Since this involves a hotly debated and also highly important subject , which so far has failed to receive proper attention both in the European Parliament and in the European Union as a whole , we hope to able to remedy the matter with this report .

We are talking here about fishing with very small-meshed nets , whose catches are meant for industrial processing .
Target species are usually fish which do not serve direct human consumption or are only used to a limited degree for this purpose .
This type of fishery is very important in the North Sea , which is why the report concentrates on this region .
Industrial fishing 's share of the total North Sea catch has stood at almost 60 % over the last few years .
This means that here twice as many fish are being caught for industrial exploitation as they are on average worldwide .
Industrial fishing , however , is not just a regionally significant sector of the economy .
It is also the subject of controversial discussions on ecological justifiability .
Many will recall the campaign by Greenpeace against sand eel fishing off the Scottish coast in the summer of 1996 .
This was to do with the fact that , as a result of the fine meshing of the nets , sexually immature edible fish were being caught as a by-catch .
Owing to the high catch rates with the target species in the sand eel fishery , the annual catch is in the order of one million tonnes .
That is why many people are concerned about the stocks themselves and the maintenance of the food chain .
The Committee on Fisheries has taken the clear view that fishing for industrial purposes is only justifiable if it observes the principle of sustainability and if , in cases of conflict , priority is given to fishing for human consumption .
The report states that in the past , especially with mixed fishing and sprat fishing , there has been a very serious problem with monitoring compliance with Community law .
This has been reflected in the excessive catches of target species and the permitted by-catch of protected species - especially herring - being fairly regularly exceeded .
The high mortality rate for herring in the North Sea , which caused the Council to introduce emergency measures in the summer of 1996 , has no doubt been partly caused by the large by-catch of herring landed through industrial fishing , where the proportion of herring is sometimes predominant .
However , we also want to acknowledge the positive developments .
The Council has introduced , as one of the emergency measures of July 1996 which have just been mentioned , an absolute upper limit for landing herring for industrial purposes , which - once reached - will lead to the fishery in question being closed .
This measure has proved to be very effective , especially since the Danish fisheries authority , in whose jurisdiction most ports of landing used by industrial fisheries are to be found , introduced in the same year a comprehensive monitoring system with a high degree of intensive sampling .
Initial figures available for 1997 indicate a drastic reduction in the herring by-catch .
It is our opinion , however , that one should wait and see what experience over several years brings before finally judging the effectiveness of the new system .
Council and Commission have taken the course of setting maximum permissible limits to reduce the by-catches .
The effectiveness of such measures is , of course , dependent on rigorous controls in the ports of landing , constant monitoring and recording of the composition of the catch and prompt closure of the fishery when the by-catch limit is reached .
The new Danish monitoring system might satisfy these conditions .
However , it needs to be accepted by the fishermen , too .
Otherwise it is not worth very much .
There are signs that suggest this acceptance is not to be found with all fishermen at present .
We therefore advise caution and consider that it is still too early to relax the other conservation measures , as the Council and the Commission are intending to do by raising the permitted share of the herring by-catch in sprat fishing from the current 10 % to 20 % .
We have therefore come out against increasing the by-catch limit to 20 % both in the motion for a resolution on my report and in the legislative proposal on Mrs Langenhagen 's report , which deals especially with herring fishing in the North Sea and the Baltic .
In other areas of fishing there is an urgent need for action .
The report has made this clear .
In particular smelt fishing should be examined .
The problem with this type of fishery is with the large by-catch of protected species , especially young shellfish and whiting .
These are two species of edible fish whose mortality rate is very high .
Worse still , the estimated by-catches of shellfish and whiting in industrial fishing are being explicitly withdrawn from the annual TAC and Quota Regulation .
There are no by-catch limits here , although the industrial fishing by-catches in certain fisheries are higher than the permitted catches in consumption fishing .
This situation is no longer tenable .
We have therefore proposed as a minimum measure that the by-catches of protected species be taken into account in the annual fixing of the permitted catch rates and in allocating the quotas to the respective Member States .
This would give the Member States engaged in industrial fishing the opportunity to solve within their own fishing industry the conflict between industrial fishing and fishing for consumption , which has seen a shift to Community level .
We consider this proposal the neatest and easiest solution to implement .
Should the Council and the Commission finally prove willing to attend to this problem , they will be assured of Parliamentary support , even for alternative solutions and for the talks with the Norwegians .
There is also a need for action in the sand eel fishery .
While marine biologists do not estimate the stocks to be endangered due to the eels ' reproductive capacity , they nevertheless do not want to rule out local reductions on account of these creatures ' territoriality and the great dependence of certain edible fish , sea birds and marine mammals on sand eels as a food resource .
We therefore call upon the Commission , as a result of the large catches involved , to adopt a precautionary approach and to ensure the provision of a management plan , similar to those already found in many other fisheries .
This plan should encompass the setting-up of protection zones in ecologically sensitive areas .
Moreover , it is our opinion that a reduction of the by-catch currently permissible in sand eel fishing at sea is a viable proposition and is something which should therefore be made law .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , I want to congratulate my colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries , Mrs Langenhagan , Mr Kindermann and Mr Kofoed , on their excellent reports which have a common underlying theme , namely sustainable fishing in the North Sea and the Baltic Sea .
I , like them , have a very strong constituency interest in the maintenance of fish stocks , in my case particularly in the North Sea .
I am especially concerned about the effects on the whole marine eco-system of the North Sea of the intense industrial fishing mainly by Danish boats .
Species like sprat , Norwegian pout and sand eel may not be used for human consumption but if huge numbers are scooped up for use as fish meal to feed pigs and chickens or as fish oil to make margarine and cooking oils and to feed farmed fish , the delicate eco-balance is distorted and food sources for fish like herring and cod , etc. which are eaten by humans are depleted .
Other sea creatures like seals and birds are also threatened by declining sources of food .
I have particular concerns about the taking of herring for industrial purposes .
The herring is an especially nutritious fish for human beings but sadly one which is no longer to be found in great abundance on the slabs of our fishmongers .
In the past , certainly in the UK , it was a very common , cheap but delicious and healthy part of the diet of many less well-off families .
Now it is far less widely available and costs much more .
Fisherman who catch herring for human consumption are finding fewer and smaller fish .
Fisherman from my constituency believe that industrial fishing is one of the main causes of this state of affairs : both because the smaller fish on which they feed are being taken in huge quantities and because the herring themselves are being caught in the very small mesh nets necessary for industrial fishing , as indeed are undersized immature cod .
Therefore , Mr Kindermann 's report is particularly welcome .
I urge support for his recommendations for stricter controls and limitations to be placed on industrial fishing , particularly those calling for careful ecological monitoring so that spawning and nursery feeding grounds can be protected through the introduction by the Commission of protection zones .
His proposals for tackling the problem of large by-catches in sprat fisheries by rigorous controls of landings and closure of fisheries when the by-catch limit is reached are also positive ways forward to ensure the survival and revival of herring stocks .
Mr President , I want to thank Mrs Langenhagen for her report , and also Mr Kofoed and Mr Kindermann .
In spite of all the work that has been done , the whole area of industrial fishing remains , certainly to me , a little bit mysterious .
In the European Union we land something like 10 % of the world 's industrial catches , and it is sold for approximately 30 % of the value of fish that is caught for human consumption .
It is also clear that industrial fish catches contain an unknown quantity of edible and even valuable fish .
In circumstances where fish is scarce and expensive , as it is in the European Union , it is very wasteful to use any fish for industrial purposes if it can be processed for human consumption .
It is also disturbing to read in the explanatory statement - and this has been raised by Mr Kindermann - that 100 000 tonnes of herring was caught as a by-catch with sprat in the Baltic up to 1996 .
This seems an extraordinary amount of fish .
I do not want to oppose the Commission proposal , referred to in the Langenhagen report , to allow industrial fishing to continue in this particular case .
However , I believe that the Commission is always under pressure to make excessive concessions to industrial fishing interests , and extending the right to fish for herring , even if some of it is of inferior quality , gives rise to serious doubts , even if Germany and Sweden did not catch their full quota in the Baltic .
It is unclear why this was so , but perhaps it is because it requires too much fishing effort because the stocks are in bad condition .
I do not believe that this gives us a case to convert stocks of fish suitable for human consumption to animal and fish feed .
The explanatory statement also informs us that , because of the way industrial fish is stored , it is impossible to tell exactly what quantity of by-catches there is .
If we catch 3 million tonnes of fish for industrial purposes in the European Union annually , with 7.5 % to 8 % of that being by-catches of edible fish , then that represents a quarter of a million tonnes of a commodity that is scarce in the European Union , when we are only 48 % self-sufficient .
A quarter of a million tonnes of edible fish being used for animal feed is excessive .
It is larger than the entire quota that an island nation like Ireland gets .
These reports have been useful .
But we need further information on this subject before we can come to a rational policy decision .
Mr President , in the United Kingdom when we think of fishing we tend to think of fish that we eat , fish and chips , maybe even fish that we might eat in the restaurants around Strasbourg .
Reading Mr Kindermann 's excellent report - and I do not say that just out of politeness , it is an outstanding report - it came as quite a shock to learn that 30 % of the world catch , some 30 million tonnes , is used for industrial fisheries .
Yet , in the case of the North Sea , which is subject to extreme environmental and ecological pressure , the figure is up to 60 % .
That is a warning signal which we cannot ignore . What is this fishmeal used for ?
Seventy-five per cent is used for animal feed , the other twenty-five per cent for oils .
This could all be replaced by other substances which could be grown rather than harvested from the sea .
About a year ago I went to one of the few fish processors in my constituency in the city of Plymouth .
There I was confronted head-on by the problem of industrial fisheries .
This organization was catching , landing and processing herring and mackerel for major multiples .
Yet the owner was able to tell me that the problem was not the quotas for these species , but that because of the 10 % legal by-catch the industrial fisheries could take out more of the fish stocks than the people with legitimate quotas .
That is not only a problem to me conceptually , but it drives a coach and horses through the whole idea of a quota system that is there to be respected .
I was particularly amazed to read in the report that the number of herring taken by by-catch is greater than the quota itself .
There are a number of lessons to be drawn here .
In fisheries we talk about the precautionary approach .
Here is one area where we have to be very precautionary indeed .
It is going to be difficulty to rein back this particular sector of the industry ; in Denmark it is an important industrial sector .
However , we have to change our priorities .
We have to be careful .
This is one of the lowest parts of the food chain in an area of sea that is under pressure .
I would be very interested to hear from the Commission what plans it has for the long-term future to ensure that this fishery is reduced quite substantially , or at least that it will not have a damaging effect on the marine environment in the long term .
Mr President , this has been a fascinating debate .
I agree with Mr Teverson that we have had three outstanding reports to contribute towards our understanding of a very difficult problem .
For Denmark in particular there is an historical dependence which was encouraged by the Danish Government , and any measures to change the balance - with which I agree - should be matched by compensatory measures .
That is the kind of challenge which perhaps we should bring out and discuss in greater detail .
I wish to salute Mr Kofoed 's honesty and courage in confronting the problems of the Baltic .
There is a whole series of matters of detail that he mentions , for example the salmon regime appears to him to be a rather crude regime and does not take adequate account of the sophisticated differences between tourists catching wild salmon and people who catch it for a living .
He has made a lot of very important points about engine size and bans on catches during breeding periods .
All these seem to be eminently common-sensical .
Likewise , Mr Kindermann , with his stress on conservation and reducing the herring by-catches .
This is extremely important , and I hope we will learn a lot from these reports .
The one lesson I would like to draw from both of these reports , and also from Mrs Langenhagen 's report , is this : when you listen to what is happening in the Baltic , for example about driftnets , it is very different to what is happening in other areas , such as the Adriatic or the Bay of Biscay .
I do not see why the European Union should impose one regime on the whole of Europe .
This helps to convince me even more that we have to have a differentiated approach in the future .
As some colleagues will know , at the moment I am doing some work on regionalization of the common fisheries policy .
This is the kind of ammunition and data which we need to be able to put together , under the umbrella of the common fisheries policy , a regional approach .
I thank the rapporteurs for their contribution .
Mr President , industrial fishing , not least at its present scale , seriously threatens fish stocks and the ecosystem .
The fact that these ships catch large amounts of fish , which are basically fit for human consumption , for processing into fish meal and fish oil is especially galling .
It is a waste of a valuable source of nutrition and protein .
Also , large amounts of food for other fish species , sea birds and sea mammals are thus lost .
It is therefore high time that the principle of sustainability is realized in the industrial fishing sector .
Unfortunately , I note that this principle is often demoted when the Council makes decisions . Council policy is mainly aimed at continuity in respect of the industrial fishing sector .
The distribution of the quota for sand smelt , horse mackerel and blue whiting speaks volumes in this respect .
Two thirds of the total North Sea contingent of horse mackerel has , for example , been allocated to Denmark , which processes this fish into fish meal .
Yet it is eminently fit for consumption .
So there is no question of preferential treatment in the case of fishing for human consumption .
The attitude of the Council in respect of fishing for sprat shows scant determination .
The establishment of an overall limit on herring catches when fishing for sprat was admittedly a significant step in the process of reducing by-catches .
But at least 10 % of the total herring catch in the North Sea still disappears into fish meal , as a by product of the sprat fishing sector .
This particularly affects herring which are not yet sexually mature , which are caught before they have been able to contribute to the preservation of the species .
I therefore consider an increase in the permitted by-catch percentage for herring in the sprat fishing industry of between 10 and 20 % , as decided by the Council on 24 March , a serious matter .
It removes all incentives to change over to more selective catching methods .
In conclusion , the treatment of the Commission proposal on the industrial fishing of herring in the Baltic comes too late .
The Council has already achieved a political agreement in regard to this .
The recommendation of this Parliament is only required by the Council to allow it formally to confirm the agreement which has already been concluded .
The Kindermann report deserves a more serious consideration in the Council .
The recommendations it contains for restricting catches , protecting ecologically sensitive areas , limiting by-catches and so forth , ought to be implemented as soon as possible .
Mr President , we are dealing with three excellent reports here .
Indeed if you look at the explanatory statement you will see that two of them were adopted unanimously and only one person abstained on the Langenhagen report .
It is an indication of the breadth of support across the committees for the sentiments which the three rapporteurs are presenting .
They are all on the same theme : the need to look at industrial fishing .
There is a need to carry out research into industrial fishing and the impact of industrial fishing on the fishing industry .
The second theme they all put forward is the most important aspect of the fishing industry : is fish primarily for human consumption ?
Industrial fishing really is an extra .
They all make the same point that the important thing is fish for human consumption .
This is what we , as European Parliamentarians are doing for our constituents - we are helping to ensure there are sufficient stocks .
The third theme which runs through the reports is the need for conservation of stocks .
Mr Kindermann mentions it with the decision of the Council to fix , for the first time in 1998 , a quota for sand eels which , up to that time , was a non-quota stock .
There was no limit on the quantity of sand eels which could be extracted from the North Sea or elsewhere .
Indeed this gave us in the West of Scotland a particular problem .
There is an area called ' the wee bankie ' , where some Danish and Scottish fishermen almost came to blows at the end of last year over the fishing activities that were going on there .
The Scots alleged that the activities of the Danes were affecting the stocks of cod .
There was a little bit of a problem there , but we got it ironed out .
It is important that there be adequate research into the effect of industrial fishing on the stocks of cod , but also into the whole marine environment .
Mr Kindermann talked about salmon .
We have a problem with wild salmon .
It is important that we see what the impact of industrial fishing is in this area .
We also must look at the conservation measures .
Mr Kindermann mentions the size of nets in the technical measures in his report .
It dovetails from Mr Kofoed 's earlier report on MGP IV , which was dealing with mainly technical measures .
So we really have to bring these things together .
I congratulate the three rapporteurs for doing an excellent job .
Mr President , the Commission has rightly proposed a ban on industrial fishing outside the Baltic Sea area .
Behind the proposal is the concern for the general decline in herring and Baltic herring stocks as well as the negative effect on the environment caused by fishing .
Marine birds , for example , can get caught up as by-catches in nets with small mesh sizes .
In the Baltic , however , the situation is different , as there the herring stocks are not under threat and fishing even has a positive effect on the marine environment .
Fishing reduces the amount of fish that would have to be thrown away and even helps increase cod stocks .
In addition , fishing is important for sparsely-populated coastal areas .
The livelihood of the people in these areas is often dependent on this one occupation .
Finland 's and Sweden 's herring fishing industry must therefore be allowed to continue .
In the Accession Treaty countries were permitted to fish herring for animal feed until the end of 1997 .
The new regulation will , in my opinion , come into force retroactively from the beginning of this year and not merely from 1999 on , as proposed in the amendment tabled by the Committee on Fisheries .
The total catch quota for the Baltic is high , however .
Although there are no problems as yet , fishing - and especially intensive fishing - must be monitored .
The principle of sustainability in fishing must be observed .
That is why I give my enthusiastic support to Mrs Langenhagen 's motion to amend the regulation , in the light of recent scientific evidence .
With reference to Mr Kofoed 's report , I wonder why the Commission gave its international recommendation to the members of the Baltic Fishing Commission so late that the deadline for filing a protest had already passed .
The Commission 's proposal in respect of the fishing of flounder and plaice , however , can be readily endorsed this time around .
Mr President , I would like to point to a very important question concerning the Baltic Sea , and that is the ruthless exploitation of wild salmon .
This practice must be stopped , as it seriously threatens the salmon in the Baltic area .
One of the main reasons for this is fishing with driftnets .
Particularly threatened is the very rare natural salmon , which is to be found almost exclusively in Sweden , but which also exists in Finland .
The salmon is born in the Swedish rivers in Norrland - the Northern region .
It then leaves the rivers and moves into the Baltic Sea for feeding .
The period the salmon spends in the Baltic Sea is , however , a dangerous time .
The main reason for this is large scale industrial fishing with driftnets measuring up to 21 kilometres .
Issuing EU approved limits and bans on fishing for sport on certain rivers , as has been done up to now , has merely symbolic value , whilst overfishing with driftnets is allowed at the same time .
This must naturally be stopped .
Another serious threat to the survival of the natural salmon is the disease M-74 , which was discovered in 1974 , with the M standing for environment related diseases .
This disease constitutes a severe threat to the natural salmon and its survival .
These are , therefore , important questions to bring up at the next meeting of the Baltic Commission and an issue which the environmental groups in Sweden and Finland are pushing for extremely hard .
Mr President , it is clear that sustainable and ecologically-sound fishing poses a challenge for the future .
But we are still far removed from this , particularly when we consider the issue of industrial fishing .
A solution to the problems associated with this in no way implies sustainable fishing .
By-catches , already mentioned , are a problem , but the catch is in general much too large .
Like previous speakers , I would therefore like alternatives to be investigated , such as vegetable sources , for the products which are presently being produced via the industrial fishing industry .
Industrial fishing is not essential for animal feeds and fish meal or oil .
An ecological approach deserves sound scientific research , of course , but this does not mean that we as politicians can sit back and await the arrival of these reports .
Waiting too long for the increased certainty which scientific research is supposed to offer us , and thereby failing to make decisions , means that we are not equal to our responsibilities .
I support all three reports : they indicate that it is possible to make a start on sustainability in the fishing industry . We now await the actions of the Commission and the Council .
I wonder what measures they will instigate .
Mr President , many of us feel very hesitant , and with justification , about industrial fisheries .
It is , therefore , a pleasure to be able to congratulate Mrs Langenhagen , Mr Kindermann and Mr Kofoed on their good and well balanced reports , where one of the proposals is that the rules for by-catches of juvenile cod , for example , should be made more stringent , that maximum limits be introduced , that the control mechanism be increased , and so on .
Bearing in mind the vulnerability of the Baltic Sea , and that the situation there may suddenly be altered , the proposal to review the regulation before the year 2003 is positive .
It is a pleasure to note that the share of industrial fisheries in the Baltic Sea is slowly declining in favour of fisheries for human consumption .
We hope this trend will continue .
A great deal of the criticism directed at the industrial fisheries in the North Sea has been justified , due to the volumes involved and the risk to the eco systems .
Mr Kindermann suggests that a modicum of industrial fisheries can be accepted , provided this does not conflict with fisheries for human consumption .
The latter must always take precedence .
On the whole , the criteria in Mr Kindermann 's report ought to be applied to the Baltic Sea , too .
Mr President , first of all I would like to emphasize once again that Baltic herring in the Baltic Sea in fact is Baltic herring and not the same as the herring we are talking about here in this House .
There seem to have been some problems with the translation .
As we know , Baltic herring and the fishing of Baltic herring are of extreme importance for the professional fishermen in Finland , for the archipelago and the coastal region .
I welcome , and I have voiced my personal support for the proposal that the exemptions granted to Sweden and Finland in their Membership negotiations be given permanent status , so that the fishermen may know for certain that the fishing can continue .
I know that the Commissioner is very familiar with this matter .
The far reaching limitations on salmon fishing which have been effected in recent years , and which Mr Kofoed pronounced unfair , have further increased the importance of the fishing of Baltic herring .
The fishing of Baltic herring for purposes other than direct human consumption makes up 80 per cent of the total Finnish catch ; the main part of it goes to fodder for fur farms .
So long as there is no set-aside for human consumption , we ought to be able to fish in the manner proposed .
As the price of Baltic herring for direct human consumption is higher , as much as possible goes to direct human consumption .
This form of regulation is also of fundamental importance for two other reasons .
It may contribute to a reduction of overfeeding in the Baltic Sea .
But the exemption is also important in the long term , as it will enable fish farmers to move increasingly to the use of fishmeal from Baltic herring instead of other nutrients being added to our waters .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Bonino for having successfully concluded a problematic agreement on the banning of drift-net fishing .
I also think that the banning of drift-net fishing should be the subject of debate in the Baltic as soon as possible .
For it is not true to say that other species , especially seals , do not get caught in these nets in the Baltic Sea .
Secondly , it is very important to promote an increase in natural salmon for rivers in Northern Europe .
There have been promising signs of this recently , as there have been restrictions in the use of drift-net fishing .
I have heard that the Finnish government intends to bring up the matter of banning drift-net fishing this Autumn at the Warsaw Conference .
We should give it our support .
It is to be hoped that Sweden and Denmark will agree .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to deal with the three reports together - they are directly related to one another - and to tell you how pleased I am that on a topic as controversial as industrial fishing , whose different opinions are echoed in this House and in today 's debate , the Parliament , although it has had a few subsequent suggestions , shares the Commission 's point of view , especially on the need to give this type of fisheries a rational direction that takes into consideration for each fisheries activity the actual state of stocks , by-catches and the problems of monitoring .
I am referring in particular to the excellent report by Mr Kindermann .
The Commission appreciates the fact that in it he highlights the progress made in monitoring and managing resources and the Commission 's own desire to make further progress .





The Commission will closely analyse the suggestions in Mr Kindermann 's report , but in this regard and in response to Mr Teverson , I would also like to make three remarks : first of all , the Commission considers the problem of monitoring the absolute priority of industrial fishing , and this is why industrial fishing vessels are included in the first phase of satellite surveillance which , as you know ladies and gentlemen , will begin in July ; secondly , the Commission has very closely monitored herring fishing in the North Sea , especially since this was the subject of a special report , which you ladies and gentlemen have surely seen , and which states something that perhaps will not please everyone , and that is that industrial fishing is more controlled , or at any rate the controls are more effective than for other types of fishing ; thirdly , as far as the more longer term initiatives are concerned , the Commission is currently financing research to understand exactly what the situation of the ecosystem is - since all the parliamentarians referred to this problem - and is pushing for and , moreover , obtaining a very concise study on the impact of industrial fishing by the International Council for the Exploitation of the Sea .
In fact , more than monitoring , I believe it especially important for everyone to know more about the impact on the ecosystem .
Regarding the convergence of views on the conditions in which herring fishing for reasons other than human consumption may and should be authorized , Mr Langenhagen proposes approving the general logic , the general system that the Commission has followed , particularly with regard to the distinction between the Baltic Sea and the other areas where current bans should remain in effect .
Indeed , beyond the approaches or values everyone has , I believe it important to say in concrete terms that the situation of the herring stock in the Baltic Sea is good .
We must also take this into account , beyond the approaches , however ideal , that we each may have .
I believe that a distinction between the two areas is legitimate , not only as far as the situation of the stock is concerned but also for the problems of by-catches .
The concrete problem that we must face therefore concerns the conditions under which herring fishing should be allowed for reasons other than human consumption .
In this regard , the Commission is trying to strike a balance between the need to create conditions that prevent abuses and the preoccupation - perhaps you ladies and gentlemen can understand me here - with not saddling the Union 's fishermen with constraints that would put them at a disadvantage in relation to fishermen from other coastal States along the Baltic Sea .
This is another factor that we must take into consideration .
Currently , only the technical measures decided in the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission apply to the fishermen of third countries , as Mr Kofoed rightly points out .
Therefore we should try to have the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission adopt more restrictive rules which will apply equally to all fishing fleets and not just to those of the EU .
For this reason the Commission cannot accept the amendments , particularly Nos 1 and 4 , precisely because they would only impose constraints on Community fishermen .
In Amendment No 4 , the Commission certainly accepts the demarcation of zones - this is obvious - but globally speaking , it cannot accept the amendment precisely on account of the rules that govern the composition of the catches , which the Commission considers to be too restrictive .
As far as Amendment No 3 is concerned , the Commission accepts that part relating to the date of application , whereas the part on the revision procedure is not , in its view , suitably worded .
Finally , the Commission accepts Amendment No 2 .
In conclusion , I would like to make two additional observations regarding technical measures in the Baltic Sea .
The Commission shares the view of the rapporteur , Mr Kofoed , on the shortcomings - also underlined in the speech - of the mechanism proposed by the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission .
As I already said , the Commission wants to avoid a situation where measures confined to the Community prove detrimental to our fishermen , and for this reason , as Mr Kofoed suggests , the Commission will do all it can to improve the technical measures that are decided at the next meeting of the International Commission I have just referred to .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Future for the market in fisheries products- fish product canning industry and aquaculture
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0204 / 98 by Mr McCartin , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the future for the market in fisheries products in the European Union : responsibility , partnership and competitiveness ( COM ( 97 ) 0719 - C4-0029 / 98 ) ; -A4-0137 / 98 by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the fish product canning industry and aquaculture in the European Union.I now invite Mr McCartin , the rapporteur , to speak for a maximum of five minutes .
Mr President , the Commission Communication on the future for the market in fisheries products implicitly recognizes a number of shortcomings in the present policies .
Very briefly these shortcomings could be described in the following way .
Firstly , several phenomena on the market in fisheries products run counter to the efforts to conserve fish stocks , on which the future of the whole fishing industry is dependent .
Illegally landed fish , in particular under-sized fish , are being put on the market and , meanwhile , withdrawal of good quality fish from the market and the subsequent turning of this fish into low-value fish-meal and fish-oil occurs .
It even happens that good quality fish is dumped at sea with the support of the Community which , in this way , tries to prevent market prices from falling too low .
I know that in recent years the amount of fish actually destroyed in this way is relatively small but even 10 , 0-20 , 000 tonnes is too much .
Secondly , an excessive mismatch between supply and demand can be observed in certain areas , suggesting that the flow of information should be improved and that stronger incentives should be provided to producers to adapt their production to demand , and to buyers to pay more attention to what the producers can actually offer .
This is closely linked to a third set of problems relating to the competitiveness of Community producers .
Imports represent an increasing challenge and outside competitors may benefit sometimes from better fishing grounds , very low labour costs and sometimes government subsidies and , indeed , a failure to control them properly .
The Commission Communication favours improving the situation , in particular through first reducing withdrawals .
For its part , the Committee on Fisheries feels that the Community should not support the waste that withdrawals involve .
The temporary withdrawal of fish should be developed since it contributes to stabilizing without causing any waste and the putting on the market of illegally landed fish should be counteracted by strengthening controls in ports , particularly , and also in the subsequent links in the food chain .
A system of designated ports - ports which are designated for the landing of fish and fish may be landed only at these ports - is an idea that the committee certainly also supports .
Stimulating producers ' organizations to achieve a greater regularity of supply by introducing catch plans is something our committee is also in favour of .
Encouraging an improvement in the quality of Community products and encouraging consumers to choose such products by means of certification and of labelling - this , too , the committee supports but clear rules must be elaborated so as to avoid uncertainties and distortions of competition between different producers .
As regards imports , the Committee on Fisheries cannot agree with the Commission that the system of reference prices should be abolished .
The Community should not abandon the possibility of intervening in case of serious disturbance of the market .
Furthermore , the Community should endeavour to counteract the distortions of competition that may follow from very low labour costs or irresponsible fishing by vessels flying flags of convenience .
In order to increase the supply from Community producers , the potential of aquaculture should be fully exploited .
This can sometimes be a controversial area .
But we have a consensus in the Fisheries Committee that there is tremendous potential there for peripheral regions to supply high-quality food to consumers in the Union while , at the same time , not neglecting environmental considerations , the health of the waters and the health of wild fish stocks , which can sometimes be affected if we go into this industry without having done proper research , as we have sometimes in the past .
In a Union where we have only 48 % self-sufficiency , it is quite obvious that there are regions - in particular Galicia in the north of Spain - where aquaculture well carried out can make an immense contribution to the viability of the local economy and , indeed , can supply the home market with high-quality food , and be a tourist attraction at the same time , because fresh , high-quality food from aquaculture can attract tourists to a region - people who have a liking for fresh sea food , consumed in its natural environment .
On a general level , the interdependence between the market and the other strands of the common fisheries policy is allimportant and has to be taken into consideration .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank the rest of my colleagues whose reports are being considered in this joint debate today - Mrs Langenhangen , Mr Kofoed , Mr Kindermann and Mr McCartin - and which I followed with interest in the Committee on Fisheries ; indeed , I contributed to some of them with my amendments .


But I am sure they will understand if I concentrate today on my own report because , among other reasons , it is not often that we have reports relating to the fish product processing industry .
Yet , this industry is a fundamental pillar of the Common Fisheries Policy and an extremely important alternative to a possible reduction in employment in coastal areas dependent on fishing activities .
Processing , along with marketing and aquaculture , forms a complementary activity and one of diversification for economic activities in the fisheries sector . It creates its own jobs and is capable of absorbing labour surpluses at a time of crisis when we are talking about overcapacity , conversion and adjustment of the Community fleet .
In the European Union the canning industry alone provides some 50 000 direct jobs with 75 000 indirect jobs .
Given that employment is the focus of all of the Union 's policies , these figures are significant ; they are even more so if we add the fact that those jobs are located in peripheral coastal regions where there are few alternatives to fisheries activities .
The own-initiative report for which I am rapporteur is the first to refer exclusively to what we could call the subsector of canning within the processing industry . It has been aimed at drawing the attention of Parliament , the Commission and the Council to the situation of the Community canning industry and the significant potentialities it might have if we continue to support it and do not implement policies which damage its competitiveness and promote unfair competition with products processed in third countries .
The Community canning industry is involved in an important challenge of modernization and restructuring in order to adapt itself to the globalization of the market and the costly demands of the Community 's environmental , technical and health and hygiene standards which act as a guarantee for the European consumer .
In this respect , it has received substantial Community aid which must continue to promote its ultimate modernization .
However , and in particular , it has been confronted with trade agreements with other countries which have allowed our markets to open up to products which are difficult to compete with in terms of price , due to their low wage and social costs and to lower technical and health and hygiene requirements . This has a negative effect not only on the final price but also , and more seriously , on the quality and guarantees for the health of consumers .
Given the risk of relocation of European businesses and its negative effect on Community employment levels , we need greater and improved control of extra-Community imports . In addition , the same demands must be made of them as are made of products processed in the European Union .
As a competitive advantage , we must make the most of the quality of our products and establish anti-fraud units specializing in fisheries as well as a network of specialized laboratories and a reference laboratory at Community level .
We must also promote a policy which supports and encourages quality among companies and campaigns to promote European canned products throughout the Union . In this respect , we should make use of the single market and the diversity of products processed throughout the territory , emphasizing their high nutritional value and the contribution certain canned products make to a healthy , balanced diet , such as blue fish in olive oil .
The labels must exactly represent the content of the product within and not use generic names , as happens with certain techniques used by third countries . This carries the risk that we may be taken in by the products we eat or , in this specific case - given the different varieties , qualities and prices of tuna - that we are given thunnus obesus , or bigeye tuna , or another variety , instead of expensive thunnus alalunga or long-fin tunny .
The Community policy on raw material supplies should be implemented in relation to the actual needs of the Community industry and new quotas should be opened only when they are strictly necessary .
Research and development involving new products , new species and new forms of presentation will have to be promoted just as the new COM in fisheries products will have to be adapted to the needs of the industry in relation to fishing activities .
In short , the report is asking the Commission for the following things : a serious and thorough study of the reality of the Community canning industry ; proposals for a specific and global plan of action ; and an analysis of the copious and scattered regulations currently in force . Further , canned products should be considered as sensitive products for which compensatory aid in trade agreements is required .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would point out that the report does not constitute a goal but is instead a departure point through which Parliament is taking a first step , drawing attention to this sector and promising - and I am doing this personally , as rapporteur - to follow up on its demands . In this way , we will together ensure that the European fish product processing industry takes the position it deserves in the world on the basis of its tradition , prestige , quality and potential , as well as its level of job creation ; indeed , job creation is the main challenge for our society and all politicians must contribute to its success .
Mr President , I believe that a plan is beginning to emerge to reform the common fisheries policy even if , as usual , it is a policy that particularly affects Europe , deals with the problems of territorial waters and succeeds with difficulty in defining a different relationship with third countries .
I am in part satisfied that we are beginning to reorganize the international fisheries agreements , but it will do us no good to make progress on European territorial waters if we do not tackle the problem with third countries too .
Shipowners are currently paying tuna 40 lira a kilo : a ridiculous figure .
A large quantity of this product , 58 per cent , is imported in the European Union .
Of these imports , 65 per cent are not subject to customs duties and there are also hygiene and sanitary problems .
I say this because I am convinced that we need to harmonise not only the common fisheries policy but also our relationship with third countries .
Market policy can provide answers .
I am pleased with the Commission 's proposal and communication and see that some positive choices have been made , including after the debate that this Parliament was able to engage .
I am thinking especially of the way in which Parliament has tackled the problem of organizing producers , the way in which an attempt has been made to monitor the products fished in territorial waters so that they are identifiable and attract the attention of consumers within the framework of market rules , so that their quality is also eco-compatible .
These are very important aspects .
For this , we must promote all the positive actions that favour the introduction of a designation of origin , the post-GSPs for fishery products - in my opinion these are important choices - but at the same time we must overcome the logic of supporting prices in such a widespread manner that is perhaps not always properly focussed .
We must aim much more specifically at supporting fishermen 's income so that it is directly connected with the biological and environmental balance .
From this point of view , I believe that it is very useful to encourage a biological rest period , forms of subsidiarity in the work and possibilities of guaranteeing income - in addition to the work directly related to fishing - which will also enhance some of the anthropological aspects of the fisheries sector , of the relationship between fishermen and the sea which , if the commercial and economic logic prevails , risks being increasingly lost .
We need to transmit this culture too , a culture that involves respect for the sea , a balance between resources that can be caught .
This balance is restored not only by taking action based on our romantic vision of the sea but also by using scientific instruments that can guarantee adequate research which will put a value on the available resources .
From this point of view , we also need to develop a better policy of control that is not dispersive , one that makes optimal use of technological innovations .
I therefore applaud the fact that the satellite system can be used as a fundamental part of monitoring .
I believe that some important signs are emerging .
We will be able to continue this debate with the documents that will be presented to reform fisheries after 2002 .
I believe , Madam Commissioner , that you have taken some steps in this direction , in your work with the Parliament , but I am also convinced that there are a few points on which we must work .
I am referring to a point to which I draw your particular attention and to which I am sure you are sensitive : the use of dolphins in military experiments . I do not think we can accept this anymore .
Recently , carcasses of dolphins were found in the Gulf of Marseille .
These creatures had been used for such purpose and their throats had been ripped open by the explosion of small bombs .
This matter must be put on the agenda so as to prevent it occurring again .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , the Community market for fisheries products finds itself in a very strange situation .
The high dependency on imports can undoubtedly justify allowing the tariffs established within the GATT , although they are low .
However , at the same time , the European Union is implementing a policy aimed at the removal of tariff barriers which , in my opinion , is affecting important quotas .
Whether with regard to agreements such as the generalized system of preferences or in the context of cooperation or other types of agreements , the Commission accepts provisions involving a total or partial withdrawal of tariffs for fisheries products ; this leaves the Community industry increasingly vulnerable .
I am not denying that they may be justified in certain cases , however , we must prevent the continuation of situations - which I would even describe as ridiculous - such as those that force , for example , Community producers of tinned tuna to export to the United States with a tariff of 35 % while the United States exports to the European Union with a tariff of 24 % .
I am sure you will realize that this is certainly not a case where poverty or the need to promote the development of a country justifies a tariff preference of 11 % .
I am therefore particularly concerned - and I think that some of my colleagues have already mentioned this - about the Commission 's statement regarding the likely market trend towards lowering tariff protection . We believe , on the contrary , that the Commission is obliged to protect , where possible , its own production by encouraging policies which contribute to an increase in internal supply .
It must also curb the removal of tariff barriers or demand reciprocity , as well as allowing differential treatment for products from joint ventures which do , after all , receive Community capital . In addition , the Commission should maintain reference prices , contrary to what its intention appears to be , and encourage carry-over premiums , particularly as replacements for withdrawal or destruction mechanisms which , in a market lacking high-quality proteins , paradoxically give priority to the conversion of fish into oils or fish meal .
We have thus been calling for a long time for a reform of the common organization of the market for fisheries .
The Commission has finally presented this document which , we presume , puts forward the guidelines from its imminent legislative proposal , which it has promised to submit before the end of the year .
We hope that the Commission , which has been slow in tackling this reform , will take into consideration the proposals our rapporteur , Mr McCartin , has included finally in his report , so that the forthcoming legislative proposal is capable of helping Community producers as soon as possible .
We ask that special attention be given to the introduction of measures guaranteeing that imported products meet the same health and hygiene guarantees as are demanded of our own products , with a view to preventing discrimination and unfair competition and encouraging the protection of the health of European consumers .
Madam Commissioner , these are only some of the rapid responses the market for fisheries products requires .
Mr McCartin 's report , as well as the comprehensive and excellent report by Mr Varela on the Community canning industry , contain many others which are fundamental and which cannot be forgotten when tackling the reform of the common organization of the market . This is necessary not to achieve as yet its optimum performance , as the Commission itself hopes , but to provide a minimum balance between imports and the external aspect of its own production and between the different internal productions in terms of the Community market .
Mr President , I would like to speak about the report by Mr McCartin dealing with the vital matter of the future for the market in fishery products in the European Union .
Of course , there is no question but that the demand from the European market calls for a substantial share of imports from developing countries .
But let us not forget that 80 % of these imports already benefit from a preferential tariff system , many are even duty-free .
So the rapporteur is right - and Mrs Fraga pointed this out before I did - when he states that the Commission has a duty to protect Community producers to the best of its ability and that further measures to abolish customs duty on fishery products from outside the EU are really not what we want .
First , catches by fishermen of the European Union are governed by a self-evident fact : if there are no resources , there are no more catches .
This is why we must obviously support the efforts designed to control supply on the basis of market demand .
Also , as the rapporteur pointed out , we must encourage producers ' organizations to work to catch plans and it seems logical - for the benefit of the fresh goods market - to steer intervention tools in the direction of withdrawals for put-back , rather than withdrawals for dumping .
We must encourage quality policies .
Of course , the existing joint organization of markets provides support for producers ' organizations that commit themselves to quality improvement plans .
Whilst that assistance has not yielded the success we might have expected , this is due neither to its underlying principle nor the lack of forward-planning , but to insufficient amounts .
It is vital therefore that we revitalize the appeal of these incentives by stepping up the amounts involved .
We must let consumers know about these policies by showing our support , in particular , for those products that can be identified with a specific region , once they have been subjected to rigorous , thoroughly-tested quality control procedures .
Nevertheless , I would still question the advisability and actual definition of the eco labels we have in mind .
In this respect , the Commission would call upon specialists in the fishing industry and any others involved .
What exactly does that mean ?
Does that imply official recognition of quality labels awarded by bodies set up for that specific purpose and funded , for example , by industrial consortia seeking to implant a positive image in the minds of the consumers ?
Or , perhaps , by others whose ecological rhetoric often conceals a baser , customer-oriented philosophy ?
In which case , we might see the Commission turn against any scientific analysis and leap onto the bandwagon of a public opinion largely ignorant of sea-faring matters , easily deflected and , in some cases , easily manipulated - a particularly loathsome example of which we have just witnessed .
Mr President , salmon , herring and other sea-foods make the issue very appetizing and appealing .
Unfortunately the same is not true of the Community fishing policy .
This presents serious problems in its internal market , which shows a continuing deficit of approximately 60 % .
This shortfall is made up for by imports from third countries , many of which maintain low prices , due to what is commonly known as " social dumping ' .
This policy has had particularly negative effects on coastal and small-scale fisheries , which show reduced levels of production and employment as well as a reduction in their share of the total fish market , to the benefit of large-scale fishing industries .
Any attempt to organize the market for fisheries products must therefore be aimed at the protection and balanced growth of the fishing industry . It must also be adapted to regional characteristics and it must protect mainly the small and medium-sized and coastal fishing industry , which is an important source of income and an important sector of employment , especially for the coastal regions and the islands .
Stringent measures must also be taken to conserve fish stocks and to maintain the marine eco-system . Measures must be taken to tackle illegal fishing and the landing and trade of fisheries products , as these will have positive repercussions for consumers who will have greater guarantees of product quality and price stability .
The common fisheries policy must not repeat the tragic mistakes of the common agricultural policy .
The Commission proposals for a reduction in fisheries production and partial compensation for lost income in the form of other subsidies will have the same negative results as in agriculture , that is , a reduction in employment and an increase in imports from third countries , disintegration of the social fabric , and depopulation of coastal and island regions .
I have other things to say , but I do not wish to monopolize the time available . I will submit them in a written explanation of the vote , as this matter of the fisheries industry , which really is extremely important for the Community , must be tackled by the Commission with both prudence and gravity .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on his successful ban on driftnets , which was long overdue .
It is very important that the market for fish in the EU is reformed and consolidated .
Fish is caught to be sold on the market and therefore there is great scope , via the markets , to improve the efficiency of the CFP as well as promoting its conservation goals .
In this respect , the role which the market can play is particularly important .
The policy of withdrawing fish from the market and sometimes destroying it simply because the price is too low is totally unacceptable .
It is outrageous in today 's world , with so much poverty and hunger , both around the world and right here in the EU , that such a policy should exist .
We have heard about promoting the consumption of fish as a healthy food to support the fishing industry .
This is fine and good , but it must be conditional and selective .
We must not be involved in promoting the consumption of all fish no matter what species , the area where it was caught or the gear that was used .
It could be argued that some of the stocks in the EU are in such desperate straits that it would be negligent or even worse to promote their consumption .
Another point which was just raised is the concept of eco-labelling , which is becoming more popular .
The Committee on Fisheries heard an account of this just a few months ago .
The scope for such a concept to be positive is really great .
But there are conditions which must be met to avoid some fairly obvious and serious pitfalls .
The criteria which are used by these ecolabels must be publicly available to all who are interested , and must be detailed and specific .
For instance , to say that a fish was caught in a fishery which is sustainable or responsibly managed is utterly meaningless , because one person 's definition of ' responsible ' may differ very much from another 's .
Verification of such claims is also crucial if consumers are actually to have confidence in this .
This is where the thorny question is raised of who shall be responsible for ensuring that the claims are valid .
What role does the Commission see for itself in this area , or is it going to be the Member States ' responsibility ?
We have all seen the vigour with which Member States have pursued the surveillance of fishing activities so far , and I would like to know the Commission 's view on this question .
Mr President , I congratulate both rapporteurs on the work they have put into these very interesting reports .
Mr Varela 's report is as good as the delicious Galician fish we have all consumed .
I have nothing really to add to that .
Mr McCartin has taken on a rather more thorny series of problems in his report and I congratulate him for addressing them .
We have a whole series of interlocking problems with the whole question of a free market and the idea of protecting the interests of those who are dependent on fisheries in a particular area .
I have already mentioned - and I think the Commission took note of it - the whole question of the possible regionalization of the common fisheries policy .
This is where we have to start looking very seriously at what that means in various contexts .
Obviously one starts from the cornerstone of relative stability .
That sets limits on what is possible .
When you start talking about local boats landing locally you have the problem of quota hopping .
There is no case for discrimination on the ground of nationality but a link with the local ports would clearly have to be part of that philosophy .
Like many fishermen , I am unhappy with the idea of centralizing the ports of landing .
Certainly in Scotland that has been a bone of contention .
Fishermen do not like being told you can only land in certain ports .
On the contrary , they would like the freedom to land .
But I would recommend to the Commission - and I think this is one idea that would be appreciated by fishermen throughout Europe - that it should centralize information about fish prices electronically .
Fishermen could use radios or other electronic devices to find out where to land their fish .
I think they would go for that kind of centralization .
Finally , with regard to Mr Baldarelli 's points on balancing supply and demand scientifically , that would have support .
The amendments by Mr Souchet of the I-EDN Group are all very sound and we will be voting for most of them .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , looking back on the report by Mr McCartin , I would like to say that we are today confronted by two different policy orientations , that is to say fishery or agricultural products .
Some people , like our rapporteur , want us to adopt a totally liberal policy .
Others , including myself , prefer a policy that seeks to devote more attention to the interests of the producers by implementing the principle of Community preference more rigorously , by upgrading the fresh foods market , organizing the sector in a more effective way , maintaining market intervention facilities and incorporating them in some kind of specialist discipline .
Whilst it is clear that imports from developing countries are necessary nowadays to meet a structural demand from the European market , which falls well short of the requirements we seek in terms of sea-food products , we must nevertheless ensure that such exchanges with the developing countries take place in an atmosphere of fair competition .
This is why a strengthening of import controls seems to me to be very urgent , especially those relating to source and hygiene , which should take priority in the controls procedure , at both Community and national level .
The importance of the fresh food market for both producers and consumers is such that we must pay greater attention to it .
The 15 amendments tabled by our group relate mainly to this objective of upgrading fresh foods of Community origin , principally through product identification and a suitable quality improvement policy , whilst at the same time enhancing the fisheries product sector by extending the role of producers ' organizations and by according greater recognition to inter-trade organizations .
Finally , with regard to intervention , we have tabled amendments seeking to strengthen the withdrawal mechanism to serve as a safety net , thereby contributing to market stability and the long-term survival of the fisheries product sector , whilst at the same time ensuring that it does not degenerate into a mechanism that merely provides a regular outlet for goods for which there is no market demand .
These amendments , Mr President , were devised with the special needs of the fisheries sector in mind , consisting mainly of small-scale companies which are obliged , when they feel the need to make up for a drop in the price of fish , to boost productivity by increasing their catches .
Mr President , we welcome the Commission initiative to present and , more especially , to discuss its ideas on the future of the market in fisheries products in the European Union .
The chosen form of a report makes for a discussion that is pertinent to the issue .
Three meaningful words are quoted in the Communication heading : responsibility , partnership and competitiveness - the correct sequence , in my opinion .
Fish is , and will continue to be , a scarce resource both inside and outside the European Union if some 50 % of the fish and fish products supplied in the EU originate from imports .
They are not available in the European Union .
That is why conservation of the fish stocks and market policy are closely connected .
The fisheries activity needs to be oriented globally on the basis of sustainability .
We particularly support restrictive measures for endangered stocks .
The main problem is adapting the fisheries capacity to available stocks , and this is where intervention should be the greatest .
Merely to regulate via the market is , in my opinion , a symptomatic response to the problem .
I am not the only one facing questions such as : How much of the market do we want to regulate ?
Where does responsibility , or rather the own initiative of those involved , begin and end ?
What do we want - a market economy or a planned economy ?
Standard management and marketing measures presuppose an effective and , above all , a balanced system of controls .
We can do nothing other than support the call that fisheries products should only be landed in those ports which are effectively able to control them , but not , however , the extension of fisheries inspectors 's rights to that of the retail trade .
On the other hand , it will also be vital - not only as part of the next WTO negotiations , but also with bilateral fishing agreements - to make some reference to social standards , which nowadays cause considerable distortion of competition .
In conclusion , I wish to thank the two rapporteurs for their very good reports , and I hope that we can continue to work with these excellent documents in the Committee on Fisheries .
Mr President , I welcome the report by my colleague Mr McCartin , which deals with many of the problems of the fishing industry .
It is clear that to date there has been significant over-fishing and in many cases illegal fishing of EU waters .
For example , Irish waters are regularly plundered by large industrial boats from other EU countries , many fishing with illegal nets .
This has led to disastrous effects not only on stocks , but also on the livelihoods of fishing communities who , for the most part , are situated in remote and peripheral regions of the European Union and have few , if any , alternatives .
Two elements are essential if we are to save the remaining fishing areas from total depletion .
Conservation and rebuilding of stocks - an absolute and urgent priority ; and adequate policing , with the introduction and enforcement of severe penalties against those caught fishing illegally .
It is essential to find a balance between the needs of the fishing industry , the management of resources and the needs of the people who make their living from fishing and its associated industries .
We must bear in mind that the European Union imports 52 % of its total fish consumption from third countries .
So there is a very large market to be satisfied .
I believe that aquaculture can provide part of the solution to restoring the balance between imports and fish produced within the EU .
Aquaculture is a valuable source of employment and can cushion the hardship of the areas affected by the decline in fishing .
We have proved we can farm salmon and shellfish to the highest standards , taking all the necessary precautions to ensure good environmental practices .
It is necessary to maintain and enhance these practices by improving the possibilities for fallowing , to allow the sites used for fish farming to be totally rested and flushed .
Furthermore we should seek balanced agreements with our partners in developing countries where we are fishing at present and combine this with expansion in aquaculture , thereby protecting their fishing resources and providing new sources of production within the EU .
The CFP needs to combine all aspects of the fishing industry in order to provide a viable future for our fishing communities .
A combination of conservation and good management on the one hand , and increasing fish farming on the other , will go some way to securing that future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , I should like to refer to the report submitted by my honourable friend Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , whom I congratulate on a notable , I repeat notable , piece of work .
I believe the report covers all the fundamental problems in this sector .
There are , however , a few points which I think should be highlighted .
Firstly , the absence of a suitable framework of support measures for existing industries could threaten their survival .
It will be difficult , if not impossible , to compete with products from non-EU countries whose final-product costs are much lower than the Union 's , either because of lower levels of technical and health requirements , or because of very different labour costs in those countries .
Secondly , we consider that the European Union should reinforce its quality control policy for its products , stimulate industrial effort by means of quality awards , records and labels , and hold promotional campaigns publicizing the quality and the European origin of the product .
Thirdly , with particular regard to the sardine-canning industry , to which Portugal is highly sensitive - and which is undoubtedly the industry which is most seriously affected - and following the partnership agreement with Morocco , we think urgent measures should be taken , including the establishment of a compensation fund for the Community canning industry and the maintenance of balanced subsidies for storage and freezing , to prevent market prices from fluctuating with seasonal variations , and here these subsidies should be granted to industries on production of evidence of payment of the minimum price for the product ; the launch of a Community campaign to promote canned sardines and their derivatives , bearing in mind the high nutritional value of the product ; and finally - as suggested by the rapporteur - we consider that the Commission should immediately conduct a general study of the present situation in the industry , concentrating particularly on the number of companies and the development of the sector over the last ten years in the various countries , so that the consequences of opening the market to non-EU countries become sufficiently clear , and including data on production , sources of raw materials , export and import figures , employment , technical and health regulations , duties payable , and in general the laws that govern the sector and , finally , how they are codified .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , any review of the Common Organization of the fisheries market must seek , among other things , to conserve stocks , maintain and improve regulatory mechanisms , strengthen partnerships between producers ' organizations and industry , protect the quality of products , promote increased contributions by Community production to internal market supplies , and protect Community production and processing against social ' dumping ' at world level , which is an unacceptable form of unfair competition .
Guidelines tending towards greater deregulation and liberalization will lead to even greater reductions in income levels for fishermen and producers , and will certainly damage operating conditions in the processing industry ; they will contribute to the progressive deterioration of the whole fishing sector in many regions , with adverse effects on the economic fabric and aggravated unemployment , and may cause over-fishing , to which professional operators will be tempted to turn to prevent the further erosion of their already inadequate standard of living .
Unfortunately these principles appear to form the basis of the Commission 's document , particularly inasmuch as no questions are raised over the derisory budgetary sums currently allocated to its market policy , and because it seeks to encourage the creation of transnational companies , whose devastating effects on small and medium-sized businesses in this sector - producers or processors - are easy to foresee .
There is no doubt that we have to rethink the present Common Organization of the markets .
For example , we accept that the set-aside system must be reviewed , if necessary by reducing the proportion allocated to the destruction of fish .
Nevertheless , the mechanism itself should be retained by increasing and / or creating other income support schemes for producers , just as we also need to provide subsidies for industrial freezing and storage , as stated in our amendment to Mr McCartin 's report .
With regard to fixed guide-line prices , it is essential that we retain these , and likewise the compensation system for tuna .
In that connection it is unacceptable that there is still no comparable scheme for sardines , and we are therefore re-submitting an amendment to that effect , which we hope will be approved .
There must be a system of certificates of quality , origin and production and processing conditions .
We must also pay special attention to local markets and their supplies , and particularly to their positive effect on small coastal fishing fleets .
But we must also be aware of the fact that the European Union imports almost 60 % of its supplies .
We must protect Community products against producers who have no quality control systems or no regard for social or environmental conditions .
We do not have the abolition of customs duties in new international agreements , in which the interests of the industry have been destroyed without even securing mutual guarantees .
In the report , as now amended - many of our recommendations have been adopted , and we hope it will be further improved as a result of this Plenary debate - the Commission will find , if it so wishes , sufficient ideas for revising the present Common Organization of the fisheries market without endangering the sustainability of the sector .
We await the legislative proposals which you will no doubt be submitting to us this year , Madam Commissioner .
A word about Mr Daniel Suanzes-Carpegna 's report on the canning industry .
I will not take long , because it is in fact a very good report .
Its wording is excellent and , if the proposals are taken up , it will help to improve the operation of the canning industry .
Our two amendments to your report , Mr Suanzes-Carpegna , are intended to reduce the costs of raw materials without jeopardizing operations in other important sectors - such as olive oil - and to help strengthen the Producers ' Organization . This is of fundamental importance if we are to set up effective partnerships with operators in the same sector .
Mr President , this evening 's sitting on fisheries presents a gloomy picture .
It seems more like an academic meeting than a parliamentary sitting because we are discussing texts which are study texts and not legislative texts . A group of us , who already knew each other well because we are a group of friends from the Community fisheries sector , met in connection with these texts , which are in fact more academic than anything , and in circumstances which , according to the Commission reports , seem to be heralding the disappearance of the sector .
In other words , I have the impression that this is the type of debate we will look back on in years to come with nostalgia , as a time when we could still talk about the Community fisheries sector .
I am going to refer primarily to the Commission communication on the future for the market in fisheries products in the European Union .
I think that it is a good report , that is a report drawn up with great sincerity and honesty and one which also fulfils its role .
It is a preliminary report and the Commission has set itself a deadline of 30 June of this year . In other words , it has given itself a week or two to receive reference material and points of view from the sectors involved in production , from the social partners , etcetera , and on the basis of that information , it will undoubtedly draw up legislative proposals .
I believe that the report is very honest and reveals the problems facing the sector .
The basic problem , which has been highlighted by various speakers before me , is that 60 % of Community consumption of fisheries products comes from imports - the Community only supplies 40 % of its own needs - and that possibly - and this is a trend that can be seen clearly - our entire Community consumption will eventually come from imports .
I believe that that would probably be a line of defence .
From time to time , as far as fisheries are concerned , the news we receive is generally bad news .
We sometimes receive good news but that good news is usually accompanied by some bad news .
For example , the agreement reached on 8 June by the Fisheries Council establishes the ban on drift gillnets but postpones it until 31 December 2001 .
Between now and 31 December 2001 there are six months left of 1998 , 12 months in 1999 , 12 months in 2000 and 12 months in 2001 , which means that by the time drift gillnets are finally banned , there may well be no fish left that have escaped this equipment which is destroying the fisheries sector .
At least the desire is there to do away with this evil .
But sometimes the news we receive is completely bad . For example , recently there have been statements in the Spanish press by the Moroccan authorities who say that they are not going to renew the fisheries agreement .
Not only are they not going to renew the fisheries agreement with the European Union , but , in addition , a year before that agreement comes to an end - or more than a year in advance - they are going to take away from us a range of fishing licences in a certain zone . By doing this , it seems that they are not fulfilling the commitments made with the Community and , until the actual event , I was unaware if there had been any Community reaction .
And this , without any shadow of a doubt , is bad news .
In this respect , and to avoid this process , I would like to highlight the references made by the chairman of our Committee on Fisheries , Mr Fraga , and the conclusions of the report by Mr McCartin , which , in my view , was given serious deliberation and careful thought in the Committee on Fisheries .
I would also refer the Commissioner to paragraphs 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 and 21 .
In particular , in paragraphs 14 to 17 , Mr McCartin 's report refers to the need to maintain a system of protection for the Community market .
It is true that we are going to import an increasing number of non-Community products , but if we again lower the protection we have at the same time as we are being expelled from fishing-grounds , then we are asking to be expelled from even more fishing-grounds .
In some way , this Community fisheries market , which is so tempting , is the greatest enemy of the Community producers themselves , because increasingly more is asked of us , more is demanded of us and more limits are imposed on us .
I therefore believe that any concession in the context of the World Trade Organization , which it appears that the Commission is planning , must be thoroughly examined .
Secondly , paragraph 21 talks about joint ventures - joint ventures with Community capital - as a possible solution in cases where fisheries agreements have terminated ; this is an issue which could certainly be developed .
However , the great mystery is : what is going to happen with Agenda 2000 and what resources will be available for the fisheries sector during the period 2000 to 2006 ?
Is the Commission going to have the necessary funds to be able to support , for example , joint ventures , and to support all the types of measures envisaged in the Community report ?
Finally , Mr President , I would like to thank the Commission for the work it has done , I would also like to thank Mr McCartin for his work too and I would say that we are waiting for the second part of this report which will undoubtedly come very soon and will contain concrete proposals or new initiatives on the part of the Commission .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the five rapporteurs and I am going to concentrate primarily on Mr McCartin 's report on the market for fisheries products .
I believe , in fact , that the Commission has carried out a valuable analysis and that , in the same way as we have a common agricultural policy which dedicates its efforts to the stability of the agricultural markets and farmers ' incomes , we should , as regards the problems of the fisheries sector , think about trying to look for imaginative formulas which are also geared towards a common fisheries policy which guarantees a certain stability for the market and fishermen 's incomes .
We have very scarce resources and the problems continue to grow .
To give you an example , fish such as hake 11 or 12 years ago used to receive a price of just over 400 pesetas per kilo ( ECU 2.5 per kilo ) at the ports . Twelve years later , the same price is still being paid , while the cost of gas oil and the costs for fishermen have increased enormously .
This leads to a situation which may , in fact , threaten the very survival of the sector .
In this respect , paragraph 14 of Mr McCartin 's report underlines the need to eliminate or reduce the current trend towards doing away with tariffs .
We must search for measures in this connection so that , while fulfilling international commitments , the Commission can protect our sector as far as possible .
Paragraph 16 is also very important in that , as regards those competing with us , we must demand minimum social guarantees of them within the context of the measures required by the ILO : respect for the environment in fishing for resources and , in addition , minimum conditions in terms of health and quality which can be compared to our products .
I believe that we are obliged to ensure the maintenance of the Community fisheries sector - and I am aware of the difference that exists between the agricultural sector in that we are talking about a market which needs external fisheries resources to supply its own needs - but we need to find imaginative solutions in this respect .
I will simply conclude by saying that we must also focus on the need to avoid fraud in the market and I will end by giving two advance warnings regarding " loin ' fillets of tuna from countries involved in the generalized system of preferences and the possibility of the Community market for cod being affected by fraud from Russia , for example , through agreements with other countries .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think the method the Commission has chosen is the right one : by opening this communication to discussion , it allows Parliament , the various sectors and the Council to make their contributions to what will become the subsequent legislation .
But I should like to emphasize here a point mentioned in Mr McCartin 's report , which I think is an excellent contribution to this debate .
That point concerns the waters of non-EU countries ; it is a subject that has been very well dealt with by Mr Medina Ortega and we should indeed be giving some thought to it , for , as he has quite correctly said , the consumption of fish products in the European Union is also an attraction in market terms and in some ways also a potential cause of greater difficulty in obtaining fishing quotas , which , as we know , is the area in which we are experiencing the greatest problems .
On reading the Commission document , therefore , I would like to insist on a few measures which I consider to be important .
In the first place , and naturally on the subject of sardines , in the light of my honourable friend 's excellent report on the canning industry , I should like to re-emphasize what has already been said here about sardines , namely the need for compensation for the sardine-canning industry . Hence the importance of subsidies for the freezing and storage industries .
We also need a way of regulating the market itself . My view is that the paper drawn up by the Producers ' Organizations should have been used as a basis and it would have operated by means of sardines purchased by the Producers ' Organizations at above their removal price .
We need an award for quantities delivered by the Producers ' Associations to industry under contracts , because we consider it essential that the industry should have strong and active organizations ; we need the possibility of developing interprofessional organizations , the use of denominations of origin and quality marks , and particularly promotion campaigns based on denominations of origin ; we need to channel the principle of preferential Community treatment into food subsidies ; and finally , we need the financial aid to off-set the temporary or permanent closure of industrial units , the only way of preventing some very negative social effects in the already disastrous situation that exists in some regions which are highly dependent on fishing .
Finally , I should like to underline the following point : this reform is going to cost more money .
This is also something we should be aware of .
It will cost at least ECU 30m per year to implement this reform .
That is a point Parliament will also have to think about .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the topics covered in the Varela report , which I refer to in particular , are many and on the whole have been dealt with properly , with solutions that I consider positive in most cases .
However , no mention is made of the international agreements on trade and the problems related to the gradual reduction of customs protection .
Well , in my opinion , given the insufficient amount of raw materials produced by the Community , we must now guarantee that the processing industry is supplied at internationally quoted prices and avoid a situation where , in cases of bilateral cooperation agreements , we are forced to barter the total elimination of customs duties on finished products for the signing of fisheries agreements , such as that with Morocco .
Now , the customs advantages granted to Morocco have really been a major factor in the closure of most of the facilities of the Italian sardine canning industry .
We would like to make sure that the tuna canning industry does not meet with the same fate , as could very well happen if the current system were to be modified with zero customs duties on imported frozen tuna steaks from GSP countries .
That is why I certainly consider it useful to do an in-depth study on the effects of the so-called tariff anomalies , definitely including the anomaly with imported loins which , contrary to the general rule , are imported as a finished product .
The rapporteur is right in calling for an effective system to control imported canned goods from third countries and the origin of products , a definite policy of quality which should be combined with an adequate promotional campaign .
He is also right in requesting that the Community 's canned goods be declared sensitive products , with compensatory aid for the tuna and sardine sector : all this in a very labour-intensive sector , which is often located in disadvantaged regions , and therefore one which merits priority consideration in the context of the European Union 's employment policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think the debate we have conducted here underlines yet again the complexity of this sector and the many interconnections between its individual elements .
For example , many of you , during this debate , have told me that it would be beneficial to develop aquaculture not only in our own area , but also in the developing countries and therefore in line with our bilateral agreements .
This is all well and good , except that to produce fish by aquaculture we need fish meal .
If I might hark back to the debate we held scarcely an hour and a half ago on fish products not intended for human consumption , we came face to face with a number of contradictions .
I say all this simply because during the debate I found that I had detected two of the dominant persuasions prevailing within the Council , but also within the sector itself , which do , however , have a point in common , if I understood your excellent report correctly , Mr Rapporteur .
This common factor relates to the need for a greater commitment on the part of the public authorities in favour not only of the transition to a more responsible fisheries policy , but also with respect to aid for the sector to enable it to adapt to new economic , commercial and health criteria .
So , if I understand you properly , we agree on the fact that it is important to strengthen the organizational base of all the parties involved and help them gain access to innovations .
We therefore have to support the operators in the sector and the industry as a whole .
But I would like to ask you a question that many others have already posed .
What about the quality policy , and indeed other motions which have been tabled , such as the controlled source proposal ?
We can and must be able to control it .
And I would inform this House that it is already difficult enough for us to apply the regulations on minimum size in a credible way .
If this is the approach we are to adopt , we must therefore - and this is the matter raised by Ms McKenna - give some thought to the supervision and control conditions required .
Some Members have urged the Commission to conduct further research , fresh analyses and so forth .
I would simply like to point out that this debate has been running since 1996 , that we have held two seminars with Parliament , at Quimper and La Haye , that work with the departments concerned has continued in close concert with Parliament , that we have listened to the opinions of everybody , that there have also been a number of regional meetings with representatives of the sector and that , therefore , the time has arrived for the Commission to draw its own conclusions and to debate a legislative text designed to clarify a significant number of issues .
The time has now come for me to honour the commitment I undertook to submit a proposal which will inevitably be controversial , because it is impossible to please everyone .
For example , to go back to the debate , several suggestions were put forward which do not bear any relation to the matter in hand .
Because in the fishing industry that is how things always are ; as soon as you open a debate on a particular issue , we have to say a little something about everything .
Take the subject of funds , for example .
I have no idea what funds will be allocated , any more than you do .
What will the Community budgetary allocation be for the period 2000-2006 ?
Like you , I do not have a clue .
As you know , in principle , the budgetary allocation does not come within my domain .
Moreover , it is quite clear that there are problems with regard to the developing countries , to which several speakers have alluded .
I note , for instance , the statements by Morocco , which no longer wants part of any fishing agreement .
To me , there is nothing new in this .
Incidentally , further contacts are meanwhile being established .
So I would call for a little more order and discipline when the Commission is the sole arbiter in negotiations concerning fishing agreements .
I do not really need help here .
I would rather not be bothered with , for example , the presence of those private European companies - without naming names - which have concluded private agreements with individual States in the developing world , where I hold a negotiating brief .
I would also be glad if the Member States could remember from time to time that the authority to negotiate fishing agreements falls within the jurisdiction of the Community .
It is a fact that confusion helps nobody .
But I digress - indeed , we have had no shortage of digressions during this debate .
During the debate , I detected two particular persuasions which are typical and traditional , and two objectives that are occasionally contradictory .
On the one side , there are those who believe that complying with the common trade policy in this sector is a priority and , on the other side , there are those - whose representatives I have met - who wish to boost the importance of domestic policies in market matters .
The Commission has a duty , before the end of the year , to settle any disputes and to submit a proposal which , I am certain , will not please everybody .
One further word on the own-initiative report of Mr Varela .
There are , nevertheless , degrees of convergence between Mr Varela 's report and that of Mr McCartin .
For example , both stress the need to observe strict compliance with health regulations .
This is an important factor , from a commercial standpoint too .
While we are on the subject , I would also remind you that there are only five or six Community health inspectors .
I have said this before and I want to remind you of it again today .
There are also other points on which the rapporteurs see eye-to-eye .
For example , the creation of mechanisms for strengthening associations and enhancing the position of individual operators in the sector .
But , beyond these points of common interest , there are also analyses and proposals concerning the canning industry that seem to me , Mr Varela , to be overly dramatic or pessimistic .
Because , whilst it is true that some companies - which we know about - have been unable to cope with the competition from the developing countries , we should also point out that some of them were , to some extent , operating obsolete businesses and that imports have merely accelerated a process that was inevitable .
The business people concerned have even admitted as much .
In addition , I feel obliged to point out that the Commission has already introduced marketing standards for canned sardines and tuna , to guarantee the transparency of commercial transactions in this sector , all for the benefit of the consumer .
Hence , a number of criteria , quite clear in their purpose , have already been defined with regard to sardines and tuna .
The problem is , however , that I am being asked to allocate special aid facilities to help the sector along , virtually to the detriment of other sectors .
I must therefore remind you that this sector has already benefited from significant financial support from the Community as compared with others .
It is also the case that in 1995 the Member States themselves decided not to extend the procedure for awarding carry-over payments in favour of the sardine industry , precisely because the operators and the Member States no longer wished to favour this sector over others , in view of everything that had been done already .
Member States may , at their own level , give precedence to this sector if they consider it to be of prime importance in their own country , by relying , of course , on the Structural Funds which fall within their jurisdiction .
On the same subject , allow me to point out that such aid awarded by the Member States , whether in the past or in the future , does not excuse the sector from contributing to innovative projects , in order to steer the marketing strategy towards valueadded products , which foster European technology , rather than in the direction of basic products which do not require advanced technology and which therefore suffer badly from the competition of developing countries where labour costs are obviously very much cheaper .
So , there you have the guidelines .
But with regard to carry-over payments , I would remind Mr Varela that this was rejected by the Member States back in 1995 .
Thank you , Mrs Bonino .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have arrived at the end of this debate , which has seriously overrun its allocated time .
Mr Varela wishes to speak as rapporteur and he may do so for a maximum of one minute .
Mr President , the Commissioner called on us not to help but , at least , to ensure that we did not put any barriers or obstacles in the way of her work .
And in relation to the competitiveness of the industry to which we are referring , I would like to say to her that it is obvious that certain companies cannot be competitive , but we are asking that they do not put obstacles before them .
I referred to the fact that certain agreements are obstacles , and this is what we are saying .
If there are health measures yet very few inspectors , as you said , we call for the creation of a network of specialized laboratories so that there might be controls .
The Member States can do this themselves but it must take place on the basis of a proposal from the European Union itself .
Madam Commissioner , we are calling for specific measures to be taken .
Thank you , Mr Varela .
I hereby declare the debate closed , having considerably overrun the time allocated , and I am sure that you all join with me in thanking Parliament 's services and the interpreters for this extra work which we have burdened them with on a day that was already extremely busy .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.55 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's session have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , I rise under Rule 108 to make a personal statement because of the attack on myself and Mr Coates by the President-in-Office when he replied to the debate yesterday .
On page 28 of the Rainbow he suggests that we do not have any democratic mandate or legitimacy because we were elected on a Labour ticket and therefore we should not be sitting as Members of the House .
This is a serious personal attack and under Rule 108 of the Rules of Procedure I am allowed to reply .
I would observe that I was elected under a Labour ticket - not a New Labour ticket - when John Smith and Margaret Beckett were leaders of the party , and elected by two-thirds of my party members locally , unlike the Labour MEPs for next year who will be selected by Mr Blair personally .
So , I would claim to have a far stronger democratic mandate than they will have .
Madam President , I would like to praise the exemplary activity of the French security service during the visit by Tony Blair .
Secondly , I would like to inform you that President Gil-Robles has received a letter from Prime Minister Dehaene promising us that a police station will be established in the vicinity of the Parliament in Brussels .
Madam President , it concerns what has been lacking in the Minutes throughout the week , namely there has been no reference to Mr Falconer telling us whether he is voting or not .
Has there been any rule change by the Bureau with regard to recorded votes ?
Thank you very much , Mr Wynn , for following the matter so carefully .
Madam President , I thank my colleague , Mr Wynn , for raising this matter .
Obviously , I would wish to allay Members ' concern .
I am glad to see that the Monday to Friday group are still with us .
We are here all week and we vote all week , unlike some Members who are only present part-time and by Thursday afternoon are on the move .
The answer is quite simple .
I wrote to the President asking him how many Members had been affected as a result of the rule changes .
He advised me that per part-session since February 120 Members have had their allowances adjusted as a result .
I attend every month from Monday to Friday so I participate for the whole week .
I am opposed to the principle of how the Bureau came to the decision without referring the matter to the House , but I am appalled at the lack of backbone of these 120 Members who have stayed silent on this issue and have raised no protest in this Chamber .
With that in mind , I have decided to allow them to deal with their own consciences .
I will continue to support my principles and I have no doubt I will argue for those principles within the Socialist Group .
I hope this allays the House 's concern .
Thank you , Mr Falconer , for the explanation .
We will record that in the Minutes .
( The Minutes were approved )
Votes
The amendment of Regulation No 1866 / 86 laying down certain technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources in the waters of the Baltic Sea is based on the latest recommendations adopted in the framework of the International Baltic Sea Fisheries Commission ( IBSFC ) .
What are these technical measures ?
They are merely minor adjustments to already existing prohibition periods for the fishing of flounder and plaice , and minor adjustments to prohibitions on the use of certain gear in fishing for salmon .
As the rapporteur has said , who , may I remind you , is Danish , ' These adjustments , and thus the Commission proposal , can easily be approved ' .
However , I should like to remind you that wild salmon is in the process of disappearing from the Baltic Sea , a sea which receives special treatment from the Commission .
As we have seen in the Kindermann report , intensive industrial fishing is carried out in the Baltic .
Industrial fisheries use small-meshed nets and , despite protests made by Greenpeace , such activities are not subject to any particular restrictions .
The use of large-scale drift gillnets is still authorized , although this is an infringement of international legislation , which imposes a 2.5 km limit .
On the other hand , at present , Spanish vessels rarely fish in the Baltic .
Does the latter explain the former ?
Our group supports this report in substance , as well as the proposal for a regulation , but wishes to stress that the Commission must remain impartial with regard to the fishermen of the various Member States .
We are therefore very firmly opposed to the fact that the Commission ' forgot ' industrial fisheries when it established new technical measures for fisheries in Europe and that it ' forgot ' to ask the users of large-scale drift gillnets to comply with international legislation .
It is inadmissible that the Commission should ignore the scientific considerations which form the basis of the Common Fisheries Policy , should favour some European fishermen undeservedly and should discriminate outrageously against others , in order to gain a large enough majority in the Council .
Kindermann report ( A4-0201 / 98 )
My group wishes to congratulate Mr Kindermann on the quality of his report on industrial fisheries .
As you know , industrial fisheries use small-meshed nets , the catches from which are intended for industrial processing into fish meal and fish oil .
Denmark is the largest producer of fish meal in the European Union , accounting for 80 % of industrial production and 6 % of the world market .
Fish meal is used mainly as animal feed in the poultry and pig-rearing sectors .
There is a remarkable disparity between the declared objective of the conservation of stocks and the huge quantities of fish caught for industrial purposes .
Our rapporteur quotes a number of particularly impressive statistics relating to industrial fisheries : 30 % of all world catches comes from industrial fisheries .
The proportion may be as high as 60 % in some seas , such as the North Sea , which is extremely vulnerable , as we all know .
By-catches are also large : sometimes they even exceed actual catch quotas .
There is an even more startling contrast between the Commission 's uncompromising attitude towards certain types of fishery and its leniency towards industrial fisheries .
Does this distinction have anything to do with the fact that Spanish vessels are rarely to be found in northern waters ?
Such discriminatory treatment by the Commission is not acceptable under any circumstances .
On the one hand , the use of drift gillnets has been prohibited without scientific basis in the Atlantic , where small catches are taken from very large stocks .
On the other hand , a good deal of research has been carried out , but no action has been taken with regard to industrial fisheries , which makes huge demands on resources . What is the reason for this differential treatment ?
If industrial fisheries constituted a significant activity in the Atlantic , they would most certainly be treated differently .
McCartin report ( A4-0204 / 98 )
As I said in my speech , our group tabled 15 amendments to Mr McCartin 's report .
In fact , in contrast to the rapporteur 's initial proposals , we believe it is necessary to have a strong COM for fishery products , particularly for products intended for the fresh fish market .
The approach adopted by the rapporteur is too exclusively liberal , going so far as to call explicitly for a reduction in the principle of Community preference .
I do , of course , know that the European Union has signed , and has made Member States sign , a number of free trade agreements .
It has made Member States join the generalized system of preferences , particularly with drug-producing countries . We are also restricted by the GATT agreements within the framework of the WTO because , as a result of a major political error , unlike agricultural products , fishery products have always been consolidated under the GATT .
A COM which strengthens the entire fisheries sector is therefore essential , because of these major constraints , which already significantly limit Community preference .
We have a number of other possibilities , such as the improved organization of the sector , which would enhance the fresh fish market , and the continued use of market interventions .
But what does the rapporteur propose ?
In terms of enhancement of the market , very little .
Instead of maintaining withdrawal systems , he proposes to do away with them .
What would be left of the COM ?
One can but wonder .
The COM must not operate to the sole advantage of processors , whose main requirement is regularity of supply at the lowest cost , irrespective of the source of raw materials .
It is therefore essential for the WTO to establish specific measures applicable to the fresh fish market .
Varela Suanzes-Carpegna report ( A4-0137 / 98 )
Our group supports the overall approach adopted by Mr Varela in his report .
It is clearly essential to preserve , and therefore if necessary to protect , the fish canning industry and aquaculture in the European Union .
This is why my group tabled 16 amendments to the McCartin report on the COM for fisheries products .
The fisheries sector must be analyzed as a whole : it needs the processing sector but at the same time , and the Commission must accept this , if production were to cease in Europe , there would no longer be a European fish canning sector .
We therefore only support those of the rapporteur 's proposals which aim to strengthen the canning industries and to stop relocations to countries where wages are low .
In his report , Mr Varela focuses on two important sectors of the canning industry : the sardine sector and the tuna sector .
The sardine sector , which has been virtually allowed to disappear in France , is still very important in the Iberian Peninsula .
The rapporteur proposes protecting this industry from imports of processed products from North African countries , particularly Morocco .
Although I am aware of the competition faced by the industry in Portugal and Spain , I would however like to point out that these North African countries have fragile economies which require support , unlike a certain number of other countries - especially in Latin America - with whom the European Union has signed preferential agreements to import tinned fish products , in particular within the framework of the so-called ' generalized system of preferences ' .
With regard to the tuna industry , the rapporteur considers it necessary ' to ensure there is a proper supply of the necessary raw material ( fresh , frozen and fillets of tuna ) , giving priority to the Community fleet ? ' . The Spanish , French , Irish and British tuna fishing fleets in the Atlantic have contributed towards that supply until now .
I note that having worked actively in favour of the prohibition of fishing for tuna by European vessels with drift gillnets , Mr Varela is now asking for specific measures to protect the Community tuna processing industry : is it also destined , like fish stocks , to become a Spanish monopoly ?
Finally , Mr President , I should like to remind the House that the fish product canning industry is highly diversified and not limited to the above two sectors of activity .
Furthermore , fish product processors , like all manufacturers , require regular supplies of raw materials at the lowest possible cost .
We must therefore very carefully ensure that the future of the processing sector is safe , but at the same time we must avoid doing so to the detriment of the fresh fish sector . This is a sector which is likely to expand in response to the current concerns of consumers , who wish to eat fresh , wholesome , unrefined foods .
This is why it is absolutely essential for European fishermen to retain control of the fresh fish sector .
Market in oils and fat
The next item is the statement on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 136 / 66 / EEC on the establishment of a common organization of the market in oils and fats ( COM ( 98 ) 0171 - C4-0229 / 98-98 / 0098 ( CNS ) ) .
One moment !
Quiet please !
We cannot hear if you are all talking at once .
They should have taken a little olive oil before they came !
( FR ) I have therefore proposed that the procedure involving the Management Committee for Oils and Fats be replaced by the procedure described in Article 43 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
I have also tabled amendments to make consultation of the European Parliament compulsory .
With regard to the system of national guaranteed quantities , I believe that the need to ensure compliance with the maximum guaranteed quantity must be emphasized , in order to avoid unfortunate divergences such as those which have occurred with regard to the quotas for dairy products .
Finally , as far as infringements of the aid schemes are concerned , the twelve months proposed by the Commission in which to adopt a decision with regard to further action to be taken following the detection of infringements is too long and will make the decision less effective .
A period of six months would be preferable , as suggested by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Finally , I should like to remind you of the urgent need to obtain full , reliable statistics on the production of olive oil in the various producer Member States .
Before the adoption of this regulation , it would be preferable for the Court of Auditors to have completed their verification of these statistics .
That is , in brief , the reasoning behind the amendments in my report , which the Committee on Budgetary Control has approved .
Commissioner , we are here to defend a wonderful gift of nature .
The olive tree gives us the world 's most noble representative of the food we produce , and at the same time it is the symbol of a unique landscape , a history and an identity of which we should be proud as Europeans .
Allow me , Commissioner Fischler , to say that the Commission certainly gave a poor example and did a horrible job of managing this matter : news leaks , inferences , rebuttals and postponements too often prevailed over the true merit of the official documents and helped poison the atmosphere somewhat .
Although this Commission proposal has its flaws , it does have two merits in my view : the first is that it takes account of the arguments of the majority of this Parliament .
Personally , I was critical of the Jové Peres compromise , but I must acknowledge today that after the stormy debates in 1997 on the fundamental points of the compromise reached in December , the Commission has accepted Parliament 's arguments .
And now , ladies and gentlemen , we cannot say : we were only joking !
It makes no sense today to have someone here complaining that it is impossible to have a fit and proper debate .
The second merit of this proposal is that it puts an end to the uncertainties and indifference that we have been seeing for some time .
We cannot ignore , with the excuse that there are no surpluses lying in the warehouses , the profound signs that the sector has structural difficulties : falling prices , sharp cuts in aid and production forecasts for the leading producer country that foreshadow worrisome scenarios for producers who are not at fault for all this .
We cannot make it through another year with a COM from 1966 , one which is old and outdated , the only common organization of the market that does not have national quotas aimed at making individual Member States and producers responsible for their behaviour .
Those who do not want all this , those who persist in asking for time , facts and postponements , saying that the fault lies with the same old Eurocrats in Brussels , are not defending olive growers but betraying them .
I hope that today we all realize this .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to make four remarks .
First of all , I would like to say that I , too , on behalf of my group , am pleased that this debate has finally reached the House , a debate that we have requested because paragraph 1 of the document approved at the time by Parliament stated that we had to move quickly to reform the sector .
I am therefore pleased , because the Council of Ministers and the Commission have taken heed of our request and this morning we can finally express our opinion .
As for the second observation , the Commission 's proposal does indeed take on board some of the important points that we raised in the document approved by Parliament : ' no ' to consumer aid , ' yes ' to production aid , which is confirmed , and ' yes ' to the definition of national quotas , without which we risk not only seeing producers penalized but also a war break out between these producers and between the various producer countries .
Therefore , the Commission is taking heed of our requests and I and my group are pleased about this .
Thirdly , I would nonetheless like to raise a point that does not please me .
In all the discussion papers on the CAP reform which also concern Agenda 2000 , the Group of the European People 's Party talks about rebalancing resources between the various sectors and between the various areas of the European Union .
Well , we here , Commissioner , have an important opportunity : the opportunity to demonstrate that we truly intend to promote producer sectors that have a future - without any distinction between sectors in the North and in the South - by giving a positive response to olive oil and a positive response to a fundamental sector in the Mediterranean that can develop but that needs more resources to increase overall production levels , and the opportunity to promote the product on the markets and improve the quality .
Lastly , I would like to say that a solution also has to be found for the current year .
Even if we make wise decisions here today in Parliament and in the forthcoming days in the Council of Ministers , we will perhaps solve the problem for the year to come , but there are already major consequences for the current year that producers will be forced to pay without special measures .
For this reason I request that it be adopted by the Commission .
Mr President , Madam President , Commissioner , we are debating here a particularly important point .
We are all aware of the importance of agriculture for the European Union and the importance of certain agricultural sectors , not for the entire European territory but for very specific areas .
Last year there was a meeting in Cork where the importance of the countryside was also discussed .
Commissioner , in certain areas , guarantees for the countryside are guarantees for particular crops which are , in fact , monocultures in those areas .
The Commission drew up a proposal which was debated by the Committee on Agriculture and approved by a wide majority in this Parliament last December .
The Commission has drawn up a new proposal and I must say that , in many cases , it has not respected the guidelines that this House had approved reflecting the fundamental concern of those regions involved in olive oil production .
I agree , Commissioner , that fraud is something that has got to be avoided and cannot represent a form of finance for anyone . However , I believe that we cannot legislate or lay down regulations with only the struggle against fraud in mind .
We must think about the needs of the sector and the needs of those areas throughout Europe which depend , primarily , on a specific sector such as , in this case , that of olive oil .
We have always talked about the need to guarantee high-quality agriculture and high-quality products .
And if we are talking about the quality of a product , the guarantee of a product 's origin , we must ban the marketing of mixtures with other products , which represents an adulteration of the guarantee of origin .
We must draw up a policy based on protection and on promoting consumption aimed at guiding the consumer , provide specific aid to products linked to olive oil , such as table olives , and establish , in this respect , effective systems of control .
I believe , Commissioner , that this proposal with which we have been presented can be improved and I hope that during this debate , through the vote on the amendments tabled by the various political groups , we can manage to significantly improve the proposal on this issue . Although it may not be an important issue for the whole of European agriculture , it is very important for specific regions and for specific people who do want to believe in a truly European agricultural policy .
Madam President , the Commission has put forward a number of proposals for the reform of the market in olive oil , chiefly because there were doubts concerning the effectiveness and transparency of a double system of aid to producers .
In parallel , Community production increased during the last season , which had unfavourable repercussions on the setting of prices , while the non-allocation of maximum guaranteed quantities at national level punishes all oil producers for the violations of a few .
This considerable increase in Community production has created huge reserves , while in many cases the difference between the price from the producer and the retail price has created problems of competition .
The reform of the market in olive oil is urgent and it should come about soon and last until 2006 , in other words , it should have the same time scale as the other products subsumed under Agenda 2000 .
A transition period will serve only those who invest in overproduction , which runs counter to Community projections , while it will punish the rest and lead to a loss of jobs and environmental damage .
The establishment of national quotas is necessary , therefore , and must take this year 's production - 1998 / 99 - into consideration .
It is also necessary to preserve the intervention mechanism and the intervention price in order to ensure market and price stability in a sector where production varies considerably from year to year .
It is necessary to create a supplementary system of subsidies for smallholdings and small-scale producers , as well as aid for the setting up , before the year 2000 , of an oil-production register in countries that do not have one .
Finally , in my opinion , it is also necessary to create a system of subsidies for the production of table olives .
Madam President , in its proposal for a reform the Commission has not followed most of the guidelines contained in the report approved in December by this Parliament .
Unlike with other reforms , the Commission proposes doing away with intervention and maintaining the maximum guaranteed quantity at a level which is much lower than Community consumption . And , ladies and gentlemen , in Parliament we called for an increase in the maximum guaranteed quantity to take account of consumption , exports and a safety margin , and this was the condition , ladies and gentlemen , that was to enable us to subsequently establish national reference quantities .
From my modest position , I am calling on my colleagues to take serious account of this issue when voting today .
The Commission does not put forward proposals to ban blends of olive oil with other oils , it does not draw up proposals to establish a reliable and effective system of control , nor proposals on table olives , although Mr Fischler promised us this at the conclusion of the debate which took place in Parliament in December .
Moreover , it tackles the control of planting in a way that might create serious problems of legal uncertainty .
The list could be much longer , as demonstrated by the large number of amendments which have been tabled .
So , we are talking about a proposal similar to those usually presented by the Commission concerning Mediterranean production . In other words , it is totally discriminatory with respect to continental production , although one other characteristic is evident : the approval of the urgent procedure for a radical reform of a COM , which is an unprecedented event in this Parliament .
If we wanted the reform to enter into force before next year , we still had some time available to better complete our work .
Leaving aside the media use which the existence of different presidencies might have , the use of this procedure has a very clear practical significance : the Commission is drawing up proposals for the distribution of the maximum guaranteed quantities between those Member States involved in production using information which the Commission itself says is not very faithful and blocking information - which will appear in the next few days , from the Court of Auditors , etcetera - which could have been very valuable for our work .
Ladies and gentlemen , my group 's amendments aim , as far as possible , to correct this situation and , of course , have tried to be completely respectful of this Parliament 's mandate and of the unitary commitment we established in December .
I hope that this desire for agreement , which took shape in December , is respected today by all our colleagues .
Madam President , olive growing is of great cultural , but also economic , significance and therefore the identity of European olive cultivation must be guaranteed right up to the level of regional allocation .
The stock of olive trees may well be of importance to us - also an important ecological factor - but that is not enough .
It is also a matter of considering olives as a social factor , in other words , in relation to the number of jobs in this sector .
What is more , in the policy of the Commission it must be clear that we are dealing here with an important foodstuff .
The objective , therefore , must not be to support a type of cultivation that is difficult to market , but instead the marketing , processing and regional allocation must be supported , taking into consideration the demand for olive oil from consumers .
Only if we move in the direction of a regional market will it be possible to resolve the difficulties that we face , despite pumping billions into this sector and still losing jobs .
Madam President , Commissioner , the assignment of national quotas , the elimination of consumer aid and the improvement of crops and the quality of the product are some of the best aspects of this document . For this reason , it has our overall support .
Of course , the elimination of the flat-rate scheme for small producers and the uncertainty surrounding the last season lead us to request special measures so that this year too the sharp cuts do not negatively effect the weaker economies , those of southern Europe .
We must , however , convince ourselves that olive oil , the growing of olives , is an important European resource not only from an economic point of view but also from an environmental viewpoint .
The ' oil ' problem cannot be considered just a problem of the countries of southern Europe , it is a European problem : oil is a European resource , and a strong product can be decisive in creating competitive conditions that benefit our economies .
That is why I am expressing the National Alliance 's approval of and support for the work done , and I believe that these observations lead us to reflect on the need to take urgent action to obtain certainties .
For too many years we have been in a situation of uncertainty that has given rise to conditions of speculation .
This document is a first important step so that producers can again have peace of mind in order to improve production and to create conditions of growth for the European economies .
Madam President , I would like to briefly mention , on behalf of the Spanish Socialist Members , the criteria which have led to these amendments .
Recently , this Parliament approved an opinion on the future of the olive oil COM which seemed to establish a certain consensus .
The response from the European Commission could not have been more frustrating since it presented a proposal which was totally removed from that consensus .
Despite what has been said , there is no national agenda here : if we ask for an increase in the maximum guaranteed quantity , we do so in the interest of all European producers ; if we want to maintain intervention , we want to do so for all European producers ; if we want a specific ban on mixtures , we want it on behalf of all European consumers ; if we call for a scheme for table olives , we do so for all European producers ; and if we call for a special regime for small producers , we do so irrespective of the region where they are located .
Commissioner , I thank you for being here for this debate .
However , I would like to tell you clearly that the producers of olive oil cannot understand that , while in other sectors of the CAP there do not seem to be any budgetary problems , in this sector , in spite of the contribution the olive sector makes towards combating erosion and desertification and in spite of its contribution to employment and to keeping the population in the countryside , the Commission 's proposals go in the opposite sense .
I am sure that a more detailed consideration of its proposal on the part of the Commission would lead , as has happened in other sectors - such as wine - to a new proposal , a much more realistic one , which maintains the economic and social cohesion which must inspire all of the Community policies of the European Union .
Madam President , it is not necessary to highlight the enormous economic importance of the olive crop in the European Union .
More than 4 million hectares and 465 000 jobs depend on this crop .
In my autonomous community alone , Andalusia , 14 000 jobs , almost 50 % of all agricultural jobs , depend on this COM , which is thus established as a basic element of social and territorial cohesion .
In this context , the Commission has presented us with a proposal which , in its current form , is clearly out of step with Mediterranean agriculture , unbalanced in respect of certain Member States and technically incorrect since it eliminates fundamental elements for the stability of prices and agricultural incomes , such as intervention . Further , it does not protect Community consumers in that it does not consider banning mixtures and totally ignores the situation of table olives .
The Commission must begin to treat Mediterranean farmers fairly .
It is not possible to always invoke financial neutrality for the more disadvantaged farmers and to be prepared to systematically increase , without restrictions , aid to continental production .
Commissioner , it is perfectly possible to increase the maximum guaranteed quantity with a very limited budgetary effort ; it is perfectly possible too , where appropriate , to bring national quotas into line with actual production in the Member States , and the Commission knows that the figures on which it based its proposal are inaccurate and obsolete .
I am pleased with the fact that we have tabled amendments which have led to important agreements within the political groups and which , if the vote reflects those agreements , will allow us to give a response to the hopes of Community farmers and significantly improve the Commission proposals , establishing , in addition , elements for rigorous control which might reassure European contributors .
I hope that the Commissioner takes these amendments into account , shows flexibility and modifies his proposal .
Madam President , Commissioner , what has happened this week in connection with the reform of the olive oil sector confirms that , by agreeing to urgent procedure , the European Parliament has taken a very serious decision , because it has agreed to deal with a very important reform without drawing up a report , acting on impulse in response to circumstances and when there was no need to observe close time limits .
With regard to the Commission 's proposal for a regulation , contrary to what some Members have said here , it does not follow the guidelines in the Jové Peres report we approved in December . It merely takes a few partial ideas from it , out of context .
We hope the amendments we shall be approving today will restore the spirit and the letter of that document , particularly as regards the increase in maximum guaranteed quantities and their national distribution on the basis of real and reliable data . This will also be my own country 's interests , in respect of which the Commission 's proposal does not take into account the olive plantation development plan .
I hope the amendments will restore the spirit and letter of the Jové Peres report regarding the reinstatement of intervention mechanisms , subsidies for small-scale producers and consumption , the production of table olives and firm measures to prohibit the mixing of olive oil with other products .
If the consensus we reached in December is recovered today and this House does not place the interest of olive growers in general second to other national interests which are not very obvious , we may be in a position to amend the Commission 's proposal , ensure that the sector remains sustainable and respond positively to the concerns of the olive growers .
I hope that , if so , the Commission will now accept what it actually rejected in December .
Madam President , concreteness is valuable to politics and must be a characteristic of politics .
We are faced with a valuable choice because it is concrete , and it is concrete because it takes account of the quality and quantity of agricultural production with mechanisms to assist production and with mechanisms to determine national quotas ; it is concrete because it takes account of the urgency of intervention ; last but not least , it is a concrete political choice because it takes into account the Mediterranean dimension and the rural dimension of the European economy .
I believe that these factors must be underlined at this time and hope that the debate serves to make this intervention more , and not less , concrete .
Madam President , Commissioner , it is with great satisfaction that I am taking part in this debate which our group called for .
We expressed our desire for it in the Committee on Agriculture when we voted for urgent procedure by 25 to a mere 17 ; we confirmed it on Monday when this Parliament wanted to send a signal and voted 196 to 154 to end this dispute .
It is definitely time that this 32-year old common organization of the markets retire .
It is unthinkable that we prolong any further some of the schemes that the COM has introduced .
I will mention two of these : the system of maximum guaranteed quantities at Community level which means that it is unthinkable to continue setting national quotas that not only no longer correspond to the productive potential of countries that produce olive oil but also no longer correspond to market demand .
So as not to repeat what other Members speaking before me have already said , why not focus on a measure that is provided for in this COM , that is , product promotion which strangely is always considered in all the COMs as optional , an almost luxury accessory ?
We know that product promotion is the best way to highlight quality , and product quality is the best way to win over consumers and in so doing also solve problems of excess quantity .
That is why a few more tonnes of oil do not scare me , provided that it is extra-virgin olive oil and therefore quality oil .
It is in the common interest today to give the go-ahead to this reform in any case , before the marketing year begins in November .
Therefore , I do not think anyone here - at least I hope not - still wants to carry out initiatives that would stand in the way of what we are trying to accomplish .
Any move to refer the matter back to committee or some similar step would not be in the interest of anyone and would cause serious economic damage . In particular , it would severely damage the image of this Parliament which once again would show itself incapable of deciding .
Granted , the proposal is not perfect , but we also have to leave some detail for the Commission and the Council , otherwise what use are they ?
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , those of us who have been opposed to the fact that this reform is being debated by urgent procedure , have tried to be constructive and be faithful travelling companions since this procedure was approved by our sovereign House .
All the basic aspects of this reform have already been discussed by the speakers before me .
The maximum guaranteed quantity , intervention , the ban on mixtures , table olives , the distribution among countries , etcetera , have all already been sufficiently discussed in order to try and have them incorporated into this reform .
However , Commissioner , and I am sorry that there is no representative from the Council here today , in a few statements made yesterday evening - which were certainly very unfortunate - the Council confirmed that this reform should take place at no financial cost .
Commissioner , you know the sector perfectly well - and we know how sensitive you are towards this topic - and on many occasions you have said that there would not be a reform which would be detrimental to producing countries .
Commissioner , you now have a golden opportunity to prove that .
You must be sensitive and accept that a reform does not take place without an increase in the budget , and particularly so when these financial stringencies always affect our southern countries .
You must seriously consider and accept the suggestions which are made by Members of this Parliament . These suggestions are being made with great sacrifices and responsibility and with a constructive spirit in mind on the part of the majority of Members , who give priority to their citizens ' advantages - for whom we have all been elected - rather than to their own possible political advantages .
Madam President , when we speak about olive oil producers there are three things we must not forget .
Firstly , we are speaking about producers who live in the poorest regions of the European Union and who , as a result , need support .
Secondly , they produce a product which has been shown to contribute to promoting the good health of consumers . Thirdly , olive growing makes an important contribution to environmental stability .
The adoption of the new regulation is urgent , not only because the regulation which currently governs olive oil is old , but because there are serious problems which need to be tackled immediately .
Chief among these is the exceeding of average guaranteed quantities at European level , and indeed by a large amount , with the result that subsidies for producers are falling dramatically in all countries , even when production in one country is low .
The system that is being proposed , that is , the system of national quotas , is without doubt a just system .
However , if the quota of a particular country is not used up , it should be permitted for the difference to be carried over into the next trading period .
I am puzzled at the fact that , while for products from the north the new regulations remain in force until 2005 , for olive oil the intention is for the regulation to remain in force only until 2001 , when there will be a new , more stringent , regulation .
Why two measures and two yardsticks ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to express my thanks for the constructive debate that we have all shared today in this discussion on the olive oil sector .
May I remind you that as long ago as December 18 1997 , with its decision on the olive oil sector , the European Parliament made a fundamental contribution to the debate on the common organization of this market .
The Commission has addressed the recommendations expressed in your proposal of March 18 this year in the following way : first , the Commission shares the view of Parliament that an urgent reform is necessary .
It has also accepted the argument for obtaining more details about production before carrying out a final reform .
The proposal for the full reform will , therefore , be presented at a later date once the appropriate actions have been carried out , but early enough for it to be able to come into force on November 1 2001 .
While a more thorough analysis is being made of the market production and certain other aspects during the initial phase , it is , however , also necessary to adapt the current regime for the financial years 1998 / 99 to 2000 / 2001 in order to confront the present difficulties of the producers and above all to avoid a worsening of the situation .
By means of this initial step , the Commission wants to do justice to the argument and the dictates of urgency .
If we now compare the resolution of the European Parliament with the proposal of the Commission , we find the following : the European Parliament wishes to have a single production subsidy in accordance with the actual quantities of oil produced .
The Commission proposes abolishing the double subsidy regulation and likewise retaining only one subsidy for the actual production .
The European Parliament is calling for an increase in the maximum guaranteed quantity , while the Commission proposes raising this maximum guaranteed quantity by 212 000 tonnes to 1 562 400 tonnes .
The European Parliament wishes to establish national reference quantities .
The Commission proposes dividing the maximum guaranteed quantity into national guaranteed quantities .
The European Parliament wishes to maintain an intervention mechanism by means of private storage .
The Commission proposes a massive strengthening and exclusive use of private storage .
This measure should make an effective contribution to market regulation .
The European Parliament wishes once and for all to abolish the consumption subsidies .
So does the Commission .
Thus , in these five central points of reform , the Commission and Parliament agree in principle .
In view of the time available , I prefer to restrict myself to the most important problem areas in my further work , instead of dealing with each of the 163 proposed amendments .
Some amendments refer to the principles of the future reform in the year 2001 .
I agree that such a reform is necessary .
Initially , however , we must improve our knowledge of this sector .
The results of the new investigations will be available soon enough to be considered in the proposals that will be presented in the year 2000 for the introduction of the reform in 2001 .
I do not believe that we should wait much longer after that for the fundamental reform .
As I have already said , the measures that are proposed with effect from the next financial year take into account the urgency of the problem .
For that reason , I cannot approve the amendments that call these measures into question .
A second group of amendments concerns the maximum guaranteed quantity and its division among the Member States .
I would point out that a sharp increase in the maximum guaranteed quantity would exceed the average capacity of the market , unless extremely low oil prices are accepted .
A division among the Member States seems essential to me .
It has , incidentally , been required by Parliament so that those producers that are producing the surpluses are given greater responsibility .
The criteria for this division are based on data from the past , using a common formula that we have also applied in other areas .
They will , however , take into account new planting and the task of regulating small producers .
A balance must be maintained here , which is certainly very difficult to do .
The amendments that concern the use of currently unused maximum guaranteed quantities include some technical options that we will certainly examine in the context of a general balance .
As far as the new cultivated areas are concerned , it is essential to limit these strictly , as experience has shown that the maximum guaranteed quantity is not sufficient to maintain the market equilibrium .
For this reason , the Commission proposes to guarantee subsidies for these new plantings only in a few exceptional cases .
It is not possible to generalize these exceptions , as is demanded in some quarters .
On the other hand , a total ban , as proposed by other amendments , seems to me ultimately more difficult to carry out and more likely to cause conflict .
Numerous amendments concern the intervention regulation as well as the subsidy for private storage .
In contrast to some amendments , I consider the abolition of the intervention regulation to be absolutely essential , in particular in connection with the request for the increase of the maximum guaranteed quantity .
I do not consider it sensible either to reintroduce a degree of intervention through the back door by the automatic triggering of private storage instead of the flexible instrument that we want to create for ourselves here .
As for the wish to retain the subsidy to small producers or the consumption subsidy in some form , experience has indeed shown us that this is not possible , since the only economic effect worth mentioning is that it encourages abuse of the subsidy to the detriment of the budget .
Numerous amendments call for the introduction of a subsidy for table olives .
The Commission has made it clear that it has an open mind on this question .
A ruling must be found , however , whereby sensible , verifiable and economically acceptable support is possible .
I can fully identify with the very many amendments for the improvement and strengthening of controls .
There are , however , already appropriate Council directives and in many cases also Commission directives , for example , for the approval and control of oil mills .
With the proposed simplifications , the controls should be concentrated on the production subsidy .
During the transitional period , the Commission 's provisions will be adapted and , if necessary , tightened so that these controls are more effective .
I can assure you that we will return to your considerations in implementing the reform .
The question of olive residue oil is related in part to the question of controls already mentioned .
In certain areas or companies it is difficult to carry out controls on oilcake .
In addition , this problem comprises several aspects such as oil quality , environmental protection and market capacity .
My offices are currently examining this question ; what is more , in my opinion , the difficult and complex question of the openly labelled and legal blends of olive oil with other oils should be subjected to further inspection .
Numerous amendments concern the work and obligations of the producer organizations .
I know that intensive discussions are taking place on this question .
The present proposal by the Commission , however , concentrates , as already mentioned , on the measures that are urgently necessary to overcome a crisis in the olive oil industry or rather to prevent an even greater crisis .
The other problems , too , such as quality improvement , forwarding of statistical data or various control questions are also to be examined during the transitional period .
Naturally I have an open mind about the extent to which such measures can be more fully incorporated into the final proposal for reform in the year 2000 . This also applies to the question of producers ' organizations .
Some amendments concern the current financial year .
This appears to be particularly profitable ; these amendments propose that the effects of cutting the subsidy are reduced .
I certainly cannot allow us to restrict the reform to this one issue and concentrate on a reduction of subsidies instead of a full reform .
The fixed regulations must be observed and considerable effects on the budget must be prevented .
In addition , we must consider that the draft budget for 1999 currently leaves us no leeway .
Other amendments would like to make the subsidy dependent on producer-independent criteria such as environmental protection .
I am basically in favour of this idea .
However , it is an idea which has already been taken up by the horizontal measures in Agenda 2000 .
Further questions , such as the reimbursement for olive oil used in tinned foods , the overall export refund , the collection of statistical data or the promotion of trade , are less urgent and should , therefore , be dealt with in the later proposal for the year 2000 .
Some amendments refer to the legislative procedure and demand that Parliament is listened to at all decision-making levels .
As far as the general legal provisions of the Council are concerned , I agree in principle .
The Commission is not proposing any new regulations of this type either .
In the present case , however , existing technical texts are being changed and here I can accept no amendments , because this would call into question all the texts and further complicate the already complex discussions .
In the reform to be carried out at a later date these general provisions should be omitted anyway .
As far as the implementing provisions of the Commission are concerned , a fast and flexible procedure in which experts from the sector can be called upon is still required .
The presentation of a report to Parliament prior to the final reform seems a thoroughly sensible idea to me ; but I would like to avoid having to present numerous reports .
Some other amendments concern comments without any concrete legislative proposals or references to existing regulations .
From my point of view , these do not have to be considered .
In closing , I would like to thank you again very much for your work and your contributions .
I am , as you know , sympathetic towards many of the ideas presented here , I am prepared to examine various questions addressed here and you may rest assured that I will express your concerns in the Council .
Thank you for your attention .
Thank you , Mr Fischler .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ( as amended ) )
Mr Colino Salamanca has the floor .
Mr President , we have just voted on the Commission proposal as modified by the amendments which we have just introduced .
We still have not voted on the legislative proposal .
And before that step , I would like to put a question to the Commissioner .
Very important amendments have been approved : the one which determines that the maximum guaranteed quantity is 1 800 000 tonnes ; the one which establishes aid for the production of table olives ; and the one which establishes that for the 19981999 season there will be a target price and a representative price .
And , finally , the ban on mixtures within the European Union has also been established .
I would like to know the Commission 's position in relation to these questions .

Would Mr Fischler like to reply to the points raised by Mr Colino Salamanca , on which I will subsequently have to make a regulatory point ?
Mr President , I am happy to reply to these points .
First may I make it clear that the Commission cannot , of course , take over all the amendments , but that it , too , has its duty to perform .
But I refer to what I said in my earlier contribution .
I would like to remind you of it again .
First , we have addressed five fundamental wishes of Parliament with our proposal .
Second , we have a certain sympathy towards many of your amendments .
Third , we will also examine a series of amendments in our further deliberations .
Mr President , the answer the Commissioner has just given me obliges me to ask that the matter be referred back to committee .
Mr Colino has asked that the matter be referred back to committee .
Are there any objections to this ?
Mr President , before giving my view with respect to the proposal by Mr Colino , I would like to ask you , in accordance with Rule 129 , if this request for referral back to committee is being made on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists or on behalf of 29 Members .
Because , if it is the latter , this would have to be done on a formal basis .
Mr Galeote , allow me to give you the explanation myself and to suggest that you read Rule 60 ( 2 ) .
In this case it is not a matter of a request for referral back to committee on behalf of a group of 29 Members .
In fact , in this case the chairman or the rapporteur has the ability to do so , and Mr Colino is chairman of the Committee on Agriculture .
Mr President , I respect that personal interpretation , and I would like to say to Mr Colino that on Tuesday he asked this House to vote against the use of urgent procedure .
We supported that , Mr Colino , because your request was based on the argument that the maximum guaranteed quantity was insufficient .
You also said that the text meant the end of intervention .
You , Mr Colino , said that the Commission 's proposal would mean that there would not be a ban on blends with olive oil and you ended by saying that the Commission 's proposal did not contain a regulation on table olives .
All of this was true and therefore we did support you .
We have had negotiations throughout the week and you participated in many of those negotiations .
Today we have had a very important vote by virtue of which the proposal , which the European Commission has drawn up in due course , has been significantly revised .
It is precisely for that reason that I am calling on this House to vote against referral and on you , Mr Colino , as a Spaniard , not to try to invalidate a vote which is very much for the benefit of our country 's farmers .
Mr Cabezón wishes to speak in favour of the request for referral back to committee .
Mr President , at this time , once we have voted - and the result of the vote is known , the representative of the PPE Group has reminded us of it - there are still too many accusations of this kind , urging us to put Spain 's interests first in an immediate and cheap manner .
The reality is that this House has given its opinion on fundamental issues concerning the reform of the olive oil sector .
The chairman of the Committee on Agriculture asked the Commissioner what he thought about the result of Parliament 's vote , and the Commissioner answered that he was sympathetic towards it .
And tomorrow , we are going to tell the producers of olive oil and European farmers that the Commissioner was sympathetic towards this vote by Parliament .
We have asked the Commissioner for more than sympathy .
There is a difference between this Parliament 's opinion and the Commission 's position ; what we want to know is whether the Commission is going to take over Parliament 's opinion , because if it does , it will take it to the Council , but if it does not take it over , it will not go to the Council at all .
We therefore ask that the proposal be referred back to committee , to see if we are able to convince the Commissioner outright that it is right for the Commission to take over Parliament 's opinion .
So , we are now calling for referral back to committee .
Mr Fantuzzi wishes to speak .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to say that Mr Colino is not making this request on behalf of the Socialist Group , because the Socialist Group is opposed to referral back to committee .

Secondly , if we refer to the Rules of Procedure , the chairman of a committee , in my opinion according to the interpretation of Rule 60 ( 2 ) , can request referral to a committee only when the Commission states that it does not intend to accept any - I repeat , any - of Parliament 's amendments .
Commissioner Fischler stated at the beginning of the debate that he accepted some of the amendments as they are .
Therefore , the conditions for referral back to committee are not met .
Thank you , Mr Fantuzzi .
Mr Dell 'Alba wishes to speak .
Mr President , I asked to speak only to express my full agreement with what Mr Fantuzzi had to say on this point and to repeat that I do not understand what we are voting on .
We had a vote without a report ; we voted on all the amendments .
Please explain to me what we are referring back to committee , given that the resolution does not exist , because we have a procedure without a report .
Frankly , it seems to me that this is a manoeuvre to buy time , and it also goes beyond any Rules of Procedure .
I do not see what you can refer back to committee !
Mr Dell 'Alba , it is the amendments which would be referred back to committee .
I will now put Mr Colino Salamanca 's request to the vote .
( Parliament rejected the request )
Mr Pasty wishes to speak .
Mr President , I should like to make a proposal with regard to the next part of our proceedings .
It is very important for us to vote this morning on the second report for which a request for urgent debate has been made , that is , the set-aside requirement .
I therefore propose that we do not hold a debate but proceed immediately to the vote which , according to our Rules of Procedure , is possible .
We could also adopt the same approach with regard to the report on bananas , otherwise , we will be unable to get everything done this morning .
I therefore suggest that we proceed to the vote on the setaside requirement , which will be very short , without holding a debate .
Mr Pasty is proposing that , for the remainder of the agenda , we proceed directly to the vote , and that we cancel the debates .
Are there any objections to Mr Pasty 's proposal ?
( The President noted that there were no objections to the proposal )
Mr President , we have seen here today a clear example of how the improvements introduced by the European Parliament are cancelled with sympathy .
Commissioner , please listen to me .
In Andalusia , and throughout Spain , it is incomprehensible that this type of backward movement can take place , and particularly as regards olive oil , a product that is so symbolic and so important .
We do not have confidence in what the Minister is going to do because , since the beginning of the process , she has mistaken her role and is more involved in making declarations than participating in negotiations , as she should .
Commissioner , you are surrounded by errors and are committing the serious mistake of discriminating against Mediterranean products ; you are surrounded by ignorance , and what we have experienced today is a historical mistake by Europe against Spain and against Andalusia .
By agreeing to the use of urgent procedure for the reform of the common organization of the market for olive oil , the European Parliament has taken a very serious political decision , and that decision creates an equally serious precedent for the future .
It is unacceptable that this House should have decided to vote on the proposal for a regulation without waiting for the completion of the Parliamentary report , which , furthermore , could have been ready in time for the debate and vote at the meeting of the Committee on Agriculture this month , and for debate and vote in the House in July .
It is unacceptable that the European Parliament should have acceded to the Council 's request for the use of urgent procedure , the only reason for which must have been the British Presidency 's desire to see the olive oil market reform process completed in the first half of the year .
It is unacceptable that the European Parliament itself should have decided to exclude itself from the normal democratic process of discussion of a matter which is not merely incidental ; on the contrary , it deals with the reform of an agricultural sector which is fundamental to four of its Member States .
This fact in itself creates a serious precedent the European Parliament will find it difficult not to follow in the future .
It is unacceptable that the European Parliament should have approved a request for the use of urgent procedure when there was no hurry in terms of time limits , since the reform to be approved is due to take effect next November .
With this decision only a limited debate has been possible in Parliament , since a period has been allowed for amendments to the Commission 's proposal for a regulation , of which there are over 160 .
In spite of this procedure , which is in no way open or democratic , the amendments approved have substantially altered the text put forward by the Commission , following the basic guidelines of Mr Jové Peres ' report .
The maximum guaranteed quantity is increased for figures representing consumption and exports and its national allocation is provided for on the basis of reliable and verifiable data .
Intervention mechanisms are restored together with the creation of subsidies for storage and also for the production of table olives .
Other measures include additional subsidies for production by small-scale growers , control mechanisms for the stages between production and consumption , a ban on the mixing of olive oil with vegetable oils , and the promotion of consumption .
The planting of new olive trees is also permitted in countries with approved development plans .
For these reasons , although we disagree with the process , we vote in favour of the regulation as amended by a set of amendments that originated in our group .
The Commission should simply accept the amendments and proceed accordingly .
After requesting the emergency procedure , the Council has no option but to ratify the amendments approved today .
This is what we and European olive growers demand .
Set-aside requirement
The next item is the debate on the proposal for a Council Regulation derogating from Regulation ( EEC ) No 1765 / 92 establishing a support system for producers of certain arable crops as regards the set-aside requirement for the marketing year 1999 / 2000 ( COM ( 98 ) 03661 - C4-0363 / 98-98 / 0213 ( CNS ) ) .
In accordance with Mr Pasty 's proposal , we shall proceed directly to the vote .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf wishes to speak .
Mr President , I would like us to debate this report and I would like the debate to proceed as we have proposed and planned it .
The fact that time is short must not impede the debates on the report .
At the time , no objections were raised .
However , so that there is no doubt , I will put to the vote Mr Pasty 's proposal that , for the remainder of the agenda , we proceed directly to the votes .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal ( as amended ) )
Mr Souchet has the floor .
Mr President , I will make my explanation of vote in writing as I intended , but I also wish to say orally that it is scandalous that Parliament has given its opinion an issue as important as this without holding a debate .
We are not debating this matter .
Parliament has approved this method of proceeding .
In order to combat cereal surpluses in the course of the agricultural reform of 1992 , a decision was made to link the area-related compensation payments so that producers of certain agricultural crops would take a certain percentage of their land out of production .
By means of Regulation No 1765 / 92 / EEC , the percentage determined for compulsory set-aside was 17.5 % .
At the same time , small producers who make use of the simplified regulation are exempted from the set-aside obligation .
The compulsory setaside quota was set at 15 % in 1993 and 1994 and at 5 % in 1997 and 1998 .
Initially , set-aside fulfilled its purpose as a measure for managing the market .
Surpluses were reduced by using them as animal feed and by prompt servicing of the world market .
The introduction of an export levy by the Commission was an unfortunate measure .
It impeded the reduction of cereal stocks .
Anyone who opposes the market is penalized .
After two good harvests the supplies are building up again and the internal market prices have weakened considerably .
Its use as animal feed is reaching limits , because also the meat markets are static or falling .
We welcome the fact that the cyclical set-aside is set at 10 % and that no new planting of fodder plants is permitted .
The utilization of new feed quantities creates new problems on the meat market and new control problems .
The set-aside areas may only be planted exclusively with raw materials that will grow again .
This has proved successful !
In particular , there has been a pleasing demand for vegetable oils in industry as an environmentally friendly fuel and lubricating oil .
I call on the Council and the Commission to implement the resolution of 10 % very swiftly so that the farmers can plan their planting in good time .
The proposal by the Commission concerning the compulsory set-aside of 10 % of arable land for next year is unavoidable .
Income compensation was fixed for six years in 1993 .
With present prospects of production , the increased stocks with limited export prospects would result in an unacceptable fall in cereal prices .
However , the proposal puts the Commission in a difficult position as Agenda 2000 proposes only voluntary set-aside .
More efforts should be made by the Commission to find new markets for arable products .
Raw material from the arable sector can be used to make bio diesel , lubricating oil , plastics etcetera , which are all bio degradable and therefore to the benefit of the environment .
The European Commission should investigate whether compulsory use of these products initially in ecologically sensitive areas is economically feasible , especially from an environmental point of view .
If new markets can be created , farmers will become less dependent on public subsidies .
We were told in 1992 that it was necessary to reinstate the set-aside , which had been tested since 1988 , as stocks were increasing due to over-production .
From 1992 to 1997 , we were told that the set-aside was having a positive effect .
Stocks were declining because of the setaside .
But now , in 1998 , we are being told that it is necessary to establish a set-aside of 10 % because stocks have increased to 14 million tonnes , and may even reach an estimated 30 million tonnes by the year 2000 .
At the same time , the reform of the CAP removes the set-aside requirement .
Whilst in Agenda 2000 the set-aside is being removed , at the same time it has to be urgently re-established .
This is a strange way to behave .
In reality , the set-aside , like the " fine tuning ' of a visual flight procedure , has hardly any effect on the world market .
When stocks decline , it is because there is a drop in supply and an increase in demand .
Supply may decrease because of the climate in North America ( snow ) and in Cairns Group countries ( drought in Australia ) .
El Niño has far more effect on the market than the European Commission and its stabilizers .
Similarly , when the growing Asian economy increases its indirect and direct consumption of cereals , in order to feed chickens and pigs , for example , Western stocks decline .
Conversely , if Asian currencies collapse , purchases of cereals decrease in the West .
In other words , Brussels ' voluntarism , expressed in terms of rationing procedures , such as MGQs , quotas , grubbing and other national guaranteed quantities , is ideological rather than practical and effective .
This ideology is reprehensible .
It is the Malthusian ideology of the Club of Rome .
According to Brussels , we must stop planting olive trees after 2001 , although the consumption of olive oil is increasing and we are world leaders , producing 80 % of the total quantity of olive oil .
With regard to vineyards , planting is being stopped , vines uprooted , unripe grapes gathered .
Apple trees are being pulled up .
Milk production is being restricted .
Where cereals are concerned , land is laid to waste .
There is constant rationing everywhere .
And meanwhile , at the international negotiating table , from the GATT to the WTO , our interests are not being protected .
We are giving up markets . We are not exporting .
So , if we really must get rid of something , it is the bugetarist ideology , the pettiness and Malthusianism of the Commission in Brussels that we need to eradicate .
Our opposition to the grant of subsidies for set-aside is well-known , because this practice has negative effects on production and employment , and also because it benefits large-scale producers who own vast tracts of land they can take out of production while still making financial profits from them .
We therefore oppose the Commission 's proposal to increase the compulsory uncultivated-land tax on cereals from 5 % to 10 % .
This proposal is all the more incomprehensible inasmuch as it comes precisely during the final run-up to the implementation of the Agenda 2000 guidelines , which provide for a 0 % rate of tax on uncultivated land .
We can only conclude that this proposal is a further attempt to save more money , within the general policy of indiscriminate budgetary restraint .
In that context , and as a means of preventing the approval of the Commission 's proposals , we opt to vote in favour of the amendments tabled , the object of which is essentially to maintain the current 5 % rate of tax on uncultivated land .
Although I do not intend to make a habit of it , I should like to thank the Commission for responding to our request for the set-aside requirement to be established at the same time as the 1998 / 1999 price package .
My request was upheld by many of my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and I am delighted that this was the case .
I cannot say the same thing with regard to the proposed 10 % set-aside , although I understand the concern caused by estimated cereals stocks of 30 million tonnes by the end of this agricultural year .
Commissioner Fischler , you must admit your guilt , and admit that you were wrong to handle the calendar of export certificates so cautiously , when they were favourable to us !
Admit that by underestimating the specific size of the European wheat crop , you made it difficult for contracts to be signed .
Admit that the size of the harvests of cereals whose export is prohibited , such as fodder-quality wheat and corn , should have compelled you to open the door to exports .
Be that as it may , we will not reach the ceilings available under the GATT this year , far less take up any unused carryovers .
This is all extremely harmful to European agriculture and the farmers who have entrusted us with a responsibility will once more be accused of over-production .
Our group has tabled two amendments to your proposal .
The aim of the first is to renew the suspension of the extraordinary set-aside .
The aim of the second is to ask for the compulsory set-aside requirement to be kept at the same level as in the two preceding years , that is , 5 % .
European farmers will not accept a rise in the set-aside requirement due to management errors and the situation in the world market , particularly considering the fact that , within the framework of Agenda 2000 and CAP 2000 , the Commission has proposed a set-aside of 0 % .
Farmers will not accept such incoherence .
As the initiator , in June 1997 , of the oral question to the Commission , supported by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the establishment of the set-aside requirement before 30 June of each year , I thank the Commission for requesting an urgent debate on this subject .
However , if the ' Santer package ' anticipates a set-aside of 0 % by the year 2000 , I wonder why the Commission is now proposing a set-aside of 10 % .
What has caused this inconsistency ?
What is happening ?
Could this be due to mismanagement of stocks ?
In view of the price reductions largely recommended by the Commission , farmers are being encouraged to produce more , despite the set-aside , in order to compensate for the drop in their incomes , thereby causing an imbalance in some crops in comparison with others .
The problem of oilseeds is an old story , but I would like to remind you of one technical detail . In order to obtain the same yield , twice as much acreage has to be cultivated with oilseeds as with cereals .
At the time of the Blair House agreements , the Delors Committee , represented by Commissioners McSharry and Brittan , put a noose around our necks by agreeing to limit the production of oilseeds in Europe .
And yet the rotation of oilseed crops would have been an excellent tool for the control of cereal crops , without having to use the set-aside requirement .
This would have enabled crops for industrial purposes , which are now almost never mentioned , to be developed more quickly and would , above all , have made it possible to retain some degree of independence with regard to cattle feed .
Perhaps we should consider this in time for the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
To conclude , and to return to this morning 's debate , my group will support the 5 % set-aside requirement .
As it stands , the Commission 's proposal for the set-aside requirement is unacceptable .
This is why our group has tabled amendments to prevent the application of the extraordinary set-aside and to limit the compulsory set-aside to 5 % , instead of the 10 % proposed by the Commission .
Although the Commission regrets the existence of European stocks of 30 million tonnes of cereals , it must not forget that it is directly responsible : at the beginning of the agricultural year , that is , during the first three months , the Commission applied an export tax to cereals when global rates were higher than European rates .
The Commission also failed to grant the necessary authorizations to supply barley to the Saudi market .
European farmers must not be penalized for the Commission 's mismanagement .
They will not accept the adoption of a high set-aside , and I believe they are right .
How could the Commission propose to raise both the compulsory set-aside and the extraordinary set-aside at the same time ?
A few weeks ago , we received proposals for the reform of the COM for arable crops , in which the Commission proposed a compulsory set-aside of 0 % .
The proposals submitted to us by the Commission are therefore totally lacking in coherence .
One step in the right direction has , however , been taken and is worth mentioning .
The Commission did respond to our request , in the report by Mr des Places on the price package , for a proposal on the set-aside requirement before the end of this month .
European farmers must know what compulsory set-aside requirement has been established before they start sowing .
Finally , we call on the Commission to accept the two amendments we have tabled . These are perfectly coherent , in terms of the setaside , with the proposals voted within the framework of the report by Mr des Places and the Commission 's proposals for the reform of the COM on arable crops .
ACP suppliers of bananas
The next item is the report ( A4-0237 / 98 ) by Mr Liese , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the proposal for a Council Regulation establishing a special framework of assistance for traditional ACP suppliers of bananas ( COM ( 98 ) 0005 - C4-0263 / 98-98 / 0014 ( SYN ) ) .
Before the vote on Amendment No 31
Mr President , I would like to make two points .
Firstly , the wording of Amendment No 31in our documents does not match the wording that was agreed on in the committee .
It was indeed said in committee that this amendment had to be changed and that it had to be introduced as an Article , and not in the financial statement for administrative reasons .
But the wording as presented here was not the resolution of the committee .
You could say that the committee decided on the meaning but not the wording of its resolution .
I am putting this on record and would ask Parliament 's services to check how one should proceed in such a case .
In order that everyone knows what we are voting on : it is a matter here of the financial sum involved .
The committee proposes ECU 500 million .
The procedure in the House , however , - even the Commission sees it in this way , in my view , and perhaps the Commissioner can comment on this - is that financial sums are normally set in the budgetary procedure .
Colleagues in the Committee on Budgets have also asked me to point out once more that this is an unusual procedure and that actually the application ought to be rejected .
The committee , however , is in favour and for that reason , as rapporteur , I must also say that , in accordance with the spirit of the resolution , the committee has agreed to increase this financial amount .
Mr President , on this point , I would also like to mention Amendment No 38 .
But was this not retracted , Mr Liese ?
Then that will be explicitly recorded .
On the question of setting the sum , it is not a matter of a budgetary procedure or the anticipation of a budgetary procedure but it concerns a political declaration of intent .
For this reason I find it important that we take a vote on this .
Yet another application is contained subsequently in the legislative resolution , which provides for the increase to ECU 500 million .
We can , therefore , take a vote on it without anticipating the budgetary procedure .
But by doing so we give expression to the fact that we want to use financial resources here too .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
We vote in favour of the Council 's proposal for a regulation , since it aims to make it possible to set subsidized prices for bananas imported in the traditional way from the ACP countries .
The fact is that the import of bananas from those countries has recently been challenged by a decision by the World Trade Organization - WTO - , as a result of which an amendment of the common organization of the market for bananas is under discussion . This amendment will allow for increased dollar imports of bananas , at lower prices , produced by American transnational countries .
This will obviously be damaging to bananas produced in the European Union - particularly in Madeira - and those imported from the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries , which have long-standing agreements with the European Union under the Lomé Convention .
In some ways the regulation is intended to provide a minimum amount of compensation to offset reductions in the prices of bananas from the ACP countries - and thus in producers ' incomes - in face of increased competition from a large quantity of dollar bananas which will be allowed free entry into the European Union .
It should be emphasized - as we already have done when stating the reasons for our vote on the Thomas report on the new common organization of the market for bananas - that this situation has become possible only because the decisions of the World Trade Organization , which increasingly panders to American interests , are being imposed on the European Union without any reaction or show of political will by the latter in defence of its producers and those in the poor ACP countries .
Mr President , the traditional trading relationships between Member States of the European Union and a number of third countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific must be protected , and the principle of the Lomé Convention must be upheld .
We do not want the international political and economic balance to be destroyed in the name of globalization and free trade .
Fair trade must be encouraged , that is , trade which respects the environment , social welfare and health .
Are we going to watch continual attacks being made against the Lomé system without reacting ?
We have every reason to be concerned about the weakness of the Commission 's reactions .
The attack being made against us at present with regard to bananas by firms involved in production in Latin America must be examined in conjunction with the difficulties we are meeting in trying to impose an obligation to use 100 % cocoa in the manufacture of chocolate .
The same thing applies to oilseeds .
The use of genetically modified micro-organisms for soya beans will make this area more productive and therefore more profitable , and will compete directly with the production of peanuts , although we do not even know what side effects GMOs will have on the environment and health .
The European Union must be aware that by signing some international free trade agreements , or by joining the generalized system of preferences , it is likely to help destabilize many countries , especially on the African continent .
Our group supports almost all the amendments proposed by the Committee on Development and Cooperation , except Amendment No 32 .
In fact , our group is opposed to the establishment of a reduction coefficient , which would be applied from 2004 to producers who have not done enough to increase their competitiveness .
We would support the principle of a reduction coefficient if it were to be imposed on producers who fail to comply with environmental , social and health requirements .
The text of this amendment utterly contradicts the principle of so-called fair trade .
Finally , our group is opposed to all the amendments tabled by Mr Liese on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , all of which is aimed at damaging the production of bananas by traditional ACP suppliers .
Instrumentalities and proceeds from crime
The next item is the report ( A4-0222 / 98 ) by Mr Orlando , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft Joint Action adopted by the Council on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union concerning arrangements for cooperation between Member States in respect of the identification , tracing , freezing or seizing and confiscation of instrumentalities and the proceeds from crime ( 6490 / 98 - C4-0184 / 98-98 / 0909 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr Nassauer wishes to speak .
Mr President , on behalf of the PPE Group and pursuant to Rule 131 of the Rules of Procedure , I request that the debate be postponed until the next mini-part-session in Brussels .
We attach great importance to this debate .
It is obvious that it cannot take place in an appropriate form under the existing conditions .
For this reason , we ask the House to vote in favour of our request for postponement .
Are there any objections to Mr Nassauer 's request ?
Mr President , I only wanted to say that in the committee there was a spirit of harmony between the various political groups and therefore I must carefully follow the request made by the Group of the European People 's Party which made an important contribution to solving these problems .
I will let the Presidency decide , but I believe that on such an important issue we should not stifle the debate or prevent any group from contributing .
Mr Schulz wishes to speak in favour of the request .
Mr President , I would like to give my express support to the request made by Mr Nassauer .
I would also add one comment on the other decisions that we have reached this morning : if this house is not to degenerate into a large gymnasium for building up our biceps , because we spend more time voting on the dotting of " i ' s and crossing of " t ' s than on political discussion ...
... and we do this in every week-long part-session , then I ask you finally to consider preventing such incidents as the current one from being repeated .
It is a matter here of consultations within the framework of the third pillar , where the only possibility of democratization is the debate here in Parliament and we have nothing else to offer the Council than an undebated , albeit inexpensively balloted , opinion .
That is not something which contributes to the strengthening and the reputation of the European Parliament .
For this reason we have no other choice , for the sake of our own credibility , than to proceed as Mr Nassauer has proposed .
( Applause )
I will now put to the vote the request to postpone the debate on the report by Mr Orlando .
( Parliament approved the request )
TACIS programme
The next item is the report ( A4-0179 / 98 ) by Mrs Karamanou , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , on the Commission Communication to the Council , to the European Parliament and to the Committee of the Regions on cross-border cooperation within the framework of the TACIS Programme ( COM ( 97 ) 0239 - C4-0280 / 97 ) .
Mrs Karamanou wishes to speak .
Mr President , I think that , as the situation has turned out , I too would like to ask that the debate on my report be deferred .
I will now put to the vote the request to postpone the report by Mrs Karamanou .
( Parliament approved the request )
Electronic communication
The next item is the report ( A4-0189 / 98 ) by Mr Ullmann , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on a Communication from the Commission to the Council , to the European Parliament , to the European Economic and Social Committee and to the Committee of the Regions on ensuring security and trust in electronic communication - towards a European framework for digital signatures and encryption ( COM ( 97 ) 0503 - C4-0648 / 97 ) .
It has been requested that this report be postponed .
I will put this request to the vote .
( Parliament approved the request for postponement )
Information society
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0473 / 98 by Mr Dupuis and Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on the information society ; -B4-0475 / 98 by Mr Pasty , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , to the Commission , on the information society , Internet management and democracy ; -B4-0476 / 98 by Mr Martens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Commission , on the information society , Internet management and democracy ; -B4-0477 / 98 by Mrs Ryynänen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission , on the information society ; -B4-0478 / 98 by Mr Elchlepp , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on the information society ; -B4-0479 / 98 by Mrs Pailler and Mrs Sierra González , on behalf of the Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , to the Commission , on the information society and democracy ; -B4-0480 / 98 by Mr Wolf and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on the information society.I have received seven motions for resolutions .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on the information society , Internet management and democracy .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Finland is a pioneer in the construction of the information society . A part of this work is via