Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament , adjourned on Friday , 30 September 1996 .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the last sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you may remember that during the last sitting in Strasbourg , I asked why the Dutch station RTL4 had disappeared from our screens here .
Two weeks ago , I received a call from Parliament to tell me that it would be available again in time for this sitting .
So I came to Strasbourg full of anticipation and turned my set on this afternoon , only to find that this was not the case .
Channel 12 now has a teleshopping programme selling German goods , which is not the same thing at all .
So I would ask you , Mr President , to do what you can to ensure that we do get RTL4 back as we were promised .
My second question concerns written questions .
On 9 September , I tabled a question under Rule 42 , which means that I should have received a reply within three weeks , or six if it was a difficult problem .
It is now precisely six weeks since 9 September and I have still not received an answer .
To whom should I apply for an answer to my question ?
We shall look into your first point , Mrs Plooij-Van Gorsel .
As regards the second matter , you will know that I am the one who has been trying to ensure that deadlines are respected in all cases , especially as regards the questions tabled by Members .
If that has not worked in this case , I shall do all I can to ensure that you receive a reply very quickly .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Order of business
The next item is the order of business .
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 17 October 1996 pursuant to Rule 95 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
Wednesday :
The Group of the European Radical Alliance has requested the referral back to committee , pursuant to Rule 129 , of the report by Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the economic and trade aspects of the Europe Agreement between the European Union and Slovenia .
I give the floor to Mr Dell 'Alba to explain the request .
Mr President , I should like to explain my request for this report to be referred back to committee : first of all , in one paragraph the Committee on External Economic Relations gives its assent , whereas - with all due respect - it is not competent to do so .
I know that a corrigendum has been issued .
But another simple reason , Mr Posselt , is that an explanatory statement serves to justify a report .
Yet this one , a report of an economic nature , contains a reconstruction of historical events since 1945 , tragic events affecting not only the Community and various communities referred to in the report , but also the Italian community which used to live in these areas and which has been completely overlooked .
Since this departs from the subject of the report , and in particular because the explanatory statement takes no account either of the report or of historical fact , I am requesting referral back to committee .
It would , to put it mildly , be a scandal if Parliament were to adopt such an explanatory statement .
Mr President , as you will remember this was discussed at the Conference of Presidents last Thursday and there was agreement that some of that explanatory statement was not in line with the Rules of this House .
You undertook to deal with that before it came to the House .
I hope that will resolve the problem and that we can go on as planned and deal with the Posselt report on the agenda .
That is what my group is in favour of and we support your approach of trying to take out those items in the explanatory statement which are at variance with the Rules of this House .
You have correctly described the outcome of our discussions in the Conference of Presidents .
As regards the motion for a resolution , a corrigendum has since been submitted . The question regarding the motion for a resolution has been settled by the corrigendum .
There remains the problem of the explanatory statement .
However , I see that the rapporteur himself , Mr Posselt , is asking for the floor .
Mr President , I should simply like to say that I tried in my report to present a genuinely comprehensive picture of the economic and trade aspects and to link these - as is the practice in the Committee on External Economic Relations - with an assessment of the political context , which is essential for an objective evaluation .
There was near-unanimity in favour of the report in the Committee on External Economic Relations : it was approved by 18 votes to 1 , with all the Italian members present voting in favour .
Mr Dell 'Alba was not represented .
He delivered a minority report in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , but in the Committee on External Economic Relations the report was approved almost unanimously .
As regards the explanatory statement - which is not normally put to the vote - there was in fact an exchange of letters between Mr Konecny , the shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and myself , and we achieved a broad degree of consensus on drafting the explanatory statement .
I also took the unusual step of incorporating into my report all the comments of my committee colleagues , and there was a broad consensus in the committee that these too were acceptable .
I have now let Mr Posselt speak to explain the situation in the committee .
That was already very generous of me , and I see that Mr Fayot , as chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , is looking at me rather quizzically .
I shall therefore now also give the floor to Mr Dell 'Alba once again on a point of order .
I know what that means .
But let me say that the vote which we shall have to take in a moment concerns the question of whether we refer this report back to committee , and nothing more .
Mr President , in view of what has been said by Mrs Green , we withdraw our request .
We are satisfied with the reply , as long as the explanatory statement can be amended , and the Conference of Presidents has agreed to amend it as necessary .
I would just say to Mr Posselt that I cannot possibly participate in all 20 parliamentary committees .
That allows us to solve the problem very neatly and correctly .
Friday :
With regard to the votes scheduled for Friday under the procedure without report , 29 Members have opposed application of the procedure , pursuant to Rule 99 ( 2 ) .
The objections concern the proposal for a regulation on the protection of forests against atmospheric pollution , and the proposal for a regulation on the protection of forests against fire .
These proposals are thus referred back to the committee responsible for reconsideration .
That is how we proceed , and this happens automatically when there is opposition from 29 Members .
Mr President , I am not clear about the list of urgencies which has been approved .
I was requesting the inclusion of the disasters which have struck Italy - the flood in Calabria and the earthquake - because the damage done is truly enormous .
Fortunately , not very many lives were lost , but tremendous damage has been done to our artistic heritage and to public property .
I believe that solidarity should be shown at the time , and not months afterwards .
You have misunderstood that , Mr Castagnetti .
I announced a request for urgent procedure from the Council .
The list of subjects for the topical and urgent debate will be presented tomorrow . There is a further meeting of the Conference of Presidents on the question tonight , since we were unable to reach agreement last week .
Mr Cornelissen , if I know you , you surely do not wish to raise a point of order , and I cannot give you the floor for any other reason !
Mr President , once you hear what I have to say , I am sure you will agree that I am right to draw your attention to a serious coach crash which occurred yesterday .
On behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would ask you to extend Parliament 's condolences to the victims and their families and friends .
I would also like to take this opportunity to ask the Commission when we can expect to see the measures it announced to improve coach transport safety , which is an extremely urgent matter , as the events of yesterday sadly demonstrated once again .
I shall express the condolences of the House to the victims ' families , Mr Cornelissen .
As regards the Commission , we shall be having a debate tomorrow on its annual programme , and that is precisely when you can raise the matter .
Mr President , sorry for taking up your time but I just want to put on the record as a point of order my objection to the fact that on the agenda for this week we have Question Time to the Commission at 5.30 p.m. on Tuesday afternoon and at the same time we also have committee meetings .
Question Time is this Parliament 's one opportunity to put the Commission in the dock and put questions on issues that affect our constituents .
I think it is wrong that there should be a clash between Question Time and committee meetings .
As you know , Mr Crowley , when I first took office , I tried to ensure that other meetings did not take place at the same time as our plenary sittings .
The House has not followed my lead in this respect , including your own group .
So I can do no more about it !
Cinema and television production
The next item is the report ( A4-0304 / 96 ) by Mrs Guinebertière , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( COM ( 95 ) 0546 - C4-0070 / 96-95 / 0281 ( CNS ) ) establishing a European Guarantee Fund to promote cinema and television production .
I would ask the two Members just beside the rapporteur to stop their conversation .
I think that is illmannered and discourteous .
Thank you , Mr President .
That is indeed much better now - I can hear myself speak .
There is the television without frontiers directive , which establishes the legal framework , the MEDIA II programme , which as we all know provides support for cinema and television programmes and catalogues , but is unfortunately not enough to reverse the trend towards further imports from the United States , and thirdly the Guarantee Fund .
The Commission 's proposal for a decision contains five main points , first and foremost the establishment of a Guarantee Fund , with a view to sharing risk with providers of funding to the audiovisual industry .
By acting as an incentive , it should encourage banks to fund the cinema and television production sector , which is widely known as a ' high-risk ' activity .
The Commission proposes the formation of the necessary capital , half of which - ECU 90 million - would come from the Union , and the other half - ECU 90 m - from private banks .
The Commission is asking that the guarantees provided should amount to no more than 50 % of the individual loans and credits granted .
Under the proposal , responsibility for managing the Fund would fall to the EIF , which would conclude guarantee contracts with the banks .
A cooperation agreement between the EIF and the Commission would cover the management of the Fund , which would be created for an unlimited period , although there would be an assessment after three years , and then every five years .
What has been the response from the Council ?
The Working Group on Audiovisual Affairs has considered the matter three times and raised numerous questions .
It called in particular for consultation of the Ecofin Council , and this took place on 11 March 1996 .
A number of technical and financial issues raised there cast doubt on the political will of the Member States , and a further study has been requested .
Nor can it necessarily be said that the banks will seek to participate directly in the Fund 's capital in the first instance , since the present proposal says nothing about how the banks should be involved in managing their own capital within the EIF .
What is more , the return on private capital invested in this Fund would have to be governed by clauses set out in the cooperation agreement , and here too there is a lack of detail .
As rapporteur , having consulted many funding bodies and professionals , I am proposing on behalf of the Committee on Culture that the capital of the Fund should remain open , in particular to the EIB , that the Fund should be able not only to guarantee productions , but also to promote co-productions and the compilation of catalogues , and that the Fund should be used to increase the circulation of cinema and television works in Europe and beyond , as well as promoting co-productions by producers in smaller language areas .
We are also proposing a five-year test phase , followed by both a financial assessment and a sectoral impact study , perhaps accompanied by proposals , which will enable the Commission to make the Fund permanent .
We should also like this Fund to be managed within the EIF by an ad hoc body to be known as a Banking Committee , consisting of the external partners , the EIF and the Commission .
Finally , we think that an additional committee , consisting of experts from banking and audiovisual circles , should be set up to pre-select projects , in order to enable the project sponsors to negotiate their rates for the sums guaranteed .
Our amendments are constructive ones , and we hope that they will help the Commission to fine-tune its proposal in an effort to gain the support of the Member States .
Personally , I am convinced that a European promotion mechanism on these lines can enable our original productions to compete with those of the American giant .
Europe has many talented artists : let us help them to produce works of fiction which will be circulated to 370 million European viewers , and soon many more .
Mr President , first of all , many thanks to our rapporteur , Mrs Guinebertière .
She really has done superb work on this proposal and has shown both vision and great attention to detail .
And many thanks too to the Commission and Commissioner present with us today for their proposal which , quite rightly , complements a trilogy of measures to support Europe 's audiovisual policy and industry .
The Europe Guarantee Fund is a key card in our strategy in Europe to bring investment and jobs to this fast expanding sector of the economy .
It is always worth remembering that Jacques Delors ' famous White Paper predicted there would be 2 million extra jobs in this area of the economy .
And it is only with measures like this fund that we are going to create those jobs in Europe .
It should also be remembered that we are facing a 4 billion dollar deficit in audiovisual services with the USA .
That again underlines the fact that this fund is essential to help redress that balance and very importantly enhance cultural diversity on our screens .
Cultural pluralism will only be developed when we have economic pluralism and it is economic pluralism in cinema and television this fund will really help develop .
The recent report by the European Investment Bank that our rapporteur mentioned confirms the value , viability and potentially positive impact of such a fund on our cinema and television industry .
The report confirms also , very importantly , the positive interest from the financial sector .
I make a plea to Ministers : they must take this report seriously as well as the views of this House today .
The European Parliament supports the fund , the industry professionals support the fund and certain visionary governments support the fund .
In this respect we owe much to the Irish Minister , Michael D. Higgins , whose determination to put culture and the audiovisual industry at the heart of the European Union is absolutely second to none .
We wish him luck at the next meeting of culture ministers on this issue .
But certain governments are hesitating ; certain governments have said ' let 's see what Ecofin Ministers have to say about this report ' .
Surprise , surprise - when they were consulted , what did the Ecofin Ministers say ? ' Do we really need this fund ?
Will it really create jobs ? ' Such negative comments display a level of economic and cultural illiteracy .
As Michael D. Higgins recently said , if the European Union is going to continue to be purely about economics and competition policy it will not win the hearts and minds of our citizens .
It is on television and cinema screens that we are going to win the hearts and minds of our citizens and by supporting our audiovisual industry .
As the Irish Minister said : books and films are not buckets .
Films are also not fish , I would add .
At the Cannes Summit of 1995 heads of state actually asked the Commission to go away and propose this fund .
I wish ministers had not so easily forgotten that they asked for these proposals in the first place .
So at the next meeting of Culture Ministers , under the judicious presidency of Michael D. Higgins , let us have a political decision that this fund should go ahead .
Details can be left to later .
The United States Administration has always been very serious throughout this century about supporting its film and TV industry .
We have to be equally serious .
Let our ministers show for once that they are serious about culture and the creative economy and that they care more about that than cars or carrots or , indeed , competition policy .
This fund should be up and running at the beginning of 1997 .
Anything less would be to betray our audiovisual industry and the jobs that it can create .
Mr President , I thank Mme Guinebertière for her heroic work on this very complex document .
I note also that it looks as if colleagues from the other side of the House have stolen the Irish Minister for Culture in this context .
They have certainly stolen some of my own lines !
This is a very welcome report for those of us who have worked in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media on this issue .
The proposal for this guarantee fund is both timely and progressive .
We are aware of the significant growth in the EU audiovisual market - 16 % per annum - which makes it the fastest growing audiovisual market in the world .
We are equally aware of the discrepancy between the EU audiovisual market size and the position of EU productions within that market .
In this context a proposal such as the guarantee fund , which puts in place a fourth building block in the development of the infrastructure of the Community audiovisual market is to be welcomed .
Let us hope when it is up and running that we will finally be able to produce films which people want to see , will enhance our bank of cultural products itself and also be films that other Europeans want to see and will go to .
Ms Tongue has pointed out that this is a political issue and indeed it very much is .
While broadly supporting the guarantee fund , it must be stressed that the success of the fund will depend on certain key tenets being addressed in its structure .
First of all , it must truly be a pan-European fund .
It must be structured to ensure that all countries have access .
As we are aware , the banking structure and its relationship with film varies across Europe .
It is important that the fund plays a role as an incentive to less film-friendly banking countries to participate in film financing , to take a risk , to take a gamble , to take a toss at producing something so that they might ultimately not just be very proud of their own involvement but also it might actually make some money for them as well .
A weighting to reflect the different banking systems may very well be necessary in the fund .
Parliament has already addressed this equitable right to participate with its reference to the position of countries with small audiovisual capacity .
This is vital and must be retained .
It is interesting to note that the differentiation in the banking sector 's involvement in film is not necessarily related to the country 's audiovisual output capacity .
The role of the European Investment Bank in the structuring and operation of the guarantee fund , as currently proposed , is central .
We know it generally deals with major infrastructure projects where levels of security are very high and each project 's timescale is measured over many years .
The fact that the project profile for audiovisual production is more shortterm must be acknowledged .
It cannot , as Ms Tongue has said , be viewed in the same way as perhaps more clearly defined economic proposals are .
The fund , as currently proposed , allows for the participation of distributors and other funders including broadcasters and independent European film producers .
This again focuses on a key element of European policy and thinking regarding the importance of distribution and access to the market for European films .
We are also very well aware that good progress in this whole area is being made under the Irish presidency where there is a passionate attachment and a very positive experience of progressing film production .
We will , no doubt , continue cautiously , but progress is surely being made in recognizing that the guarantee fund is a vital part of the future for the European film industry .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mrs Guinebertière warmly on this excellent report .
We are delighted to welcome the undertaking of such a clearly European enterprise , whose aim is to support the European film industry and the wider field of audiovisual broadcasting , which reflects Europe 's multicultural society .
The proposed fund is an intermediate step between grant-based systems such as MEDIA , for example , which do not suffice on their own to support European film industry , and clearly commercial funding systems .
A risk-sharing system of this type is pioneering and addresses the need to create European audiovisual products of high quality with prospects of commercial success , so that they will attract interest from major investors .
The report quite rightly points out the need for clarity , both concerning political will for the final creation of the fund and with regard to how it is to operate .
In that context , however , the rapporteur 's amendments proposing , first , the constitution of an ad hoc body within the framework of the European Investment Fund and , secondly , the fixing of a five-year trial period , are particularly important .
However , we are concerned about the eligibility criteria for projects to be funded , and about the criteria of commercial success , lest these should result in a policy of support only for major projects that will neglect the individuality of the audiovisual sector in Europe and its multicultural aspect .
The report is particularly successful in drawing attention to those dangers .
Small and medium enterprises , and more generally productions from Member States with a limited audiovisual output , geographically small and whose languages are less widely used , should receive more favourable treatment exactly as happens in the context of MEDIA II .
We would therefore like to see a specific proportion of the total amount committed to such cases , with priority for proposals relating to co-productions by at least two Member States , and finally , we consider that independent producers , who generally give expression to cultural and linguistic individuality , should be given particular support .
Mr President , the Guinebertière report deserves a solid parliamentary consensus because , not only is it very balanced , but it also puts forward some specific technical solutions calling for the creation of a guarantee fund to promote European audiovisual production .
I would like to pick out some of the most important points for setting up a specific framework for this fund ; bringing it into the scope of the European Investment Bank , which has a cultural side , in order to create attractive financial conditions for all the partners involved and , an aspect which I particularly welcome , the accent on including small production countries and small projects in the programme .
It should also be pointed out that , without this fund , the MEDIA II Programme , promoting training , development and distribution , and the Television without Frontiers Directive , regulating TV-broadcasting , will never attain their main objective of reviving European production and making it competitive with the rest of the world .
The Guinebertière report clarifies and reinforces the Commission proposal , which the Committee on Culture unanimously regarded as a good basis .
Now we have to overcome any doubts that might linger in certain Member States .
To those Member States which , although aware of the need for the fund , are hesitating to give it the goahead , on behalf of the Liberal Group I should like to point out three things :
all professional sectors of the audiovisual industry are unanimous in calling for it to be set up ; -the EIF technical opinion , sought by the Commission , has confirmed that it is financially viable ; -tens of millions of ECU allocated to the MEDIA II Programme would be wasted unless the go-ahead is given , since without the knock-on effect of the Guarantee Fund only marginal effects will be produced.I shall end with an appeal for a pooling of efforts and ideas so that the fund can be created in 1997 for a trial period , with all of the monitoring and control guarantees proposed in the report .
With this Guarantee Fund we should finally attract sufficient numbers of private investors to give European creativity an opportunity to show its strength inside and outside its frontiers .
Mr President , while welcoming Mrs Guinebertière 's enthusiasm for the establishment of a European Guarantee Fund , it is easy to imagine just how much will-power , conviction , humour sometimes and optimism she must have needed to bring her report to the plenary .
Yes , we do need this Guarantee Fund to promote cinema production , the distribution of films in cinemas , and the broadcasting of European works by television channels .
We have repeatedly lined up the figures to prove this , every time there has been a need to defend our cultural identity and our cinema and television industry , almost as if we were dealing with what I might call - if I were not a feminist - ' a young girl 's fancy ' on the part of Europe .
Yet the employment potential of this sector is not insignificant , as Hollywood and the United States realized 50 years ago .
The result is that today , according to the figures of the European Audiovisual Observatory , 77.7 % of the works of fiction broadcast in 1994 by the 88 television channels in the EU were not of European origin .
That is enough figures .
I fail to understand the attitude of some of those in the Council .
What does it take to convince you ?
Unless a historic but unthinkable decision has been taken simply to abandon , to sacrifice Europe 's culture .
Here too , the figures speak volumes .
The initial proposal , in 1994 , amounted to 1 % of the Structural Funds , or ECU 1.5 billion over five years .
Now the Commission is proposing ECU 90 million , exactly the sum siphoned off from MEDIA II .
It goes without saying that , if it is to have a dynamic effect , this Fund should not give priority to large projects .
I should like to end by addressing myself more particularly to the French ministers who , instead of jeopardizing the positive role of the financing companies in France by proposing to abolish their tax advantages , should be proposing to extend to Europe this very effective method of funding the cinema , as Mrs Guinebertière has emphasized .
In the run-up to the Cultural Affairs Council on 16 December , this report has the great merit of reaffirming the cultural , industrial and economic potential and interest of the cinema and the audiovisual sector .
Allow me finally to paraphrase a statement by Wim Wenders .
He was referring to industry ; I refer to politics and the Union .
One can perhaps accept that the European Union cannot afford to be idealistic , but one cannot accept that it has a right to hold its industries and citizens in contempt ; it should not be allowed to do so .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the language of the audiovisual media is still - and will increasingly be - the first language of mass communication , entertainment and understanding : levels of active and passive participation will continue to increase because , for very many people , the audiovisual media constitute the arena for deciding whether they are to be winners or losers .
At the same time , however , the audiovisual media are suffering a fate similar to the enclosure of the medieval commons : language and expression are being reduced to market commodities , instead of being understood as the objects of a continuing public duty - a duty of care and custody , renewal and creation .
Likewise , innovation and creativity are not mere by-products of the competitive market , and that is why we need the resources to offer them public support .
The Guarantee Fund is one important element .
However , we should never forget that it is equally important to strengthen public-service production and distribution .
Nor should we fall into the trap of seeking a European answer to the abstraction that is Disney culture .
We need genuine diversity , including the capacity to enter into dialogue with others ; we need genuinely panEuropean initiatives in which there will also be a place for smaller countries and language areas , which are part of our rich heritage .
We need a political logic that will counter the unquestioning acceptance of the WTO logic on a world scale .
We need this report - and I thank Mrs Guinebertière for it - but we must also realize , given the increasingly capitalintensive nature of this particular field , that the alliance of European film-makers , which first mooted this project , was certainly unrealistic in thinking that the money would be enough for some 17 years , without the addition of further resources .
We must also be clear that the figure of two to three million potential jobs - which has been used in arguing the case - is , unfortunately , not a realistic one , given the rationalization that is taking place in the audiovisual media as a result of new technologies and organizational concepts .
It is all the more important to activate this political catalyst , and to draw on the political will of the Member States to ensure that it actually works .
To recap , therefore : we shall support the motion , but we should be under no illusions - we have not yet achieved the decisive breakthrough .
Mr President , can finance and economics come to the aid of culture ?
This is to some extent the question which should be answered by the establishment of this European Guarantee Fund to promote cinema and television production .
For how can a strong , dynamic audiovisual sector be developed , when this sector has certain weaknesses which are directly attributable to underinvestment ?
The Commission is now proposing this Guarantee Fund , designed to share the risks run by financiers when they invest in the audiovisual sector .
Under this mechanism , based on similar experiments in France and Spain , it should be possible , in the long term , to cover 50 % of the risks incurred by the projects selected .
However , as Mrs Guinebertière states in her excellent report , although this scheme will provide vital support for a fully-fledged audiovisual industry , a number of points need further clarification .
I am thinking in particular of the role of the European Investment Fund , a partner in the scheme , as well as the problem of project selection and how to reconcile cultural interest with profitability .
Furthermore , the financial framework should be specified .
Indeed , I find it somewhat hard to believe that the budget earmarked for the launch of the scheme - counted in tens of millions of ECU - will be enough to give it any real impetus .
We know how reluctant banks are to invest in what is seen as a high-risk sector : how then can they be expected to join in establishing a Fund with a turnover of less than ECU 110 million ?
What is more , we are well aware of the imperfections in the organization of production companies in European countries and the need for streamlining .
Since they are too small , they find it difficult to compete with American producers , which are huge and still expanding .
So will the Fund be able to pump sufficient oxygen into this sector for it to forge ahead and restructure ?
If it can , then perhaps this Guarantee Fund will enable the David of Europe to triumph over the Goliath of Hollywood !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Parliament is delivering its opinion on the establishment of a European Guarantee Fund just as a study by the EIF has appeared , indicating that a guarantee fund could be an ideal instrument .
It would operate for 17 years without any further injection of Community capital , and within ten years could be helping to finance around 630 cinema and television films and the compilation of some 60 catalogues .
We in the Socialist Group would urge that this Fund be set up without delay , for a number of reasons .
First , there are cultural reasons .
As you know , we support the introduction of a quota in the review of the television without frontiers directive .
Opponents say that there are better ways of promoting Europe 's film culture , and recommend a defensive approach .
They talk about alternatives , such as the Fund .
We are now taking them at their word .
Are the governments prepared to help fund an operation which will pump new life into European culture ?
There are also economic reasons .
Are the governments prepared to provide funding to expand an industry which is finding it difficult to withstand the tide of American violence ?
And there are social reasons too .
Making and distributing these hundreds of productions will create a good many jobs , but the question is whether the governments are prepared to invest in this type of new employment .
We are asking these questions because we are not happy about them .
The Council has already shown itself to be rather pessimistic about this Fund .
A number of questions raised have , in our opinion , been answered perfectly adequately by the EIF report .
Parliament , through its rapporteur Mrs Guinebertière , has also shown a great deal of flexibility and a very positive approach in order to give the Fund the best possible chance of success .
For all these reasons , we hope that the Council will be prepared to promote the European film industry by giving the Fund the green light on 15 December .
All Parliament can do now , unfortunately , is stand and watch .
Mr President , I too add my thanks and congratulations to Mrs Guinebertière , although I speak from a slightly different perspective than other Members who have spoken .
In considering this proposal I start from a position of believing that we need to be aware that public subsidies , by possibly featherbedding and insulating an industry from genuine market forces , can actually do more harm than good .
We need to be careful of the nostrum that problems can be solved by simply throwing money at them .
Certainly I am dubious that national or European civil servants are capable of judging what makes a good film and whether public money should be spent on one film or another .
That said , the European film industry is important , both as a vehicle of European culture and as an important wealth and employment creator .
In the television without frontiers debate , I am firmly opposed to the concept of output quotas , which I see as a gross distortion of the market .
But I am prepared to look more positively at the Guarantee Fund provided that two important conditions are observed .
There must be minimal bureaucratic interference and the decisions on which films to back must be based on sound objective , financial and cultural criteria .
I hope that the advisory committee and other mechanisms proposed will satisfy this condition but it is a matter that will need regular review .
The other condition is that the fund must not create an open-ended drain on Community funds .
Projections suggest on a worse-case scenario that the fund will be self-supporting for many years - I hope so .
I particularly commend the amendment from the Committee on Budgets that where a film is successful and produces a surplus , then some of that surplus should be paid into the fund .
I note that even the executive vicepresident of Polygram - one of Europe 's leading film-makers - supported this proposal when he suggested 2 % of net profits from successful films should pass back into the fund .
It goes without saying that there needs to be maximum transparency and probity in the allocation of guarantees , to ensure money is spent fairly , effectively and is in no way abused .
With these criteria , I consider the Community can and should offer practical and positive support to this important European industry .
Mr President , the exemption of cultural products from GATT does indeed allow us to create policy instruments .
However , the instrument we have created and which our colleague has explained so clearly and astutely , though it may be appropriate in terms of quality , because it would be foolish to believe that the free market will concern itself with cultural development , covers too small a range .
I am talking about money , Mr President , there is not enough of it , it has been siphoned off from elsewhere - from MEDIA - and I do not think this beginning responds to the concept of critical mass .
We will support it , at any rate , and I hope all goes well .
If the Council is listening , I will stress three points , Mr President . First , I hope that what is agreed will be kept to and that the absurdities of the ' television without frontiers ' directive will not be repeated , which two-thirds of our governments ignore .
I hope Ecofin stays out of it .
It has shown itself to be incapable , lacking in inspiration and devoid of spirit or any ideas whatsoever for development in Europe - I need only remind you of the trans-European networks .
Thirdly , we all know that for the audiovisual sector to develop , other things too are needed , but there is a lack of political will , which the rapporteur very rightly described as lukewarm .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the battle we are waging here , ahead of the second reading of the television without frontiers directive , is helping to defend and promote European culture , and I know that this is an aspiration shared by a large majority in the House .
In very much the same vein , we have a proposal today for a European Guarantee Fund to promote cinema and television production in Europe .
The proposal aims to develop this sector by reducing the risk for investors and encouraging them to back a greater number of European productions in the future .
Our cinema industry is in fact facing a fearsome adversary , the United States , which can only be confronted with ample resources and , above all , a united approach to banking circles , which often have distinctly cold feet in this area .
Our colleague 's report was overwhelmingly endorsed by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
This demonstrates that Parliament as a whole favours the development of European cinema and television , and personally I am delighted by that fact .
I fear , however , that the Council is once again playing a double game , though it is putting forward the idea of a European Guarantee Fund as an essential complement to the television without frontiers directive and the MEDIA II programme .
But at the same time , it seems to be planning a reduction in the budget for MEDIA II .
The budget lines are of course different , but the Council does not seem prepared to provide the funding needed to carry out its objectives ; it appears to be shifting , by sleight of hand , a few million ECU from one budget line to another .
The risks involved in cinema production will certainly not be reduced by accounting moves alone .
If my suspicions were to prove correct , we would once again be reminded of the gulf between the Council 's words and its deeds , and I hope that I am proved wrong .
Having said that , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of the report , and I support the establishment of this Guarantee Fund because audiovisual production must be assisted .
This is vital for Europe , and there can be no doubt that more finance , more funding , is required .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to thank you for the help which you have given us and I should like to congratulate you on the excellent work you have carried out over these last months . You know very well what the Commission programme has been .
You know that , in addition to the Television Without Frontiers Directive - dating back to 1989 - and the MEDIA Programme , a programme aimed at ' reproduction ' - i.e. anything to do with the development , distribution and training , with a sizeable budget of 310 MECU - we also felt that we had to find an extra means of acting and , after much thought , we decided that the best way would be to create a guarantee fund with the features which we have proposed ; we have , of course , relied on the support of the European Parliament - and , therefore , we are very much reassured by what you have said here today this afternoon . But we also need the support of the Council , the other legislative arm , which is scheduled to meet on 16 December 1996 .
I want to tell you that we are going to take your ideas very seriously .
In particular , any reference to launching the fund for a trial period because that is exactly what we intended to do .
We do not want to take any risks and we want to try and find out how this fund might operate ; that is why we shall be operating it for a few years to see how it goes .
We must also take into account - and this is a concern of many Members of the European Parliament - special arrangements for the small countries .
This fund must not help only the bigger countries and big producers but the smaller countries too .
That is why we must bear in mind co-production between different countries so that the knock-on effects of the fund can be really effective for production and distribution alike .
I would like to reserve very special congratulations for the rapporteur , Mrs Guinebertière . I would like to tell her that I fully go along with what she has told us here today .
The idea that the fund should support co-productions , stimulate intra-European circulation of films , help co-production between countries with the smallest film-making capacity , and the five-year trial period , all of which , I think , sums up the main points made by Mrs Guinebertière - and I must say that , from the Commission 's point of view , we are fully in agreement .
This means that the European Parliament and the Commission have to join forces in order to try and convince the Council to make progress on this score .
I will conclude by telling you that the Commission can accept 21 of the 33 amendments tabled , in full , in spirit or in part .
We accept in full Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 4 , 8 , 10 , 12 and 14 .
We accept in spirit Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 9 , 15 , 16 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 23 and 36 .
We accept in part Amendments Nos 11 , 28 , 30 and 35 .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 7 , 17 , 20 , 21 , 24-27 , 29 , 31 , 32 or 33 .
The amendments which we cannot accept refer to the subject of flexible machinery or else certain problems which are simply ones of wording or presentation .
However , as you can see , we have accepted most of the tabled amendments either in full or in spirit .
I think that , bearing in mind all of the European Parliament 's proposals which undoubtedly enrich the Commission 's presentation , all I now need to do is thank this Assembly very much and very sincerely for its cooperation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ariane
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0308 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0377 / 96-94 / 0189 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a support programme in the field of books and reading ( Ariane ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Mouskouri ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , with great relief and after a long wait we received the Council 's common position concerning the ARIANE programme for the promotion of books and reading .
Frankly , however , it is a pity that such a programme , with a very limited budget and a content which does so much to enrich knowledge and to contribute towards the preservation of our respective cultures , encountered so many difficulties in achieving an outcome more quickly .
This demonstrates to us yet again the extent to which the requirement for a unanimous vote is undesirable in a procedure of collective decision .
The Council 's common position substantially reformulates the content and structure initially envisaged by the Commission .
There are four important changes :
First of all , the programme 's duration has been reduced from five to two years - 1997 to 1998 - but in Article 8 of the decision there is provision for the European Parliament and the Council to adopt a new programme if the Commission 's assessment report on the ARIANE programme is in fact positive .
As for the budget , this has been cut from 34 million ECU over 5 years to 7 million ECU over 2 years , while a budget of 2.5 million ECU was used for a pilot scheme for the year 1996 .
Next , concerning the issue of comitology . The Council replaced the advisory committee originally proposed by the Commission with a mixed committee , both management and advisory .
Finally , as regards the structure of the programme , from three actions initially envisaged by the Commission , we have now passed on to 6 , a thing which gives us a clearer picture of the programme 's field of application .
Greater priority is also given to translation , with the explanation that 50 % of the programme 's budget is intended for that .
I could express disappointment at the fact that both the duration and the budget have been cut by so much .
Regarding duration , it is some consolation that the adoption of a new programme is provided for , but we cannot make do with such a small budget if we wish to allow the ARIANE programme to develop , and that is why an increase of 3.5 MECU has been asked for .
The programme 's descriptive title has been slightly amended by including a mention of the fact that the promotion of books and reading is to take place mainly by translation .
This will reflect the programme 's content more accurately .
On the Committee on Culture we wished to emphasize the promotion of works in the European Union 's less-widely used languages .
The Commission is therefore asked , in its own assessment report , to explain the impact of the programme on the dissemination of literature in those languages .
That is Amendment No 3 .
For that reason , we preferred to revert to the legislation initially proposed by the Commission to assist the translation of works in less-widely used languages .
This means that where such languages are concerned , no prior assumption concerning translation into another European Union language is needed for such works to receive support for the ARIANE programme , whereas the Council 's common position imposes conditions which do not seem to us at all justified and which create difficulties for the access of those languages to translation .
In the context of Action 2 , which relates to cooperative projects , we have introduced the possibility of providing aid for the creation of two kinds of databases .
The first will contain information on books available on the market and on publishing houses , and the second on databases concerning semantic difficulties and peculiarities for technical and literary translators .
In conclusion , I should like to refer to the problem of comitology .
The Council 's choice of a mixed committee makes for excessively cumbersome procedures in relation to the programme 's implementation. the Commission 's proposal for an advisory committee seems much more appropriate .
I also want to add that we have tried to be very conservative and not at all demanding in our recommendation for second reading , choosing the wording of our amendments such that the Council should have little difficulty in accepting them .
I therefore hope the Council will take note of the improvements we have proposed and that we will very soon be able to go ahead with this ARIANE programme , for which we have waited so long .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Mouskouri for that very comprehensive indication of the way the programme has progressed since the last reading .
She speaks for all of us in the committee when she says how disappointed we are with the results .
Ariane is a support programme in the field of books and reading .
It is not a programme designed to solve all the problems of illiteracy throughout the European Union .
But the funding of this programme is so tight that we should be clear about its aims and we should not be raising people 's expectations .
I think , therefore , that we should make it very clear in the title that it is a support programme in the fields of books and reading , primarily through translation .
It is also a programme which should give priority to books in less widely used languages of the European Union even if - and here we disagree with the Council - those books have not previously been translated into other Community languages .
This is the reason why .
Here is an excellent 20th century novel written in Welsh but it is only available to about 500 , 000 people throughout the European Union .
It is a desperate shame that not more people can access this kind of book .
Waltari is a Finnish novelist who has written an excellent novel about an Egyptian .
This should be shared by people in Spain and Portugal .
But the novelists who use less widely used languages as their medium need a helping hand .
This programme must deliver for them .
The programme has taken a long time to come back to the European Parliament for second reading , but I am afraid there are still a few crucial points on which the European Parliament is at odds with the Council .
We are back to the old problem of comitology .
Our committee has been here before with the Kaleidoscope programme .
It looks as though we are going to go to conciliation again for the very same reason .
The Council is proposing that an undemocratic group of representatives meeting behind closed doors should decide the main implementation points of the programme .
They will also be consulted on every project which involves spending more than ECU 10 , 000 .
You can imagine the bureaucracy involved in this .
At a time when the people of Europe are crying out for less bureaucracy and more democracy this seems to be an act of deliberate provocation .
Finally , I should like to remind the Council and the Commission , even within the context of this programme , of their commitment to fighting unemployment .
They have identified small and medium-sized enterprises in this respect .
Why , therefore , did they delete a reference which would have given priority to small independent publishing houses ?
The European Union , through this programme , is proving that it has no intention of creating a Euromonoculture .
We live on a continent which is a cultural mosaic .
This programme is a small ceramic piece which will add colour to that mosaic and which will one day make up a complete picture which all the people of Europe can admire .
Mr President , I must confess that when I first heard of the Ariane project , I thought ' What on earth are we talking about ? ' Something to promote books and reading .
It is like saying , we are having a programme to promote seeing or walking or some other function which we actually perform quite normally in the course of a wide variety of activities in our lives .
However , it soon became obvious - and I should like to congratulate Mrs Mouskouri for her work on this project - that we are fighting a rearguard action against the passionate affair which some Commissioners are conducting with the new sexy electronic media to the detriment - for those of us who are passionate readers , as I am sure many are in the House - of the printed word .
So while this is a very small and modest programme , it is at least something to recognize and draw to people 's attention the need to protect above all the pleasures of curling up with a good book .
Coming from a small country with a lesser spoken language , I should also like to recognize that , in this context , the small publishers of minority languages are indeed the true heroes of the publishing world .
Colleagues might be interested to know that one of the laureates for the Aristion Prize , which is part of this programme , is the husband of an ex-Member of this Parliament .
He is a very distinguished Danish poet , one of your own countrymen , Mr President , Thorkild Bjørnvig , who is winning the prize for his translations of Rilke from German into Danish , which although not a minority language is less spoken than some of the other languages in the Community .
We cannot remain immune to the fact that the coming generation of young people is also fascinated and involved with the electronic media and perhaps need to have brought home to them again and again by their elders and betters the genuine pleasures of the printed word and the need to protect it , albeit with such small programmes as this .
I should like to congratulate Mrs Mouskouri .
I hope we will get moving on this now , and long live the good book !
Mr President , I do not think there can be any among us who do not support every effort to disseminate and promote books .
We are therefore particularly pleased to welcome the unblocking of the ARIANE programme after so long .
The programme 's aims are to enrich knowledge , extend the dissemination of the literary output of Europe 's peoples , and facilitate the access of European citizens to it , particularly by assisting literary translation which provides an important means of access for minor cultures to united Europe .
The common position does indeed incorporate many of the amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading .
Yet , we cannot but express our disappointment - as the rapporteur already has - at the dramatic cut of the programme 's budget which , in parallel with cuts in the budgets for other cultural programmes , demonstrates a general tendency to downgrade policies of support for European culture .
The European Parliament is therefore right to table amendments to strengthen the ARIANE programme , and amendments tending to establish more flexible procedures by opting for a purely advisory committee .
As for the less-widely used languages , we reiterate the fundamental position that these must be supported in every way and all attempts to marginalize or eliminate them must be frustrated , such attempts being quite overt granted that related dangers are also evident in the rationale of high-speed networks .
The issue amounts to a risk of downgrading Europe 's multidimensional and multilingual culture , and supplanting it in favour of the ease and abundance of a one-dimensional form of cultural expression identified with commercial success .
For all these reasons we support the rapporteur 's amendments , first to create semantics databases , and secondly , to include information on the impact of the programme on the dissemination of literature in the less-widely used languages in the Commission 's assessment report .
In the same way we have in the past supported and adopted other initiatives aimed at securing more favourable treatment for multilingual products or ones from those of the European Union 's citizens whole languages are lesswidely used .
I recall specifically the frameworks of the MEDIA II and INFO 2000 programmes .
Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , I wish to congratulate Mrs Mouskouri on her magnificent work as rapporteur .
Unfortunately , the Ariane Programme has got lost in the labyrinths and we have been waiting for months and months for a solution even though this is about a subject as important as the culture of books and the ways of making it easier to read European authors in different European languages , the languages of European citizens .
This is a very important subject for reinforcing European identity , the meaning of Europe which all of us are after .
Measures in the field of translation should not be limited to the official languages of the European Union .
They should also be extended to those other languages which are official in certain territories of Europe although they are not official European Union languages .
The Commissioner , given his origins , is quite aware of what I am referring to in this case .
Mrs Morgan has also referred to other languages which are not official , such as the case of Welsh , and it is also important that people should be able to read other European authors in that language .
I am very sorry that this programme should have such a small budget , that its application period has been reduced and that the money set aside is so small .
The budget has been cut from 6.8 MECU per year to the current budget of 3.5 MECU p.a.
I think that books deserve more support and that it would be very positive if we approved the amendment which has been tabled to increase the budget for the whole European Union to 5.25 MECU .
I hope that , in the coming years , this programme can also be extended to other European countries so that we can see the works , for example , of Wislawa Szymborska , the Polish writer , this year 's Nobel Prize winner , translated into the other languages of European states .
In this way we can help the European Union advance and not get lost ' in the labyrinth ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the budget and the duration of the programme are far from satisfactory , and mention has already been made of the undemocratic character of the comitology which is proposed .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament lacks the means to make its will prevail against the Council .
There is no political will among the Member States to give people real access to the diverse cultural heritage that binds us together within the Community and beyond , and represents an important contribution to the cultural heritage of humanity .
The diversity of translation is a beginning , but the question should be much more broadly understood .
The primary production of books , the maintenance of archives and public libraries all have a part to play , and I should also like to mention three languages , or language groups , which should have a place here too : these are Plattdeutsch , Friesian and Wendish .
Writing , reading and books are rightly referred to in this context as the fundamental building blocks of an entire civilization .
I think it is a dangerous illusion to ignore the possibility that the transition to the age of information , with its new technologies for recording , disseminating and reproducing information , could result in the development of new forms of mass illiteracy .
The fact that most people can manage to understand instruction sheets and hit songs does not make the danger any less real .
Mrs Mouskouri 's report hits the nail on the head as regards the Council decision on the Ariane programme , which is reminiscent of the trompe l 'oeil technique in absolutist architecture : painting on windows where you could not afford real ones is just like making budget cuts on minor items , and at the same time undermining the function of those items by substantially extending the tasks for which they are earmarked and the range of potential applicants .
We regard this as a dubious practice , and one that demonstrates the real need for a change in cultural policy .
Nonetheless , it is a crumb of comfort - although we need a great deal more !
Mr President , I should just like to point out to Mr Lukas that the elections are over , so there is no need for him to make any more election speeches .
Turning to the support programme in the field of books and reading - which is particularly important in our media age - I should like to take this opportunity of thanking Mrs Mouskouri for all her hard work .
In the late 1980s , the Commission , with the support of Parliament , introduced a European literary prize and a prize for the best translations of European works of literature , as a way of promoting books and reading .
What we should therefore be doing today is celebrating the fact that we have reached this second reading stage on the Ariane cultural support programme , the objectives of which are indeed worthy ones : the promotion and wider dissemination of contemporary works of literature and drama , and encouraging cooperation by networks and partnerships .
The element of cooperation with the Council of Europe is also important , as is the fact that the programme will be open to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
Personally , I think it is particularly important that literature from Eastern Europe - literature that is unknown because , in many cases , it was banned for a long time - should be recognized and distributed in the European Union too .
This would all be very laudable , but the financial aspect of the programme is extremely disappointing .
Originally it was to have a budget of ECU 34 million and to run for five years .
By the Commission 's reckoning , and according to our own members in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , that should have allowed for the translation of 2400 works of literature and 650 plays .
However , after a pilot project in 1996 , the intention is not only to delay the programme , or reduce its duration to two years - which would be damaging enough - but to give it a budget of only ECU 7 m .
I would strongly argue that it should be ECU 10 m .
As regards the comitology , the proposal for a joint advisory and management committee is particularly unacceptable in the area of culture .
We know that bureaucracy is particularly resented by artists , and it is counterproductive in this area .
Just as Ariadne 's thread helped Theseus to find his way out of the labyrinth , I hope that the new Ariane support programme for contemporary literature - while it may not resolve all our problems - will , with the help of writers and translators , give us a better sense of where we are going in Europe .
Mr President , this Ariane proposal is a poor substitute for the original and very promising proposal from Commissioner Oreja .
ECU 43 million over five years for three Community actions has dwindled to ECU 7 m over two years for six actions .
This means that there will only be an average of ECU 0.58m available for each action every year , compared with ECU 2.26m in the original proposal .
If we divide the 0.58 million by 15 , since every Member State will want to have its share , we arrive at ECU 40 000 per action per year for each Member State .
This is about a quarter of a Commissioner 's annual salary , not that I wish to begrudge him it .
In practice , the support provided by Ariane will actually be even less , given that the sixth action involves other countries too .
So now we know what the Council thinks about culture .
The amendment to ECU 10.5m is the absolute minimum .
My group supports all Mrs Mouskouri 's amendments , and I am particularly pleased that she has also incorporated the ideas from the Gutenberg programme , as well as providing support for small independent producers , especially those new to the industry .
The Committee on Culture called for a programme on books and reading in an own-initiative report as early as 1982 .
We earmarked ECU 500 000 for this in the 1995 budget , but despite all our calls , no legal basis was established .
I was the rapporteur for that report .
This was why we tabled an amendment to the budget last year to ensure that Ariane also provided funding for the Gutenberg objectives .
There are 90 million reasons for this , 90 million people in the EU who are unable or scarcely able to read .
The new article on culture gives us the chance to do something about this .
I have one final remark here for the Commissioner .
Ariane is intended to promote books and reading , but the cost of books is often a major obstacle .
DG IV is shortly to take a decision on the fixed book price in the GermanAustrian region .
I would ask you to refer to the article on culture in the Maastricht Treaty here , which provides scope for a cultural rather than an exclusively economic approach to this issue .
I should like to thank Mrs Mouskouri on behalf of my group for all her hard work .
Mr President , the development of a substantive policy for Europe 's language peculiarities is vitally important , and certainly more so than any incidental interests of any Member States .
Cultural polymorphism is also linguistic polymorphism , and any approach to the European dimension , to European identity , must be made via language because I think we all agree that a country 's best ambassador is its art .
For that reason , the ARIANE programme is very important indeed for the European Union .
The translation of literature , plays and poetry contributes towards a cultural upgrading of Europe 's peoples and to the broader availability of works written in less-widely used languages . And let me comment that they should not be referred to as minority languages , as I have repeatedly heard them called and still do .
Mr President , Commissioner , in my opinion there is no further room for manoeuvre .
The ARIANE programme , ambitious from its outset and rightly so , has been more drastically cut in both duration and budget than any of those who inspired it could have foreseen .
Mrs Mouskouri has already told us about that and I will not go into details .
I too would like to call for increased funding and I agree with the rapporteur that at least 10.5 MECU should be provided , because I do not believe that a United Europe can be based on a single currency alone .
On the contrary , indeed , a European Union must first and foremost be based on the culture of its peoples , namely every form of art , both ancient and modern .
Unless our peoples draw together and communicate , no single currency will unite them .
The only thing that can unite us is the quality of our life , whether under the heading of environment , or cultural programmes , or equal opportunities for women . And it is unfortunately mainly those things that are suffering in the name of convergence .
To conclude , Mr President , I would like to call upon the Commission to adopt the necessary initiatives so that the programme , even if truncated , can begin at once .
Mr President , I rise with great pleasure to speak in support of minority languages and the rights of individuals to be able to read and study works of literature and other writings in the language of their choice , which may sometimes be their mother tongue or may be another language .
I believe that any money spent in this field is an investment , not just a cultural but a social investment .
Those people who know nothing of other languages , those who know nothing of other countries and of other cultures , those people who live , sometimes quite happily , in ignorance , are very often those who are most susceptible to misinformation .
They are the ones who are most likely to believe half-truths and distortions .
When people fall into this category , I believe that they can develop a fear of anyone whose cultural origin , whose language , whose religion , whose appearance may differ from their own .
With this fear , the next stage takes over and you get rejection .
Unchecked , rejection of other people leads to racism , nationalism and fascism .
By contrast , I believe very firmly that an understanding of other languages and learning to speak and read them is one positive step we can take to advancing internationalism , tolerance and understanding .
By supporting the translation of works of literature and other books into a wide range of languages we can do this , we can overcome some of these fears .
In an age where money and competitiveness are increasingly important , the major languages of Europe and the world will always survive on their own .
The others , the minority ones , just as important , like minority groups of people , need support - support , I suggest , from this Parliament .
I hope very much that in future we can diversify even further because I hope that we will not just concentrate our resources on those languages which are historically European , but will look further at languages which are now increasingly being spoken by people living and being born in Europe , languages which have a European history to them .
We can look at those in the future .
I support this report with great pleasure .
I congratulate the rapporteur and I hope very much that the Commissioner will also be able to give his support to the amendments calling for a higher budget .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Cultural heritage - the Raphael programme
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0307 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the common position adopted by the Council ( C4-0378 / 96-95 / 0078 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a Community action programme in the field of cultural heritage - the Raphael programme ( rapporteur : Mr Sanz Fernández ) .
Mr President , the Committee on Culture is proposing a few but very important amendments to the text of the Council 's common position on the action programme in the field of cultural heritage .
With these amendments we intend to increase the budget for this new programme so that we can boost the activity developed in recent years in the field of cultural heritage .
As far as comitology is concerned , the Committee on Culture proposes a consultative committee for managing the programme instead of the budget management committee proposed by the Council , which would unnecessarily increase red tape and limit the Commission 's room for manoeuvre .
Mr President , the money that has allocated is the main problem which sets us apart from the Council .
The text of the Council 's common position reflects an ambitious and well-drafted programme but the budget proposed is only 30 MECU over four years , with a review after the second year , whereas in recent years we have been spending something like 10 MECU a year in the pilot phase of programmes .
Therefore , with the Council proposal , the launch of the multi-annual programme would simply mean the continuation of activities already being carried out , without being able to attain the ambitious objectives contained in the text of the common position or in the European Commission 's proposal .
The Committee on Culture proposes a budget of 86 MECU for the next four years : in my opinion , the Council is unaware of the role which culture has to play in today 's Europe , the one being constructed , nor does it bear in mind the job-creating capacity of investment in the field of cultural heritage .
European construction must not be limited to economic aspects alone .
We really must involve every citizen in the adventure of the European Union by giving it a soul , a more spiritual significance : culture , the cultural heritage which belongs to all Europeans and European citizenship : this means that we will feel disappointed if the Union focuses only on the internal market and a single currency .
Therefore , the Raphael Programme will preserve and publicise what we have in common , this rich and diverse cultural heritage in all of the Member States and regions , and will bring out the European dimension of the cultural heritage , respecting the cultural diversity of our people .
Many governments , which are at present going through times of budget tightening , are drastically cutting investment in cultural matters , as if this was a luxury which we can only allow ourselves in times of prosperity .
They are forgetting the duty that we have to preserve and transmit the cultural heritage which we have been given by previous generations and handing it on to future generations ; they are also ignoring the capacity of cultural investment to create employment , since investment in cultural heritage can allow us to revive the old heritage-related trades , create jobs and help the tourist industry - not forgetting the economic development of many regions in the Community which are rich in cultural heritage but backward in terms of economic development .
Furthermore , the cultural activities and the Raphael Programme will enhance mutual knowledge between the European peoples , bring out the values which are common to us and favour tolerance and mutual respect in times when exclusion seems to be growing and the rejection of anything different is on the increase .
Therefore , we must reject the paltry budget proposed by the Council for the Raphael Programme , the most emblematic Community programme in the area of culture .
The Maastricht Treaty dedicated culture as one of the common actions to be boosted . The multi-annual programme means that we must make a forward leap , a boost , and not simply extend the very scanty activities which have been carried out under pilot activities .
Most Culture Ministers and the European Commission want a programme which has more money in its purse .
The European Parliament has also demonstrated this ; it did so at the first reading and we will firmly maintain our position during all of the talks if the Council does not accept the budgetary amendments which will be voted on tomorrow by the plenary session of the European Parliament .
Mr President , this week the European Parliament is to take another step on the long and difficult road towards the adoption of the Raphael programme .
The amendments put forward by the rapporteur , Mr Sanz Fernández , on behalf of the Committee on Culture are very positive , and we believe that only if they are adopted will Raphael be able to assume its proper role as a genuine reference point for safeguarding and developing Europe 's cultural heritage .
All those who operate in the cultural sector , whether they are institutions , associations or private individuals , have developed high hopes in respect of Raphael , and these hopes must not be dashed .
The programme aims in fact to mobilize more generally all the energies and intelligence of the European countries in order to preserve and make available to our citizens the most extensive cultural heritage in the world .
That is why we are pursuing the two key points contained in our amendments : the first relates to the funding for the programme .
Our proposal is that it should have an allocation of at least ECU 86 million for the next four years , which really is the minimum if Raphael is to make a strong impact on the situation in Europe .
The second concerns Parliament 's well-justified refusal to accept the establishment of a programme management committee made up of representatives of the Member States ' governments .
We really fail to understand why project selection under Raphael should be subject to diplomatic negotiation or , worse still , to a share-out amongst the 15 national governments .
We therefore hope that the Council will approve Parliament 's amendments in the near future , and that one of the most important Community programmes can then be launched as soon as possible .
Finally , I hope that it might also be possible to draw on Raphael for the restoration of cultural assets damaged by natural events such as earthquakes , fires and floods .
This request comes in fact from the areas of northern Italy hit by the earthquake on 15 October , when a major part of our historical and cultural heritage was seriously damaged .
Mr President , first of all I would just like to say a few words to congratulate Mr Sanz Fernández on his painstaking work in drafting this report and I would also like to express some of my thoughts about the path we have gone down .
First of all , the rapporteur has demonstrated great lucidity in producing a report which sets out and interprets the main problem .
He has stuck to his principles and shown flexibility in defending the vital points , while yielding over instrumental or auxiliary aspects .
The result is similar to the position of the Committee on Culture and is not so very far from what my own Group has supported .
My second point is this : what lies behind the Council 's moves to fight over the question of committees and to slash Raphael 's budget to a token , not to say shameful , amount ?
We might also well ask what lay behind the ideas of the parties who signed the Treaty on European Union when they added a new title - the IXth - and a new article - Article 128 - referring to culture ?
Did they just want to go through the motions of setting out principles which they have not carried out in practice ?
Under that Article 128 and the Kaleidoscope Programme , two other programmes - Raphael and Ariane have now been set in motion but only after a rather picturesque fight in a climate of uncouth stinginess with masses of cuts , the outward signs of a grudging acceptance of the inevitable rather than the creation of a well thought out , inspiring and forward-looking project .
The Raphael Programme , Mr President , is fundamental for protecting and promoting the cultural heritage and , in other words , it is fundamental for protecting the European cultural identity , the very cornerstone of European citizenship , the very raison d 'être for our presence here .
Do they not want it ? Then let them say so .
Do they , in practice , want to make the provisions of Article 128 impracticable ?
Then let them say that too .
What is unacceptable is that they should completely undermine basic programmes by giving them such paltry sums of money and , in the end , convert the ( now hackneyed ) European cultural identity into a sordid bartered good by tossing a handful of coins at it .
Mr President , the Raphael programme now under discussion is being put forward in a week of intensive parliamentary work affecting all the sectors covered by this programme .
I am referring here to culture , tourism , and the scope for creating new jobs .
The Raphael programme is in fact aimed at establishing a specific action in relation to cultural assets , at creating conditions favourable to the growth and development of synergy between culture and tourism , with new job opportunities - especially for young people - as a likely consequence .
Europe 's cultural heritage is no longer the property of the individual Member States , but of the Community as a whole ; hence all the nations have rights and duties towards it , so that all European citizens can have access to individual events and to the individual objects of art and culture which are conserved and managed by the Member States .
This applies in particular to the social groups which are currently most remote from culture .
So it is now time for the Commission to give some substance to the Raphael programme - and Parliament has , to my mind , offered a wealth of suggestions .
That is why we shall be voting in favour of increased funding . We are also insisting that half the total sum should be earmarked for preventive action , in other words preserving , restoring and safeguarding Europe 's cultural assets .
The consequence of this will be to encourage , or reinforce , the professions and techniques involved in conserving cultural objects . It will be possible to guide large numbers of young people into those occupations which are crucial if we are to bequeath our present cultural heritage to the Europe - and , above all , the Europeans - of tomorrow .
Mr President , Commissioner , judging by appearances , sometimes I have the impression that neither the Council nor the Commission itself lend the importance that they deserve to culture issues or , at least , demonstrate that importance by giving them money from the budget .
We in the European Parliament , through an amendment , have asked for 96 million ecus whereas the Commission proposal would result in a cut of no less than 37 million ecus for a four-year programme , which means that Mr Sanz 's indignation is quite understandable .
Ladies and gentlemen , this can be read in two ways : that which has already been pointed out - that we are lending very little importance to our cultural heritage and , the second , that we are giving little importance to job creation .
Once again , we are dealing with great declarations of intent and the lack of any practical action .
Any budgetary cut to the Raphael Programme is a blow to the possibility of creating new jobs .
Fostering tourism - as we said in the first amendment tabled by the Committee on Culture - not only means sharing our heritage and cultural and artistic knowledge , but also means creating new jobs in these cultural and artistic areas of interest .
Without going any further I would like to dedicate much of what I have to say to promoting the heritage wonders which we have in Spain , and throughout the territory of Al Andaluz , for example .
I am sure that if you know these wonders you will agree , along with my Group , that we must vote for the Sanz Fernández report if we are to continue to enjoy them .
While emphasising the word ' everyone ' , I must also point out my support for the second amendment which improves access to the heritage for the disabled and less well-off and those living in the peripheral and rural regions of the European Union .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left have always favoured sharing wealth rather than sharing poverty .
And surely this principle is also 100 % applicable to our cultural heritage .
( without microphone ) ... within the context of true subsidiarity , since as it says in the explanatory memorandum , the aim of this programme is to encourage cooperation between Member States and to support and complement their action in the field of cultural heritage .
It is based on respect for national diversity , which was the framework for the creation of this common heritage .
Here the European countries have the distinct advantage of being able to develop cultural tourism , which is likely to become a major source of economic and social activity in the coming years .
The search of our contemporaries for their identity will increasingly take them to places of special meaning to them .
We are therefore wholeheartedly in favour of Amendment No 1 , designed to link tourism to the preservation of our cultural heritage .
The development of both cultural tourism in Europe and the heritage-related professions must be encouraged .
We are also in favour of Amendment No 2 , stressing the need to promote access to this programme for those in outlying regions .
Careful development of their rich heritage - maritime and rural above all , and thinking in particular of the countries bordering on the Atlantic - is one way of compensating for the geographical handicap of isolation .
As a Member for the Vendée département , which has launched pilot projects to preserve and restore its monuments and countryside under the Heritage 2000 programme , I have witnessed the impact of major heritage schemes on regional planning .
The heritage sites which have been developed are not just memorials but are also educational , creative places , as well as being genuine businesses generating employment and economic activity , no longer solely on a seasonal basis .
Both the Raphael programme - and , Commissioner , we should like an exact financial statement as regards the pilot phase - and today 's report have the virtue of acknowledging the importance of this social impact of heritage projects .
These projects make it possible , within a town , country or region , to involve a broad range of social groups , to generate new solidarity and develop social interaction .
Such projects really can integrate people and create a strong sense of collective identity , thereby playing an important role in terms of social stability .
However , the financial costs of preserving , maintaining and bringing to life monuments and records are enormous , in particular for the public authorities .
Encouragement should therefore be given to joint actions , easing the burden on all concerned - joint research into the common problems of preserving and restoring paper , for example , or transfers of know-how - and helping to avoid any repetition of mistakes or duplication of what are usually long-term initiatives .
Unfortunately , neither the duration of the programme nor the resources allocated are up to the task .
Our group very much regrets that its duration has been reduced from five years to four .
As for the budget , which has been cut from ECU 67 million over five years to ECU 30 million over four , it no longer bears any relation to the real costs of such a project .
Regrettably , the Raphael programme is therefore in danger of remaining a purely marginal and ineffective instrument in a field which is so essential not only to our cultural , but also to our economic and social development .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before I assess the Raphael Programme and the Sanz Fernández report , I should point out that a future Europe must be built not only on economic foundations but also on socio-cultural and ecological bases .
That construction can only be consolidated if we develop it specifically and harmoniously , observing the principle of subsidiarity and respecting the exclusive responsibilities of the Member States .
Apart from the very complex powers of the European Union in political and economic areas , we must make sure that Europe never lags behind , despite the big obstacles and weighty opposition which some Member States and institutions are now putting in its way , and we must make sure that all of its obligations are fulfilled in the social , cultural and environmental areas .
Economic development can only take place on a par with social and cultural progress and wildlife conservation .
This justifies the main fights which must be undertaken , with more force and urgency each time . By promoting employment , with social protection against poverty and social exclusion , by generalising public health policies , with public security , with proper housing , by reforming the education training systems , by placing the family at the heart of society , and by safeguarding the natural and cultural heritages .
In the documents which we are now analysing we should point out that the Raphael Programme is aimed at supporting and complementing Member States ' actions in the fields of cultural heritage of European importance , something which is both enormous and very rich , and which everyone knows about .
Throughout Europe , in the cities and the countryside , in the most developed countries and in the peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions , there are countless magnificent examples of the built , movable and immovable heritage , of architecture , archaeology , individual buildings and sets of buildings , cultural sites and landscapes , all of which call for conservation , protection and enhancement .
We lend enormous importance to this programme because , as well as revealing considerable concern and very great respect for the cultural heritage of our peoples and of Europe as a whole , this programme could also contribute to regional development , to lowering unemployment , to promoting tourism and somehow benefiting people 's quality of life .
Therefore , I wish to assert that we are behind the rapporteur when he points out that the programme needs a bigger financial contribution of at least 86 million ecus .
And we are behind him when he asks for ever greater attention to be paid for less favoured groups and regions , including the peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I also wish to thank Mr Sanz Fernández for his excellent work .
I should also like to tell you that we agree with everything that you have said and feel that this is one of the most important moments in all of the activities of the Committee on Culture , and this is probably one of the main points that we will have to deal with over the coming months and years .
From this point of view , I wish to tell you that the Commission opposed the common position because we felt that , in particular with reference to the budget , such a small amount does not in the least respond to the aspirations which we had .
The Raphael Programme is an important one and it is the kernel of Community activity on behalf of culture .
As far as the amendments tabled by the European Parliament are concerned I should like to tell you that the Commission has been able to accept seven of them : it accepts No 1 , No 2 - which adds to the list of groups for whom access to the cultural heritage must be improved , and you should be well aware ( because I have already had the occasion to tell the European Parliament 's Committee on Culture of this on various occasions ) what my criterion is concerning less-favoured persons , the role to be played by culture vis-à-vis exclusion and the part it can play to help people living in peripheral regions or the countryside .

As for Amendments Nos 3 and 4 , we feel that they introduce changes to two points , concerning the committees , and here again we agree with the European Parliament .
We can accept Amendment No 6 , which deletes that paragraph in the common position which refers to the clause revising the budget for the last two years of the programme ; and Amendment No 7 about changes to the maximum limit for Community financial aid to projects in point 2 of action 1 - namely European heritage laboratories - and finally , Amendment No 8 which contains details about the special care to paid to access for less-favoured persons in the aim of action No 2 .

As for the budget , the Commission wishes to be coherent in its stance which it reiterated in its communication to the Council and therefore it maintains its initial position : a budget of 67 million ecus for a five-year period .
We think that it is important that , at the Council meeting to be held on 16 December 1996 , a compromise can be found between the two current positions and all I now have to do is thank you for your support for this programme and hope that the steps that we are taking now can be taken further in the future , and that the Council will not cut the budget , which is already extraordinarily low .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Free movement of doctors and mutual recognition of qualifications
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0269 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 93 / 16 / EEC to facilitate the free movement of doctors and the mutual recognition of their diplomas , certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications ( C40381 / 96-94 / 0305 ( COD ) ) ( rapporteur : Mrs Fontaine ) .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Fontaine for the sterling work she has done .
The directive that we are discussing here - on the free movement of doctors and the mutual recognition of their diplomas , certificates and other evidence of formal qualifications - is a very important one in the eyes of the public .
It makes a practical , and not merely a rhetorical contribution to the implementation of freedom of movement and the internal market , as laid down in the European Community Treaties .
It therefore represents an important step forward .
However , the Council has simply ignored the substantive amendments that were put forward by the House at first reading .
These concerned , in particular , the position of nationals of Member States who hold diplomas awarded by third countries .
Although the directive will not prevent the Member States from allowing the holders of diplomas , certificates and other formal qualifications not acquired in a Member State from becoming established and practising as doctors , it leaves open the issue of how this should be done .
In particular , it leaves open the question of how the system of recognition should be applied in the context of freedom of movement in the European Union .
It is therefore essential to begin considering this issue , in the light of the Commission report on the state of application of the general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas .
I fail to understand how the Council can object to considering possible solutions to problems - and that is really all that we are asking for in our amendment .
I have no need to go into detail on Parliament 's other crucial amendments .
Mrs Fontaine has emphasized the importance of the role played by the Standing Committee of European Doctors and of the comitology procedure that is to be applied .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists is also fully behind the amendments on these questions that have been reintroduced by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , I fully endorse Mrs Fontaine 's very clear report .
One can only agree with a measure to facilitate the free movement of medical specialists in the European Community .
It is a matter of adapting the recognition of specialisms to medical progress : specializations change , and sometimes the minimum period for acquiring them can change , as can the content of training courses .
Some specializations exist in two or more Member States , but are not recognized in the others .
Regular updating is essential and , as provided for in the directive , it is desirable to adopt a streamlined procedure allowing for more rapid revision , instead of the more cumbersome and inevitably more convoluted procedure of legislative measures .
It is therefore a very sensible approach to empower the Commission , assisted by the Committee of Senior Public Health Officials , to decide on the changes needed to accommodate these specialist medical diplomas .
This raises some awkward problems of comitology : these problems , correctly identified by the rapporteur , are covered by the four amendments .
The rapporteur has actually somewhat diluted and adjusted the second amendment to take account of the fact that , as Commissioner Monti pointed out in the previous debate , the Standing Committee of European Doctors is an unofficial , non-institutional , private body which therefore cannot be referred to .
As it is now worded , Amendment No 2 - stating that the Advisory Committee on Medical Training shall communicate its opinions and recommendations to the Commission and the Member States - is a specific recital signalling to the Commission that this advisory committee , which represents a link with the Committee of Medical Specialists of the European Union , another strictly private body , in any event forms part of the Standing Committee of European Doctors .
It is a matter of consulting the experts on these very technical and sensitive issues .
The same goes for Amendment No 3 which , without putting forward any solutions , indicates in a recital that some reflection is also necessary on degrees and diplomas obtained by Community nationals from foreign universities .
This problem must be taken into account .
We hope that the Commission will support these amendments , which improve the text by making it more transparent and more functional .
I should like to begin by saying what a pleasure it is for me to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine - a remarkable personality with a great commitment to the health sector in Europe .
Hers is not an approach that lends itself to seeking harmonization via the lowest common denominator .
Medicine is an area in which things are now moving so fast that the content of training must be continually adapted .
The medical profession itself has the most important role to play in this respect .
Certificates awarded in third countries should be checked to ensure that the content of the studies involved is comparable , and should then be recognized without delay .
A precise definition of recognized qualifications in alternative medicine should be drawn up , with the same high standards that apply to general medical education , but without making medical studies a precondition .
Any attempt to water down the high standard of learning will be at the expense of patients and their health , rather than the education budget .
In terms of value for money , the cheapest option is undoubtedly rapid healing , through effective diagnosis and treatment .
Finally , because this is the last time that I shall have the opportunity of addressing the House , I should like to express my appreciation of the high level of cooperation that exists in the European Parliament .
I should like to thank the interpreters and the technicians , everyone on the podium , the Commission and the Council .
I have greatly enjoyed my period of cooperation with you .
Now I shall be watching you from the vantage point of my national parliament .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gredler .
I think that I echo the whole House in wishing you , on behalf of all our colleagues , all the very best for your political career in your home country , Austria . You have our warmest wishes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the European Parliament for showing such interest in this proposal , and I am grateful for the important work devoted to it by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and in particular by the rapporteur , Mrs Fontaine , with her usual clarity .
The aim of this proposal is to put in place a simplified legislative procedure to facilitate periodic updating of the lists of specializations appearing in Articles 5 and 7 of the ' doctors ' directive , which allow for the mutual recognition of diplomas , certificates and other specialist medical qualifications on the basis of mutual trust in the level of training .
Such training must comply with the minimum requirements set out in the directive and , in particular , the minimum length of specialist training courses laid down in Articles 26 and 27 , for which the simplified legislative procedure is now being proposed .
There is therefore no question of excluding certain parties from the legislative process : both Parliament and the Council will remain involved and , as far as Parliament is concerned , reference has been made to the existence of the modus vivendi which meets the request made by the House at first reading .
Nor is there any question of changing the consultation process : both the Advisory Committee on Medical Training and the Committee of Senior Public Health Officials will still be consulted , in accordance with the roles and powers attributed to them .
The purpose of Amendments Nos 1 and 4 is to amend the comitology procedure adopted in the common position for changes to the lengths of training courses laid down in Articles 26 and 27 .
As the rapporteur has said , in its original proposal the Commission had envisaged a management committee .
However , with a view to health protection and because of the considerable financial impact on Member States of such a change , the Council opted to amend the Commission 's initial text and provide for a type IIIa regulatory committee , rejecting the text which is being put forward again today in the form of Amendments Nos 1 and 4 .
Although well aware of the problems which such a change was likely to cause , and despite its basic preference for a management committee , the Commission has looked very carefully at the various arguments for and against the different solutions , and , all things considered , has concluded that the Council 's position is acceptable .
It should not be forgotten , moreover , that returning to the original text would jeopardize the consensus reached with some difficulty by the Member States .
Amendments Nos 2 and 3 take up , in another form , amendments adopted at first reading and not incorporated into either the amended proposal or the common position .
The Commission shares Parliament 's view as regards the role of the Advisory Committee on Medical Training and the importance of its opinion on specialist medical training courses .
The Commission too is concerned about the issue of recognizing qualifications obtained in a third country ; for this reason , the advisory committee has been asked for an opinion .
Its work should soon result in the adoption of a report and recommendations regarding specialist medical training courses and , above all , in some relevant proposals on changes to the list of specializations and lengths of courses .
This is also the reason why the Commission 's services have been consulting the Member States since February 1996 on the recognition of qualifications obtained in third countries , in spite of the fact that similar consultations in 1992 proved inconclusive .
These new consultations should enable the Commission to determine whether or not the present political climate lends itself to legislation in this field .
The concerns expressed in Amendments Nos 2 and 3 have thus already been addressed , and Parliament will naturally be informed of the outcome of this work and these consultations .
Under these circumstances , Mr President , the common position adopted by the Council and which the Commission can endorse - as stated in its communication to the European Parliament - would appear to respond in a balanced and legally proper way , and as comprehensively as possible , to the various concerns which have been expressed .
In conclusion , I would emphasize that above and beyond any minor differences of opinion which remain , these concerns relate - as Mrs Fontaine pointed out - to a subject which is absolutely central to the free movement of persons , and therefore to a people 's Europe .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Protection of utility models in the single market
The next item is the report ( A4-0216 / 96 ) by Mr Añoveros Trías de Bés , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the Commission Green Paper on the protection of utility models in the single market ( COM ( 95 ) 0370 - C4-0353 / 95 ) .
Mr President , what is the aim of the Commission 's Green Paper ?
The aim is to open a debate between the Member States , the European Parliament , the industry and interested sectors to respond to a certain number of questions which need to be clarified concerning essential subjects : first of all whether or not Community action needs to be taken and the legal form in which such action should take place .
The Commission reaches the general conclusion that Community action is necessary in the area of utility models to ensure rapid , simple and cheap protection of technical inventions which have a certain degree of novelty and which call for the rapid publication of their rights .
But the Commission does not propose a single option but offers various ones : a ) a directive aligning the national schemes of protection thereby introducing the system in countries which do not have specific regulations ; b ) harmonising existing schemes in creating valid protection for the whole Union , which could be obtained by means of a single application by virtue of the mutual recognition of protection granted by the Member States ; and c ) a regulation establishing a new Community protection right to be obtained by means of a single application directly applicable in all the Member States .
What is the situation of utility models at present ?
A utility model is a registered right which confers exclusive protection for technological inventions which have a certain degree of novelty .
Utility models can be registered , granted without any prior search and offer a lower level of legal protection than patents .
However , European legal provisions concerning utility models are not uniform since there are countries where the concept does not exist : Sweden , Luxembourg and the United Kingdom . In the other Member States where it is regulated there is no uniform treatment of it .
National systems of protecting industrial property which require registration are exclusively confined to the territory of the State granting protection .
The holder of a protection right may prevent the importation , by third parties , of products marketed without his authorization .
On the other hand , the differences in the level of protection provided by the model may have an influence on decisions to locate industries within the Union .
Of the options put by the Commission , the rapporteur would tend to opt for a Community regulation because he believes that this has many advantages .
A system of mutual recognition could cause great legal insecurity ; it might be appropriate to advocate a system of prior or deferred examination , but immediately following registration , thereby reconciling the requirements of speed in granting the right with legal security and the safeguarding of those most affected by the granting of models .
It would also have other disadvantages such as vulnerability to mass requests for protection from non-Community territories ; it will also bring with it considerable translation costs which would perhaps limit access to SMEs .
To offset this to a large extent , we propose assigning the administration of the utility model to the one existing Community property agency which also , as you know , administers the Community 's design .
Regardless of the final form which the model takes , we should take into account the following points : granting models without examination would cause great legal insecurity .
Moreover , if protective rights introduced at European level were too cheap this could result in massive imports , as we have said .
However , we must bear in mind that utility models must essentially be aimed at SMEs , for which costs must always be kept down .
Here I conclude , Mr President . SMEs which are the main beneficiaries and must be the main beneficiaries of utility models must , I repeat , have at their disposal a rapid , cheap , simple and useful instrument which is part of overall planning and coherent planning of all instruments protecting industrial property , bearing in mind the harmonizations already planned on protection rights .
My colleague Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes is not just an experienced solicitor but also a brilliant lawyer , and I entirely agree with what he has said in this report .
Of the three options proposed by the Commission I would , for the time being at least , prefer the directive , since it provides the greatest degree of legal clarity , though I am quite prepared to consider other arguments in favour of the two other options which Commissioner Monti has put before us .
For me , a Dutchman , this was an entirely new area of intellectual property which I knew nothing about , but which I am now very keen to support .
It would be extremely useful in practice to have a limited patent which is quick and cheap and provides protection from the moment of registration .
However , you will not be surprised to hear , Mr Monti , that a comparison immediately springs to mind with the model rights which we are also currently dealing with .
These other model rights are the subject of a directive which establishes a new intellectual property in the field of design . The car industry has no objection to the current system of long-term patents which take a long time and cost a great deal of money to obtain : their products are worth it .
But the textile industry - fashion , carpets and so on - has objected that the system is far too cumbersome , expensive and time-consuming .
I would point out to you and your staff that when we were looking at model rights , I suggested that we might introduce a quick , cheap and temporary utility model along the lines of what Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes and you yourself have proposed .
Could we not introduce something of this kind to eliminate many of the complaints we hear about design rights from the carpet industry , which is such an important sector ?
I would ask you to give this your consideration , Commissioner , and I would like to thank you for attending today , and Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes for his excellent report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , industrial property rights play an important role in the single market : they serve to promote innovative activity in the European Union , so that an idea can rapidly be transformed into goods and services available to our citizens .
As you know , utility models are registered rights which confer exclusive protection for technological inventions .
The debate on innovation which is currently under way in the European Union has revealed the extreme importance of technological innovation and protecting it effectively .
The consultations launched by the Commission with the publication in July 1995 of the Green Paper on utility models in the single market have in fact proved remarkably successful .
We have received a large number of comments , which shows how important the matter is considered to be .
And the vast majority of these comments are in favour of a Community initiative in this area .
In fact the present situation , where there are huge differences from one Member State to another , as has been pointed out , can create barriers to trade and cause inconvenience to firms .
I am most grateful to Parliament for its extremely thorough work on this issue and its support for the Commission 's proposed approach .
I am also happy to say that most of the suggestions made in the report by Mr Añoveros Trias de Bes are entirely acceptable to the Commission and reflect our own analysis of the situation .
Nevertheless , I have to say that some important technical questions - such as the level of inventiveness required to obtain protection under the utility model , or the three-dimensional form requirement - will require a good deal more examination before the Commission can adopt a definitive position .
By the same token , it is not yet certain that , if the Commission did prepare a legislative initiative , it would take the form of a regulation , as suggested by the House .
That aside , the Commission is favourably disposed to the vast majority of the proposals put forward by the rapporteur , whom I thank once again .
I also thank Mr Janssen van Raay for his comments .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 7.45 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , concerning the list of petitions appended to the Minutes , I wish to comment on Petiton No 727 / 95 by Mr James Fielding and others which concerns the position of 10 , 000 elderly people in the UK who have lost money and risk losing their homes under failed home-income plans .
They mortgaged their homes on the basis of false promises .
With regard to this petition , the Commission promised to send information about further European legislation to protect the rights of consumers with regard to financial services .
That information has not yet been received .
I would ask you to ensure that it is sent , Mr President .
I would ask my colleagues on the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee , the Social Affairs Committee and the Consumer Protection Committee to support the position of the pensioners affected when the new legislation is introduced .
Finally , I would thank Mr Newman and colleagues on the Committee on Petitions for the support and sympathy they gave to the pensioners .
You really should be grateful to me , Mr Howitt , that I let you say all that , because it had nothing to do with the Minutes !
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Decision on urgency
I would point out that the report by Mr Kittelmann on this proposal , which is due to be discussed this evening by the Committee on External Economic Relations , is already on the agenda for Friday 's sitting , marked ' possibly ' .
For the sake of procedure , however , we shall take this vote .
Does the committee responsible wish to state its views ?
Mr President , the Committee on External Economic Relations recommends that urgency be approved .
There is widespread agreement on the basic issue , I think .
I have one small remark to make , however .
Once again , we have seen just how far the Council of Ministers ' consultation of Parliament falls short of the mark .
The Commission forwarded the proposals to the Council at the end of July , yet it took the Council two months before it consulted Parliament , with the result that our Committee on Legal Affairs has been unable to examine the legal basis and the legal implications in detail .
In my view , this is particularly unfortunate for our colleagues in that committee .
We are now having to deal with yet another important initiative by rushing through it as an urgent procedure .
I would ask you , Mr President , to urge the Council once again to show a little more respect for this House .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure )
Annual programme of the Commission for 1997
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a month ago , in Parliament 's debate on the state of the Union , I expressed my concern to you : that our countries ' citizens have less and less confidence in politics , and in the structures of our constitutional states .
The European Union does not escape this finding .
This crisis of confidence is in fact a challenge .
It requires us to carry out an in-depth reform of our institutions to make them more democratic .
It also requires us to focus , in our daily work , on the causes of the disillusionment of the European public .
We are all too familiar with those causes : unemployment , insecurity and the feeling - sometimes justified - that the world is becoming dehumanized .
I shall sum up the Commission 's work programme for 1997 in two phrases : reforming what is not working ; and focusing on the real priorities .
What will be the underlying spirit of our programme ?
Firstly , that of my investiture speech .
I presented that speech in the form of a five-year programme .
You gave your backing to that programme .
Our work programme for 1997 will be based , even more so than in the past , on the Commission 's firm belief - which you share - that Europe is essential , that it is genuinely at the service of everyone , and that it is effective .
Indeed , the Union is essential whenever - in the interests of Europe 's citizens - it is better to act together than individually .
This is true within the Union ; and it is true on the international stage .
The Commission is convinced that there is a need to do less , but do it better .
But once again , in 1997 , it will not hesitate to take initiatives whenever it considers that a contribution from the Union is needed in order to deal effectively with a matter of common interest .
I shall refuse to allow subsidiarity to be used as a pretext for calling into question Community law and 40 years of common work !
Let us not underestimate or jeopardize our achievements !
Mr President , in taking stock of 1996 , the Commission has concluded that a great deal has been achieved .
Major progress has been made in a number of essential areas of Community activity .
I shall give three examples .
Firstly , the adoption of the European Confidence Pact for Employment , which I presented to you on 31 January , made it possible to raise public awareness .
Now , this pact must be implemented .
Secondly , economic and monetary union is now firmly on track .
And , thirdly , substantial breakthroughs have been made in the development of the information society .
Admittedly , we failed to launch a number of the initiatives announced at the beginning of the year .
On the other hand , other important measures , which could not have been foreseen when the work programme for 1996 was presented , were carried out .
We have learnt from this situation .
In 1997 , therefore , the Commission will focus on the real priorities .
I should now like to set out those priorities , in presenting to you the broad outlines of the Commission 's work programme for next year .
The first proof of the Commission 's efficiency will be the adoption of a rigorous approach to its own internal management .
I can give a personal undertaking in this context .
In 1997 , the Commission will set in motion farreaching reforms designed to modernize the way it is run and to improve its performance .
A rigorous approach will also be applied to the executive tasks which are conferred on the Commission by the Treaty , and for the daily management of which it is responsible .
Lastly , Community policies will also be managed with increasing care .
In 1997 , we shall be launching the third stage of the Sound and Efficient Management 2000 programme .
It will be necessary to improve cooperation between the European institutions and the Member States .
It is essential for the latter to be directly involved in the rigorous management of the Community taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , 1997 will be strongly marked by action in the areas that I call the major challenges : the Intergovernmental Conference ; economic and monetary union ; the financial package for the post-1999 period ; and enlargement .
In many respects , it will be a pivotal year , in the sense that the work on the reform of the Treaties will be concluded and give way to Agenda 2000 .
I shall come back to that later , but firstly I should like to present in greater detail our work programme for next year .
This programme forms part of a considered , coherent and sustainable plan of action , made possible by the way in which the Union 's institutions are organized : the Commission 's five-year mandate now coincides with the European Parliament 's term of office .
In view of the problems that Europe must resolve , it is no longer sufficient to make grandiose declarations .
The people of Europe have ceased to believe in such declarations - and they are right .
However , the sense of urgency must not lead to excessive haste and the adoption of piecemeal initiatives .
On the contrary , what we need is carefully considered action , carried out with perseverance and determination .
That is the imperative !
Therefore , the Commission has established four political priorities for 1997 , in line with the main strategic pillars that it set out two years ago for the duration of its mandate : fostering growth and employment and preparing for the single currency ; actively promoting the European model of society ; enhancing Europe 's presence on the international stage ; and preparing for the future .
The first priority of the Commission 's work programme is implementation of the Confidence Pact for Employment .
I attach great importance to this pact !
Do not think that I am prepared to give up a project which I see as an essential precondition for meeting the challenges of the year 2000 in the best possible circumstances .
No , ladies and gentlemen , it was not a question of beating the air .
To those who remain unconvinced , I would say : ' Read it ! '
Unemployment is sapping the confidence of Europe 's citizens .
And that confidence must be restored .
That is the pact 's objective .
We need a comprehensive , coherent and practical strategy to promote employment , and everyone must put their shoulder to the wheel !
That is my goal , and I hope that it is yours as well .
In 1997 , much of the Commission 's efforts will be directed towards putting into effect the measures set out in the confidence pact .
To this end , we have an invaluable asset : growth .
Growth is picking up , but to be sustainable , it must be based on sound macro-economic policies .
In 1997 , the penultimate year before the launch of monetary union , the Commission will be careful to ensure that the Member States take the necessary measures to achieve the convergence that will serve as a foundation for the single currency .
When I look at the budgets adopted by the Member States ' governments , I am led to an inevitable conclusion : the Member States have taken up their responsibilities for next year .
I welcome the entry of the Finnish markka into the European Monetary System . This clearly justifies my firm belief that the single currency will come into effect on 1 January 1999 - and in a significant number of countries .
The Commission was right not to give way .
Cast your minds back to not very long ago : despite all the opposition , we have stayed on course .
And we shall soon be witnessing the beneficial effects of our commitment to employment - because employment is the real goal .
Economic and monetary union is no more than a means !
The confidence pact sets this goal in a framework of structural measures aimed at maximizing the Community 's gains and taking full advantage of growth .
The first of these actions consists of completing the internal market - since as you know , that objective has not yet been fully achieved .
I shall mention just a few of the areas in which we must make progress over the course of the coming year : the internal market in gas ; the legal framework for biotechnologies ; and the Statute for the European Company .
And let us not forget the multiannual programme for small and medium-sized enterprises .
We must complete the internal market , but we must also simplify it .
And the Commission will apply itself to doing so .
The third pillar of the confidence pact is the reform of employment systems .
We need active national employment policies that are geared to the challenges .
The Commission will devote itself to taking forward , in close cooperation with the Member States and the two sides of industry , the pact 's recommendations on this point .
Similarly , it will encourage the opening of major work sites .
In 1997 , the Commission will bring forward specific proposals on access to continuous training , the life-long acquisition and accreditation of skills .
It will put into effect the action plan ' Learning in the information society ' and it will launch an ERASMUS apprenticeship programme .
It is therefore a matter of adapting to the changes that are affecting work and its place in everyone 's lives .
This same concern for employment will lead us , in 1997 , to amend the Union 's structural policies .
The mid-term reassessment of Objective 1 - for regions whose development is lagging behind - and the programming for Objective 2 - regions in the process of conversion - for the period 1997-1999 will provide us with an opportunity to do this .
Promoting employment will be the main criterion of these reappraisals .
Moreover , the Commission has put forward the idea of territorial employment pacts , and this initiative is already meeting with great success .
1997 will be the year in which it is put into effect .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two issues have become topical in 1996 : globalization and the European model of society .
And it was not by chance that they came to the fore at the same time .
I sensed a new public awareness that our social model constitutes the right response to globalization .
We must not disappoint this expectation .
The Commission will take action next year to enhance that model : that is our second priority .
It will step up those measures which contribute to building the European social model on the basis of solidarity and a more qualitative concept of growth .
Social policy , education and training , equal opportunities , economic and social cohesion , consumer and environmental policy : these are the foundations of that model .
In this context , I wish to stress that the improvement of environmental protection and the pursuit of sustainable development will be one of the Commission 's major concerns in 1997 .
We shall do everything possible to ensure that the Union plays a decisive role in the preparations for the special session of the UN General Assembly on the environment - five years after the Rio Summit - as well as in the conference of contracting parties to the Convention on Climate Change .
There is another area in which the Commission has received a forceful message from Europe 's citizens in 1996 : freedom of movement within the Union , and security in the context of the worsening of phenomena such as drugs , sexual exploitation and the trafficking of women , terrorism , violence and organized crime .
What do we see ?
Of the four freedoms incorporated in the Treaty , the free movement of persons is the least well guaranteed .
But for all that , our fellow citizens do not feel better protected .
Indeed , they do not understand why we are not equipped with the necessary means to combat these threats to their security .
It is for this reason that the Commission wishes the Intergovernmental Conference to lead to a large-scale transfer of matters of justice and home affairs to the Community domain , whenever this will enable us to take more effective action .
In the meantime , however , the Commission is using all the means at its disposal to meet the legitimate expectations of the people of Europe .
The European model of society is shaped internally , but it is advocated and promoted throughout the world .
Enhancing Europe 's presence on the international stage will be the Commission 's third objective in 1997 .
The European Union is already shouldering major responsibilities in many regions of the world , for example the Middle East , Bosnia and the former Soviet republics .
We shall have to address a number of problems - though I am always wary of giving examples , for fear of neglecting to mention other important points .
We shall put into effect all the initiatives to which we are committed , and you will be aware that there are hardly any geographical areas to which we have not given our attention .
As far as new measures are concerned , I would point out that the Union 's relations with its ACP partners will be the subject of a green paper that the Commission will present in the autumn .
This will mark the beginning of a wide-ranging debate that will continue throughout 1997 .
In all its actions , the Commission will also be concerned to ensure that the European Union is recognized to have a political influence commensurate with its financial commitments .
This influence will take shape only if the Member States prove capable of displaying firm cohesion and a constant will to work together .
Asserting the European Union 's political role implies that we are capable of developing or improving our capacity for dialogue and decision-making , whether in the field of traditional - notably commercial - external relations , or in the newer field of the common foreign and security policy .
The Commission will not relax its efforts in this respect .
This is why the Commission wishes to see an ambitious and successful Intergovernmental Conference .
I come now to the fourth pillar of our work programme : preparing for the Union 's future by drawing up Agenda 2000 .
Preparing for the Union 's future will begin with the successful conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Commission wishes the reform to provide the Union with a genuine means of defending its interests in the world and to make it possible for Europe 's citizens to recognize and experience the Union 's contribution .
This is the kind of institutional reform that the Union needs !
This is the kind of institutional reform that the Commission is advocating !
It is high time for us to realize this , and to summon up the will to achieve it .
In any event , this institutional reform is necessary .
The prospect of enlargement makes it all the more vital .
In the Commission 's view , it is an essential precondition .
Indeed , I believe that it is inconceivable to retain unanimous voting in a Union of 20 or more Member States .
Maintaining the complexity of the current procedures would seriously handicap the interplay between the Union 's institutions .
With regard to enlargement , in 1997 the Commission will deliver its opinions on the applicant countries .
It will do so only after the conclusion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
And it will do so quite independently - in other words , with no preconceived ideas or fears about stating the truth .
Preparation of the financial perspectives for the post-1999 period will begin next year .
This is closely linked to enlargement .
In 1997 , the Commission will present a communication on the financial framework for the year 2000 onwards .
Enlargement will have some important repercussions for Community policies ; I am thinking in particular of the common agricultural policy and the structural policies .
The Commission 's communication will be based on an in-depth assessment of this impact .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the year ahead will be strongly marked by action to meet the major challenges of the year 2000 : the Intergovernmental Conference must produce an ambitious result ; the Union will enter the final phase of preparing for the decision , in spring 1999 , on the third stage of economic and monetary union ; and Agenda 2000 - the plans for enlargement and the financial package for the period after 1999 - must be drawn up .
These challenges must be tackled responsibly and in a logical order .
The Commission is assuming its responsibilities .
I know that the European Parliament will assume its responsibilities .
And I am expecting the Member States to assume theirs .
( Applause )
Mr President , anyone who wishes to win an election today rails against Europe and blames it for all society 's ills .
Anyone who wishes to lose an election defends the Europe of the Maastricht Treaty .
As we have seen again quite recently , this is the situation in a number of our countries .
It is therefore more necessary than ever to state quite clearly what kind of Europe we wish to see .
And the Socialist Group wishes to see a Europe that is strong , comprehensible and credible .
Our Europe is a Europe of the fight against unemployment and for jobs ; it is a Europe of social standards which are not minimal , but adequate for all ; it is a Europe in which respect for the environment is incorporated into all our policies .
We do not wish to see a neo-liberal Europe in which market forces reign supreme .
Anyone who listens to ordinary people knows that the neo-liberal vision of Europe , which concentrates exclusively on competitiveness and the logic of finance , no longer has the support of the large majority of citizens , even the most pro-European among them .
If something is not done very quickly , there will be greater opportunities than ever for demagogues , Euro-sceptics and nationalists of every hue to set up shop and do a brisk trade .
Mr President , we are beginning today 's sitting with an initial assessment of the Commission 's work programme for 1997 , which is accompanied by a review of 1996 .
We recognize that the work programme can be a useful means of making the Commission 's present and future actions more intelligible and transparent for the general public and for all interested circles .
Just as a government invests its authority in a contract or a programme , so the work programme of the Commission - which received its investiture from this Parliament - must be something of the kind : a contract between the institutions to which each must be able to refer .
Unfortunately , it has been nothing of the kind hitherto - although this has not always been the fault of the Commission , but is above all the result of our procedures , which are often over-complicated and bureaucratic .
As we all know , according to the current procedures , the work programme should lead , after negotiations between the Commission and Parliament , to a legislative programme signed by the two presidents .
In 1995 , this procedure ended in August .
In 1996 , it ended in May .
What could be more odd than publishing a work programme , a legislative programme , five months into the year ?
Clearly , such a delay condemns this exercise to having no political impact in the eyes of public opinion , all the more so since the Council does not play the game in what should be an in-depth dialogue between the three institutions .
This is so unsatisfactory that the President of Parliament has taken the initiative of calling for the procedure to be streamlined and simplified .
In the final analysis , we should end up with a political debate on the main strategic pillars , past and future , proposed by the Commission .
Parliament is therefore proposing that we should abandon the joint declaration , which is a clumsy and ineffective instrument . But this does not mean that Parliament will henceforth be less involved in legislative programming , or less vigilant in this respect .
It will continue to adopt a resolution on the legislative programme , setting out its legislative priorities .
We expect the Commission to take those priorities seriously .
Our role is to oversee the Commission 's management ; and we shall also judge the Commission on the basis of how it complies with Parliament 's programming priorities .
On another question of procedure , at a time when the legislative workload is diminishing , the political effectiveness of the legislative programme must be increased by indicating the legal basis for proposals and the likely date of their submission .
The legislative programme for 1997 consists of 16 new proposals .
It should be easy to provide the indications that I am requesting .
This would represent a much clearer commitment on the part of the Commission .
I would also point out that , in 1995 , the Commission announced in its work programme that it wished - and I quote - ' to focus its actions to a greater extent on the efforts to provide stimulation and incentives , the majority of which are carried out by the Member States ' .
I should be interested to hear , Mr President of the Commission , how the Commission judges the results of this new approach , especially in the areas which you mentioned , such as the public 's internal security .
We should like the Commission to respect more closely the - already very limited - power of initiative conferred on Parliament by Article 138b of the Treaty .
To date , Parliament has adopted four own-initiative reports on the basis of Article 138b . I shall recall them briefly : the Jackson report on hotel safety precautions against the risk of fire ; the Alber report on the prevention and repair of environmental damage ; the Leopardi report on the health passport ; and the Rothley report on the settlement of claims relating to traffic accidents .
The Commission has been invited to follow up these initiatives on repeated occasions .
I am not sure , moreover , that the fifth item on your list of new legislative initiatives corresponds to a proposal by Parliament .
How and when , Mr Santer , does the Commission intend to respect fully Parliament 's right of initiative ?
I should like to refer briefly to your evaluation report on the implementation of the programme for 1996 .
Let it also be said in passing that your drive for transparency in 1995 has not been repeated in 1996 .
Last year , we had a right to a complete list of all legislative and pre-legislative measures , with a clear indication of which measures were completed , in progress or postponed .
In 1996 , there is none of this .
This is all the more regrettable in that the Commission considers - and I quote - ' intelligibility , transparency and accuracy ' to be permanent objectives .
Furthermore , what exactly is being evaluated ?
The Commission states that it is evaluating ' the principal achievements in relation to the model adopted by the Commission in its work programme for 1996 ' .
However , we take the view that the annual programme is not confined to the Commission 's proposals alone .
We defined the priorities together , in the course of discussions which were not always easy , and were frequently long and laborious .
Parliament clearly indicated its priorities for 1996 , and those priorities must be taken equally into account in any evaluation of the programme .
No one is interested in having a dialogue of the deaf , in talking for the sake of it .
What use is an exchange of views between the Commission and Parliament , if the Commission subsequently returns home and acts as if it had never heard of Parliament 's political priorities ?
What importance does the Commission really attach to the resolution which Parliament adopts each year on the subject of the legislative programme ?
Once again , over and above the question of procedures - and this is crucial , in my opinion - if we do not manage to establish a constructive and fruitful dialogue between the Union 's three main political institutions , with a view to drawing up a contract of government , how is Europe to be built ?
Will it be through hasty , piecemeal initiatives , or through a genuine vision of the future ?
Let me make a comment on the Commission 's manner of working .
According to Parliament 's services , we are currently awaiting the presentation of around 120 legislative measures deriving from the legislative programme for 1996 , some 50 of which we have been told will be submitted by the end of the year .
We are also awaiting the presentation of around 60 pre-legislative documents , about 20 of which will be ready by the end of December .
Clearly , it looks as if the Commission is going to have a difficult end of year , if it wishes to abide by its commitments .
So much for what is to come .
We also take an interest in the Commission 's behaviour throughout the legislative process .
Over the course of the year , Parliament has been disappointed by the Commission 's behaviour on more than one occasion , in particular regarding certain directives for which the codecision procedure applies .
Let us think back to the television without frontiers directive , Parliament 's first reading of which was completely ignored , because the Commission preferred to take the Council 's side .
Another example is the directive on ' novel foods ' , or genetically modified foodstuffs .
In the interests of improving consumer protection , Parliament proposed a number of amendments concerning labelling , which would have enabled consumers to make their choice with a full knowledge of the facts .
Here again , the Commission refused to give its backing to Parliament 's amendments .
Finally , do I need to remind the House of the way in which the Commission swept aside almost all Parliament 's amendments to the postal services directive ?
These are three directives with a highly political content , where the choices made reveal fundamental political attitudes .
Let me express my amazement , Mr President , at the Commission 's ingenuousness with regard to some of these crucial issues .
So what does the review of 1996 say about the Confidence Pact for Employment , drawn up by President Santer and presented to the Florence summit , a move to which the European Parliament gave its full backing ?
The Florence European Council - and I quote - ' welcomed the pact , and the Commission is expecting the Dublin European Council to initiate its implementation ' .
The review says nothing , on the other hand , about the slowness with which Europe is tackling the serious problem of unemployment , or the time lost , or the rebuffs from the Council suffered by the Commission .
If we wish to move forward , however , we must clearly identify the individual responsibilities in respect of this failure .
Another example - and one which is extremely controversial at the moment - concerns the funding of the transEuropean networks .
What does the review say ?
It says that the funding was increased in 1996 , that the Commission presented proposals to the Florence European Council for the funding of the 14 priority projects , and that the preliminary draft budget for 1997 provides for an increase in the appropriations for the trans-European networks .
Once again , however , it says nothing about the problems encountered in the efforts to increase the funding for the celebrated 14 projects , or the Council 's procrastination in the drafting of the budget for 1997 , or the slowness with which some of these major projects are being developed .
As regards the programme for 1997 , the top priority of the Socialist Group remains the fight against unemployment .
In this context , the ' Growth , Employment and the Euro ' section of the work programme contains no surprises .
The major question posed for 1997 is : what policies does the Commission intend to pursue with regard to employment and growth ?
Let me point out here that Parliament criticized , by a very large majority , the broad guidelines of economic policy for 1996 - to little effect , moreover , on account of the deadlock in the Ecofin Council and the Monetary Committee .
Despite the Commission 's assertions , the economic situation is scarcely improving : domestic consumption , investment and employment remain low in the majority of Member States .
In the spring of 1997 , the Commission 's services will define the broad guidelines of economic policy for 1997 .
In the likely event that there has been no upturn in the economic situation by then , will the Commission seriously be able to consider recommending the same economic policies as those of previous years , which have proved disappointing in terms of growth and employment ?
Hence , in the broad guidelines of economic policy for 1996 , the Commission did not succeed in persuading the Council to adopt the recommendation for a less restrictive monetary policy , geared more towards employment and growth .
The same enormous problem will be raised in 1997 .
At the end of 1997 , the Commission will draw up its annual report on the level of convergence achieved by the Member States .
Parliament is consulted on these reports .
This year , Parliament is in a very difficult situation .
The Ecofin Council is in danger of not adopting its recommendation until the beginning of December , leaving Parliament with only ten days or so in which to deliver its opinion before the Dublin summit .
Coming only a few months before the Council 's decision on participation in the monetary union , the 1997 report will assume particular importance .
Can the Commission undertake to ensure that we shall avoid the 1996 situation in 1997 ?
More generally , Mr President , the Socialist Group is profoundly concerned at the reduction of public investment in certain Member States .
There is reason to fear that the very foundations of recovery and growth are being weakened .
Consequently , there is a need to retain a certain margin for interpretation with regard to public investment , and to do everything possible to persuade the Member States to invest rather than consume .
On the internal market , the programme indicates that liberalization will continue .
Admittedly , it adds that it will do so with full respect for the functions of general interest and benefit to consumers .
This is to stifle a little too quickly the major debate on public services that is under way in a number of our countries .
Undoubtedly , the Commission 's communication on services of general interest represents a first step towards taking broader account of what all these services bring to our countries .
However , there is a need to translate this into practical policies without delay , rather than waiting for all public services to be dismantled before adopting new policies .
Finally , the President of the Commission attaches great importance to what he calls the European model of society .
What are we seeing in this context ?
We are seeing that , in our market economy , it is a refusal to engage in dialogue , a form of blackmailing over employment and the logic of finance , leading to job losses and relocation , which are increasingly the order of the day .
The single market is an excellent deal for some people - not least because there are minimal social standards .
We must stop this downward trend , lest one day we see Europe blow up in our faces .
After those few initial comments on your programme for 1997 , Mr President , I should like to end as follows .
I note that , in the programme 's conclusion , the Commission has mapped out the route to the year 2000 and beyond .
It is called ' Agenda 2000 ' : enlargement and the financial package for the post-1999 period .
This ritual invocation of the coming millennium makes my head spin .
The Eurocrats are certainly very good at drawing up large-scale plans for the future , but all too often they forget the everyday concerns of our citizens today : you say so yourself , Mr Santer , in your conclusion .
Let us together make it clear to the Member States , therefore , that there is a risk of Europe being killed off , if it fails to help improve the lives of its citizens here and now , without delay .
Mr President , my colleague Mr Fayot has , I am glad to say , already covered many of the points I planned to raise .
The presentation today of the Commission 's annual programme marks the outcome of the relationship of trust between the Commission and Parliament .
You will remember , Mr Santer , that when we gave you our vote of confidence , we also reached a number of agreements on cooperation between our two institutions .
For example , we were to maintain an open and transparent dialogue which would be accessible to the man in the street , an agreement which was defined in greater detail in the declaration of 25 October 1993 .
We are today assessing how well our institutions have worked with each other over the past year , giving our comments on your proposals and putting forward amendments to them .
We are , I have to say , extremely glad to be able to hold this debate in the very week when we are also looking at the budget for the coming year , where we face the difficult task of trying to make the Union operate better without any increase in funds .
The European Council is forever coming up with new initiatives - which Parliament generally supports , incidentally - but never takes the financial consequences for them .
This is something we shall be coming back to this afternoon .
Let us consider your period in office , Mr Santer .
Your first year was a year of reflection , as it had to be .
The second year was the year of ' doing less but doing better ' .
Over the last year , we have been inundated with white and green papers and conferences on a whole range of subjects , which you obviously need if you intend to introduce legislation , but we in the PPE Group assume that in the course of your five-year term of office , there must come a point when the Commission finally begins to act .
The PPE Group sees the third year as the year of action , and this means taking practical measures to organize and reorganize .
Let me take employment as an example of what has happened over the last year . What was it we said ?
More work for more people , one of the most important issues for the people of Europe .
The White Paper , the European pact on employment , measures to bring about fundamental improvements in the physical infrastructure , the transEuropean networks , research and development , small and medium-sized firms , and so on .
But the sad fact is that every positive initiative has been blocked , although this is something which you may be as powerless to prevent as we are .
They have all failed to get through the Council , because it is not taking its responsibilities here .
I sometimes wonder whether we are not too nice to one another .
The decisions taken at the IGC will determine whether Europe really makes progress , and when it comes to the subject of Europe as a business location , I think we must look to you , Mr Santer , to make more of an effort .
I should like to look back over two other areas from last year 's programme .
I said last year , on behalf of our group , that you would have to make better or at least more aggressive use of the exclusive right of initiative that you enjoy under the second pillar .
If we take the example of the Middle East , we can see that Europe is providing funding for the economic reconstruction of the Palestinian autonomous regions , yet we have no place at the political table .
Enlargement is another example which you yourself talked about .
I think that the handling of the whole issue of enlargement clearly shows that when the Council and the Commission share the same goals , things can go very smoothly .
I would simply ask you to be much more active in this field and to try to encourage a more collective spirit through the measures that you take .
As far as the third pillar is concerned , I remember that our group was quite happy last year with the measures which you announced in the areas of asylum rights , a common refugee policy and agreements on citizens of third countries .
I notice that nothing has been done about any of these except to organize conferences on them , and I wonder what is to become of them now .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi also has something to say on this matter .
I have a number of comments about the right of initiative .
The initiatives proposed by Parliament , as Mr Fayot has already pointed out , are never followed up .
When you took office , a number of agreements were reached on this subject , and I would like to know if you have any new plans in this area .
When your own right of initiative is at stake , you always have the support of this House , not least at the IGC .
We accept and defend your exclusive right , but let me say that we in Parliament sometimes have the impression that you take this right for granted , and that when it comes to deciding on legal bases you simply do whatever you like .
I think the Commission needs to realize that taking its exclusive right for granted in this way can work to its own and everyone else 's disadvantage .
As Mr Fayot said , we made a number of agreements about majority amendments .
We have been monitoring several conciliation procedures , and although they have all been different , the way some Members of the Commission have followed up Parliament 's majority amendments , such as on the novel foods dossier , has caused us great concern .
This is not the way that the agreements we reached should be implemented .
There is one final issue that I should like to raise , which may be something of a hobby-horse for a Christian Democrat , but which is extremely important nonetheless : self-regulation of the middle sectors , where there do not seem to be any genuine initiatives .
It is precisely at European level , where goals can be achieved more quickly and easily in so many areas if agreements are secured , that you should be taking sweeping measures , but you are not .
I hope that many of the points that Parliament has raised in the resolution we are about to adopt will be given some practical follow-up in your programme for the year .
We welcome your statement , Mr Santer , which contained a wealth of important initiatives , projects and proposals .
However , we must face up to things as they are , and not as we should like them to be .
In your statement , you quite rightly spoke of consumers , the environment , culture and SMEs ; but all too often , these politically important - if not vital - areas fail to receive the necessary operational and financial support .
We claim that SMEs are crucial to labour market growth , but we do not give them the financial wherewithal to remain truly competitive in the marketplace and not merely to survive .
Nor do we say very much about protecting our citizens , in particular children , the elderly and workers .
It is all very well to create new jobs , but more professional development in existing jobs is also needed , so that workers can remain competitive in what is a changing and increasingly international market .
And as the market becomes more international , there must be greater freedom of movement within the Union , which should become more than just a single market - a genuine internal market , a huge market where a transaction between London and Paris , between Rome and Madrid , can be like a national operation , and where goods , money , persons and young people - with their diplomas and professional qualifications - really can enjoy freedom of movement .
We do not envy you , Mr Santer , but we support you .
Yet the Commission must listen more to the European Parliament which , it is worth emphasizing , is the only elected EU institution , directly representative of our citizens .
1997 will be the first of five years during which , in all likelihood , Europe will either come into being once and for all , or not at all .
Good luck with your work !
Mr President , Mr Santer , I firstly wish to say that I welcome a number of Mr Fayot 's remarks .
I should like to make a number of comments .
Firstly , the Commission has set itself the goal of regaining our citizens ' confidence .
In view of the tremendous gulf which separates public opinion from our efforts to build Europe , I am sure that no one here would dispute that aim .
As the President of Parliament said during the debate on the state of the Union : ' People are not against European unification , but they do not know why they should be in favour of Europe ' .
This is indeed a deep-rooted problem which is difficult to overcome .
It is moreover , in my view , a major issue .
The opinion polls and analyses clearly show , Mr Santer , that it is the inability of the Union to meet the major challenges currently facing us that is feeding the pessimism in Europe - pessimism and popular condemnation of the state of our society : unemployment , deregulation , relocation and the erosion of social guarantees .
For millions upon millions of people , this is their experience of Europe .
Secondly , should not the Commission be more sensitive to public opinion , to the aspirations and demands of our citizens ?
Undoubtedly so , but this implies making different economic , social and financial choices ; and , personally , I do not believe that the Commission is ready to do so .
Take , for example , the introduction - come what may - of the single currency .
The reduction of labour costs , unbridled liberalization and deregulation are considered to be untouchable dogmas .
This is no longer open to discussion !
There is a farmer in my village who always says to me when I talk this way : ' Be careful . There is always a catch ! '
Indeed , people who believe in revealed truths sometimes have difficulty in adapting to new realities .
Thirdly , the Commission states that it wishes to give priority to employment .
In my view , however , this requires us to concern ourselves with more than simply the questions of the reduction of labour costs , flexibility and job insecurity .
Parliament has itself discussed the possible reduction of working hours , as well as other proposals concerning employment and growth .
Perhaps the Commission should take a little more notice - and this leads me to my fourth comment .
If it wishes to restore public confidence , perhaps the Commission should pay greater heed to Parliament .
I shall take two examples which , in France , have given rise to considerable public debate .
Firstly , on the television without frontiers directive , the Commission is not accepting Parliament 's stance on quotas ; and , secondly , on the postal services directive , the Commission has swept aside virtually all Parliament 's amendments !
If we wish there to be political authority , a capacity for action and a receptive audience , then it is extremely awkward for the Commission to be at loggerheads with Parliament in this way over major issues .
To restore public confidence , we must undoubtedly consider other approaches to ensuring economic and social development .
While I am unable to address this issue in just three minutes , I note - and welcome the fact - that , as Mr Fayot has already mentioned , the Commission has made progress on such things as recognizing the functions of general interest and public service .
This leads me to believe that , in spite of the difficulties on a number of issues , we can still move forward .
I shall end by saying , Mr President , that none of this is easy , and that , consequently , I wish you every success .
You acknowledge , Mr Santer , that the European Union is not overwhelmingly popular with the European public .
All the signals reaching us from the various Member States - whether in the form of social unrest or via the ballot box - indicate the same thing : opposition to Europe or , in any event , severe and increasing criticism .
I do not believe that your legislative programme contains anything which might change this negative image of a visionless Europe , incapable of generating support .
Undoubtedly , 1997 will , as you said , be a year of transition , since the Intergovernmental Conference has to decide on important changes to the conduct of the Union 's affairs .
However , we could have expected at least a hint of creativity in your programme , rather than simply a very general and incantatory statement on growth , which comes down to no more than wishful thinking , and in which we would be hard put to find anything specific .
For my part , I should like to make some specific criticisms .
You referred - as you do in most of your speeches - to the need for transparency , in order to restore public confidence .
When you present your programme for the coming year , should we not be provided with a review of the programmes of previous years - and not merely a quantitative review , but , for each project not successfully completed , an explanation of the technical or political reasons which led to the blockage or delay ?
Is it acceptable that not a single one of the initiatives brought forward by Parliament pursuant to Article 138b has yet been followed up ?
Will Europe 's citizens understand why the Commission has rejected important amendments adopted by a majority of the Members of Parliament in a whole range of areas , as Mr Piquet has just emphasized ?
I shall refer to one very specific area : the environment .
The Environment Council recently adopted the directive on the prevention and integrated reduction of pollution .
Parliament 's important amendments were rejected without any political explanation .
One of those amendments sought to make industrialists responsible for the environmental consequences of their activities .
This is the same demand that was made more than two years ago in the resolution contained in the Alber report of April 1994 , which was adopted by an overwhelming majority .
Here again , there has been no follow-up .
I believe , Mr President , that it is essential for you to give some thought to these matters .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its work programme for 1997 , the Commission restates its apt and ambitious general objectives . It must be said , however , that the means proposed for achieving those objectives are not commensurate with what is at stake .
Thus , once again , the Commission rightly puts forward the general objective of ' growth and employment ' . But what priority measures are set out with a view to achieving these objectives ?
You talk to us about sound macro-economic policies and the completion of the internal market .
However , Mr Santer , we wish to tell you that those are yesterday 's priorities , not the priorities that the people of Europe are expecting today .
We are undoubtedly convinced of the vital need to introduce the single currency without delay , and we welcome the efforts made by a number of Member States to achieve the budgetary stabilization that will make this possible .
We support the Commission 's intention to put in place the technical measures that will enable the single currency to be introduced .
But what is necessary above all in the Union today is to restore the confidence of Europe 's most disadvantaged citizens , for whom European integration means only budgetary rigour , the stagnation of purchasing power and the erosion of social gains .
With regard to the medium-term objectives , there is a need to redefine the priorities . It is no longer a question of promoting the internal market , convergence and stability , but growth , employment and cohesion - although we prefer the word ' solidarity ' to this rather technical term : in our view , it is the same thing .
To this end , there is a need to set out measures which correspond exactly to the real priorities .
Growth must be thought of not as a desired and expected - although far from guaranteed - result of stability , but as an economic objective in itself .
To achieve this , the Commission must put forward a growth pact for Europe that will complement the commitments to stability and find practical expression in a swift reworking of the financial perspective for the end of the century and the reform of the Structural Funds , which are the instruments of the European budgetary policy that is essential to complement the Union 's monetary policy .
Similarly , Europe 's action to promote employment must be clearer and more direct .
Structural Fund operations must be more closely linked to job creation .
Why not provide for the establishment of a ' European job ' label , or at least the clear and precise listing of all jobs directly created as the result of Community action ?
Likewise , with regard to services of general interest , with which the Commission is concerning itself , why not visualize Europewide services designed to meet the public 's new needs and directly create employment ?
We call on the Commission to demonstrate greater boldness and initiative .
We shall support such action on its part , without which we shall perhaps still have a single currency , but we shall no longer have a European project .
Mr President , the President of the Commission , Jacques Santer , has often declared himself in agreement with us in the Europe of Nations Group that the scale of legislation should be limited .
Mr Santer wishes to present himself as a strong supporter of subsidiarity .
As many decisions as possible should be left to the Member States .
I do not doubt the good will of the former Prime Minister of Luxembourg , but after more than two years as President , we unfortunately have to say that Mr Santer does not have the power to match his intentions .
When he took up his post , there were a total of 20 706 regulations , directives and other EU rules .
At the start of 1996 , there were 21 392 .
There has been more of what Mr Santer does not wish to see .
And in the Commission 's new programme , there are proposals for more legislation from Brussels .
I have not been able to find examples of any important areas where the Commission is proposing to transfer legislation back to the national parliaments .
And in the context of the Intergovernmental Conference now taking place , the Commission has put forward proposals to make qualified majority decisions the general rule .
Laws can thus be adopted by 62 votes out of 87 , and several national parliaments can be voted down .
The advocates of a closer union are seeing their idea take shape in Brussels .
The result will inevitably be a further leap towards integration , and the Commission is putting forward this proposal without giving any indication of where decisions can be handed back to the Member States in other areas .
So at some point , we have to conclude that what Mr Santer is doing is what he wants to do .
All the specific actions point in the direction of a new state .
All the actions run directly counter to our vision of a Europe in which the nations determine their own affairs and coordinate with each other when they cannot find solutions by themselves .
We are in favour of a common approach to international problems , and we are glad to support minimum rules on the discharge of dangerous substances into the sea and the atmosphere , but why does Mr Santer also wish to be able to decide that various toxic substances should be allowed in the drinking water in Århus ?
Why does the decentralist Mr Santer insist on having completely identical rules for drinking water which is treated and drinking water which is taken straight from the groundwater ?
We support minimum rules , but we shall be opposing regimentation by the EU which is an embarrassment to both democracy and the environment .
People say that pollution does not stop at borders , but is this an argument for removing the upper limit for discharges of various substances into Danish drinking water ?
We are also glad to support common standards which businesses can use in international trade , but why should the EU 's method of harmonization make standards compulsory and the same throughout the Union ?
There is a need for the Member States to have much more freedom , and I hope that the Commission will bear that fact in mind .
Mr President , you spoke of your concerns with regard to employment policy .
We share those concerns .
The European Union is grappling with a problem of drastic proportions , namely rising unemployment , with youth and long-term unemployment the most critical aspects of this depressing trend .
Not even the most fervent advocate of European monetary union can deny the link between the efforts to meet the convergence criteria , on the one hand , and rising unemployment on the other .
1997 will be a year of austerity budgets , dominated by preparations for monetary union , and this will exacerbate rather than ease the major problem of unemployment .
Economists and financial experts from very many different countries are afraid that uncompromising adherence to the timetable will have serious consequences for Europe .
Dividing the Member States into two groups - those who take part in phase one and those who cannot manage to do so - will produce a two-speed Europe .
Such a development runs counter to the spirit of Europe , and it will also have an economic impact .
The excessive and socially ill-considered budgetary cuts which some Member States are making are creating unemployment , damaging Europe as a location for business and triggering recession .
Transferring more resources from the ' ins ' to the ' outs ' will further damage the economic strength of the donor countries without having a sufficiently positive impact on the recipients .
That is why , as we move towards monetary union , the Commission should take much greater account of employment policy and social policy as elements of the equation , and free itself from what is an absurdly restrictive timetable .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , among the main political priorities of the Commission 's programme of work are the future of the European Union and the raising of its profile in the international arena .
Indeed , Mr Santer has quite rightly acknowledged that Europe is not managing to assume its rightful role in the world , at least in relation to its economic and commercial significance and to the scale of its financial commitments in terms of development aid .
By the same token , it is quite clear that Europe is not responding effectively where it should , and where a more active role is expected or even demanded of it , as in the Middle East .
The individual efforts of Mr Chirac , Mr Prodi and others , however laudable , are not enough when , at the same time , an historic opportunity is being missed at the United Nations , 50 years after the end of the war .
The Europe of peace and integration is proving unable to take the place of the Europe of war , national rivalries and post-war distrust .
There can be no doubt that this is , in the first instance , a problem of instruments and procedures , which must be resolved at the Intergovernmental Conference on the lines suggested by the Commission and Parliament , whose views are very similar here , by casting aside undue caution and unjustified resistance on the part of those who have a limited grasp of the scale of the challenge and mistakenly believe that they can counter the uncertainties of the future by taking refuge behind the thickest of walls .
But the question is whether we could go a little further , Mr Santer , even within the scope of the existing Treaty : we as MEPs could be more demanding , the Commission could push its own initiatives with greater determination and perhaps put more pressure on the Council and the governments .
This is the ground on which Europe 's future will be built .
What would be the point of enlargement without a real European foreign policy , without what is already defined in the programme as an external identity for the Union - marked by coherence , effectiveness and visibility - without the possibility of a close link between security , defence , trade and economic relations capable of being a vehicle for a European policy equal to the challenges of the modern world ?
If it cannot project itself to the outside world in this way , moreover , even the Europe of today , the Europe of 15 , will withdraw forlornly into its shell .
The ball is therefore in the court of the IGC .
This time , there is no room for small steps forward ; the major reforms which have been promised and heralded are more inescapable now than ever before .
Mr President , I welcome the efforts being made by President Santer to focus the work programme of the Commission on a small number of priority areas .
Too often in the past the Commission presented Parliament with a long list of planned initiatives covering a wide range of policy areas .
While most of these initiatives were worthwhile in themselves , they were too numerous to implement in a single year .
In addition , it was often difficult to identify the major priorities of any one year .
Looking ahead to 1997 , I believe that the Commission will have to give more attention to educating young people on the potential advantages of the single currency .
It now seems increasingly likely that a significant number of the Member States will opt to establish the single currency in three years time .
In less than six years many of our national currencies will disappear from our pockets to be replaced by the Euro .
While the arguments in favour of a single currency have been debated at length by economists and public servants and are now well-known to most people working in politics , public administration and finance , the vast majority of Europe 's citizens are still not aware of the range of benefits which the single currency will bring to them .
It will be very difficult , if not impossible , to create a single currency without the support of the citizens of the participating countries .
The opponents of monetary union have already come to this conclusion and are actively engaged in bringing their case to the electorate in many of our Member States .
It is time for the European institutions to be equally vociferous in bringing the arguments in favour of a single currency to Europe 's electorate .
The European Commission is best placed to lead a campaign in support of monetary union .
The general public should be acquainted with the wide range of potential benefits from the single currency , such as the prospect of lower mortgage interest rates , no further risk from currency fluctuations , particularly for small and medium-sized businesses exporting their products from one Member State to another , reduced costs for trade and reduced costs for travel .
In addition , efforts should now be made to refute the misleading and inaccurate arguments that are sometimes advanced by the opponents of the single currency .
I would remind the Commission that the Maastricht Treaty was very nearly derailed , largely because the general public in many of our Member States did not feel sufficiently involved in the debate leading up to Maastricht .
We must learn from this experience and ensure that we do not repeat the same mistake .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , last week , at Gardanne in the south of France , an election took place .
The two opposing candidates remaining at the end - a communist from the same group as Mr Piquet , and a member of the National Front - both rejected the obsessive austerity imposed by the Maastricht Treaty .
In other words , the public has had enough .
Europe , Mr President , is a lamentable idea . It is like the light of a dead star .
You propose to enter the future illuminating us , once again , with the light of a dead star .
The Cecchini report told too many lies . The single market has not brought a flood of milk and honey , but a flood of gall .
And there is unemployment , Mr Santer .
There is unemployment , and it is your obsession : it is the statue of the Commendatore that shows you that your European project is a bad idea .
However , unemployment does not exist everywhere .
In Japan and elsewhere in Asia , there is very little unemployment .
And this is not because the people of this part of the world have slanting eyes !
If it were , a little cosmetic surgery would be enough to solve the problem of unemployment .
It is because they are not obsessive .
They do not suffer from the sort of psychological inflexibility that characterizes the doddery old men of the Commission , who enter the future still clutching the ideas of their youth .
Along with all kinds of other sacrifices , you are imposing budgetary rigour - but not on everyone , since you are capable of making a gift of ECU 1.9 billion worth of customs duties to the multinational banana company ' Chiquita ' every year .
So there is rigour , but not for everyone .
The Dublin budget stability pact created by Hans Tietmeyer is not designed for everyone .
At a time when Singapore is about to open up , at a time when the problem of the CCEEs is about to be raised , you are maintaining nonsensical farming practices .
In the committee of inquiry , we have seen the kind of lies and intervention - even with the German Health Minister , in order to discredit a scientist - of which the Commission is capable .
And I could continue in this way on the question of taxation .
As I have said already , Mr President - and I shall end with this - Europe is a bad idea . But it is an ill wind that blows nobody any good .
With regard to taxation , you could take advantage of the Intergovernmental Conference to propose to the Member States the establishment of a statutory upper limit to tax and social security contributions .
We should then be in line with the United States - your model - and Japan .
At present , we are 15 points above them .
You could do everyone a service by setting an upper limit to tax and social security contributions .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Mr Santer for all his hard work and congratulate him on his programme .
There is much more to this than just having certain ambitions , it is also about how they are put into practice and the pace at which this happens .
As far as the single market is concerned , there is still a great deal to be done .
The gas sector has been waiting for further liberalization for some years now , and I hope that things will move faster here than they have done in the electricity sector .
The postal sector also seems to have reached stalemate , so I would urge the President of the Commission to make a great effort to get things moving there too .
As for telecommunications , although it is good that the first steps have been taken , there is of course an enormous amount going on in this sector , with the convergence of information technologies , modern media and telecommunications .
If Europe does not want to miss the boat and if we really want to take the lead in the information society , then we must have all hands on deck in this sector .
Tax matters are something of a disaster area , with no further progress than yet another discussion on VAT .
I hope the Commission will now , at long last , take a firm stand and try to force the Member States to move forward on this point .
Security is not just an internal matter , of course , it also concerns East-West relations .
I am thinking in particular here of nuclear safety , and I think the Commission should do much more to coordinate measures to improve safety in this field .
I find it amazing that there is now talk of a fifth framework programme , when we still do not have the ECU 700 million needed to implement the fourth .
Parliament will , I hope , tomorrow vote through an extra ECU 100 m , and I hope that the Commission will also take determined steps to persuade the Council to find a way round this problem .
So we need more than just words , what we need more than anything else is deeds , since this is the only way that we will see our ambitions achieved .
Mr President of the Commission , a number of general points have been made , so in my brief contribution I shall try to broach a subject which is anything but marginal .
I shall start from your own premise .
You referred to the need to win back , to revive and restore the confidence of our citizens , and to turn this into a challenge on the two fronts where that confidence is currently most at risk : employment , or rather unemployment , and security .
Then , in setting out your programme , you rightly identified four priorities and the progress which has been achieved , and you also referred to the problem of solidarity and the quality of growth .
More specifically , you touched on what is of the greatest concern to me - security - and mentioned several areas where it must be upheld : drugs , terrorism and organized crime .
But why did you stop there , Mr President ?
Today there is a danger greater than all these put together : its name is bovine spongiform encephalopathy - BSE or , to use a more colourful term , mad cow disease .
Despite the term , it is no laughing matter .
Mad cow disease could become the most fearsome and telling test for the whole of the Commission 's programme in the year ahead .
As a member of Parliament 's committee of inquiry , I can assure you that what has emerged so far - although it is not a great deal - is extremely worrying , especially in terms of the potential consequences of the epidemic , which has so far affected only the animal kingdom , for mankind in the future .
BSE is not a flu epidemic , or a common cold : it is a biological Chernobyl which is still hovering over us , but which could strike at any moment .
What we are constructing here is not some minor chapter of history , but a critical test which , if underestimated , will have the gravest of consequences .
It has been said that Europe is sick ; well , the first injection to cure it is an injection of confidence , and confidence comes from the transparency and credibility of our institutions .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , after this debate - given that there are only two minutes left - I am going to focus on one of the expressions you used : you talked of the ' disarray of European citizens ' and mentioned dehumanisation .
Indeed , the reality is that citizens of the various Member States do not feel themselves to be European citizens .
Nowadays , citizens feel that they are mere market variables and , given this , from this Assembly , we are trying to echo their appeal for greater development of anything that can help citizens to feel that they are actually affected in their daily lives : security , the development of the free movement of persons - which is being held up as you know - , practical activity - as Schuman used to say - in the areas of VAT , European society , etc .
In a nutshell , Mr President of the Commission , what is our main aim : our main aim is neither more nor less a huge one - helping European citizens to understand that , apart from market forces , we are also interested in the rule of law and that , apart from economic goals , we are also setting goals to bring about integration through full legal development of the concept of citizenship : in other words , as the subjects of rights and obligations , the very backbone of law and justice .
Mr President of the Commission , Mr President , I feel that we must emphasise the need to make progress in European construction through concrete practical measures .
It is practical measures which are going to lead to a legal Europe , the common objective of everyone aspiring after an integrated Europe concerned with more than market forces alone .
Mr President of the Commission , I wish to conclude my brief speech by saying that we are fundamentally in agreement and that you will always have the support of this Assembly : either Europe must be a Europe of the rule of law or there will be no Europe at all .
Thank you , Mr President . The sad fact is that , given the challenges we face - and many speakers have listed them - this programme of action from the Commission has nothing to offer .
It is high time that we stopped suppressing our problems and abandoned the increasingly unconvincing practice of glossing over differences to sustain a crumbling semblance of optimism .
Repeating mantra-like that ' EMU equals growth , equals a balanced budget , equals employment ' is pointless if everyone has ceased to believe it .
We must face up to the differences that clearly exist and we must not conceal the real contradictions , because it is only by acknowledging them that we can determine the tasks that lie before us and then tackle them effectively with courage , strength and realism .
This would involve a genuinely dynamic interpretation of the Commission 's right of initiative .
We need to move towards a new model of development .
We need to halve unemployment by the year 2000 .
We need to gradually dismantle the entrenched structures of social exclusion and poverty in this Europe of ours .
It is time that we included a chapter on employment in the Treaty , and an environmental and social union .
We need to coordinate and consolidate our Community 's tax and financial policies , and finally make full use of our own resources .
These steps should then form the basis for completing the internal market and for introducing a sustainable monetary union - not the other way round .
As Mr Santer rightly said , unemployment is undermining the trust of our European citizens .
That is why we need a sea-change in politics : we need to regain the trust that will give us a basis for moving to a new type of full employment .
We too wish to see European integration .
Europeanization is our best hope in the face of economic globalization , but it should not mean the continuation of the neo-liberal , monetarist political model , based on increased production , which dominates the Maastricht Treaty and is forcing the Commission to ditch more and more of the Delors White Paper on competitiveness and employment .
We wish to see a different kind of Europe - one that no longer bends to the will of transnational companies , the material constraints of the world market or the daily decisions of financiers , instead of being guided by the decisions of its citizens .
Mr President , at the end of this first debate on the Commission 's work programme for 1997 , I should like to thank all those who spoke for taking part .
Some speakers sharply criticized the Commission - which is their right - while others made a very constructive contribution through their criticisms , and this will serve as an encouragement to us to persevere with the course I have outlined .
Nevertheless , in all the speeches - from both sides of the House - I sensed a vague feeling of gloom about the state of the Union , as perceived by those who spoke .
I share this feeling , and it was precisely with a view to stemming the loss of public confidence in the European Union that we established the priorities of our work programme for 1997 .
I said the same thing to you last year .
As a politician , like yourselves , I have a great deal of contact with the people of Europe , and I can see that they are currently perturbed by three issues .
The first of these has just been mentioned by Mr Wolf : the unemployment that is undermining our society .
Something must be done to combat unemployment , and Europe must play a part in this fight .
Resolving this problem cannot be left solely to the responsibility of the Member States .
Europe cannot remain indifferent to the social concerns of its citizens !
This is a European Union problem .
Secondly , our citizens have formed their collective views on what they are seeing on Europe 's doorstep .
I refer to the situation in former Yugoslavia , and the Union 's inability to settle the conflict in that region .
Whilst it is the foremost commercial power in the world , Europe has so far failed to acquire the political weight to match its economic importance .
Thirdly , the people of Europe feel insecure in their daily lives .
They are expecting us - Europe , the Community institutions - to take action to combat terrorism , organized crime , drug trafficking , and so on .
These are the three foremost issues of concern to the people of Europe , who are demanding more of Europe , not less .
This is what must be emphasized here .
It is not a question of seeking an alternative , and I would ask those Members who perhaps do not believe in the European model : what sort of Europe would there be , if the European model that we advocate did not exist ?
These are the three areas in which we must take action ; and so these are the three priorities on which the Commission has focused its work programme .
We wish to do more to combat unemployment .
Of course , I am always told that the European Union has no specific powers and responsibilities with regard to the campaign against unemployment , since social policy falls within the exclusive competence of the Member States .
Certainly , both economic and social policies fall within the competence of the Member States , but I remain firmly convinced that the implementation of a convergent economic and social policy of the 15 , in a single market with 370 million people , will have a multiplying effect on the efforts of the individual Member States .
That is the added value which Europe can contribute in this field .
The same is true of foreign policy , and I entirely share the view expressed by Mr de Vries that Europe 's presence on the international stage needs to be enhanced .
That is why we need a common foreign and security policy worthy of the name .
And the Commission is working on that , in the sense that it has just submitted proposals to this effect to the Intergovernmental Conference .
Furthermore , tomorrow we shall have the opportunity to discuss again the last Dublin Council meeting - which essentially focused on the Intergovernmental Conference - with a view to developing this position further .
And , thirdly , the Union 's presence and activity in the area of security must be increased , to ensure that our fellow citizens are secure in their private lives .
I believe that , at the Intergovernmental Conference , we must promote the increased transfer of third-pillar matters to the Community domain .
This is the direction in which we are moving , and the whole work programme that I have presented to you this morning is centred on these three essential concerns - which , I believe , are the reason for the gloom amongst the people of Europe .
I am confident that , if there is an upturn in growth and unemployment falls , the public perception of the European Union will change .
I would urge you to believe , therefore , that it is with this aim in mind - an aim which I know is shared by all those who have spoken this morning - that , with your cooperation , we shall take action .
You will forgive me if I do not respond to all the concerns which have been expressed this morning .
I should like to say , however , that I fully agree with those - in particular Mr Fayot and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten - who spoke on the subject of our procedures .
As has often been repeated , our procedures must be transparent , to strengthen the democratic aspect of the functioning of our institutions .
The man in the street can only identify with the institutions representing him if there is transparency , and if he knows who is taking the decisions , what are the responsibilities of the different players on the Community stage , and so on .
It is for this reason that I support the President of Parliament 's initiative to review our procedures - in a constructive spirit , and in the spirit of the continuous dialogue which must exist between the Commission and Parliament .
As I have said more than once , although it is Parliament 's task to supervise and control the Commission , as the executive authority , our institutions are also , in a great many fields , natural allies . And I believe that this is the attitude we must maintain in our discussions .
In this way - and with a new , more satisfactory procedure - I am confident that we shall succeed in ensuring that the work programme is more open , transparent and comprehensible .
A number of speakers drew attention to the delays affecting certain proposals tabled under Parliament 's right of initiative .
Parliament has presented four own-initiative reports in this context . Firstly , there is the Rothley report on the settlement of claims relating to traffic accidents .
The presentation of a legislative proposal on this issue is provided for in the work programme for 1997 .
With regard to the Alber report on the prevention and repair of environmental damage , Mrs Bjerregaard has had a study carried out that will enable the Commission to adopt a position on this subject in the near future .
As regards the Leopardi report on the health passport , it must be said that all kinds of problems - budgetary , technical and political - are currently preventing the introduction of such a passport , although research is in under way in the context of the Telematic Social Security programme , TESS .
It is not impossible that an initiative will be taken on this basis in the future .
As for the Jackson report on hotel security , the Commission has already informed Parliament of its position on this subject .
Nevertheless , although we may always be able to justify ourselves for doing this or that , I believe that we can still improve the way in which we cooperate and take forward our future work together .
In conclusion , Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament once again for the confidence which , at particularly crucial times , it has always shown in the Commission , as well as for the cooperation of which it has always assured us , especially in the budgetary debates - such as the one that you are now about to begin .
For our part , you may rest assured that our attitude will be the same as that displayed by Parliament towards the Commission .
This is the essential precondition for collaboration in 1997 , the work programme for which I have presented this morning .
Mr President , I think I can speak for my colleagues when I say that I should like to thank the President of the Commission for the answers he has given .
I quite understand that they had to be fairly broad , but we did ask a number of very specific questions on matters of procedure , and I would therefore ask President Santer to ensure that we do not end up in the same hole we dug for ourselves last year , and to instruct his officials at the Commission to take proper account of the comments we have made .
I should also like to ask whether we might have the answers that he was unable to give us just now - which I quite understand - at some other time ?
I am entirely willing to forward specific answers to the Members who asked questions .
I am unable to give those answers at present , for reasons which you will understand .
The debate is closed .
1996 budget implementation - 1997 draft general budget - 1997 draft ECSC operating budget
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
motion for a resolution ( B4-1097 / 96 ) pursuant to Rule 87 of the Rules of Procedure , by Mr Elles , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , and Mr Brinkhorst , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the implementation of the Community budget for 1996 ; -report ( A4-0310 / 96 ) by Mr Brinkhorst , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Communities for the financial year 1997 - Section III - Commission ( COM ( 96 ) 0300 - C4-0350 / 96 ) ; -the report ( A4-0311 / 96 ) by Mr Fabra Vallés , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Communities for the financial year 1997 ( COM ( 96 ) 0300 - C4-0350 / 96 ) Section I - European Parliament - annex Ombudsman Section II - Council Section IV - Court of Justice Section V - Court of Auditors Section VI - Economic and Social Committee - Committee of the Regions ;
report ( A4-0322 / 96 ) by Mr Giansily , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft ECSC operating budget for 1997 ( SEC ( 96 ) 0981 - C4-0359 / 96 ) .
Mr President , we are now at a very important stage in the budget debate and the climate around the budget at present is not very propitious .
I am not so much talking of the financial situation .
It is very clear - and Parliament has expressed this time and again - that we agree that the budget for 1997 should be a restrictive budget ; it should be a budget which also takes into account the priorities of the Member States in seeking to achieve the Maastricht criteria .
Although , of course , the European budget is very small indeed compared to the national budgets , there is a symbolic value in Europe not being seen as a spender at a time when the national parliaments and the national governments are trying to be parsimonious .
That point should not be the key element of our debate .
The Committee on Budgets will propose to the plenary that the budget for 1997 be restrictive .
We have left significant margins , as we agreed in the guidelines in last March 's resolution on the budget .
The worrying part about the budget is the political context in which we are working at the present time .
From the very beginning Parliament has been looking forward to having a real dialogue with the Council on points outstanding , points covered by the Interinstitutional Agreement and points which , it has been promised for many years , are an issue which can be resolved in a dialogue .
I just wish to recall a few of these items .
We have at present 47 items in the budget which do not have a formal legal base .
A responsible budgetary authority comprising the two branches cannot live with that situation .
On behalf of Parliament , we have put forward proposals you will find reflected in the budget resolution .
We believe that we have done everything possible to come to an agreement but so far the Council has not budged one iota on that particular point .
We have throughout the last few years - and again this year - tried to review the issue of the classification of expenditure .
Of course , particularly at a time when we see that , in the agriculture sector , for instance , a sum of ECU 1.3 billion is proposed for BSE , it is really beyond the understanding of the general public , both inside this House and outside , that there is not a single element of democratic control , either at national level or at European level .
And yet the signs are not wrong .
At the IGC Conference , this central issue of democratic control is not even being touched upon , except in the case of the Belgian Government , which just last week put forward a proposal to review this issue .
But we see no readiness on the part of the Council at this moment to make any commitment on that point .
Throughout this year , we have reminded the Council of its duty and obligation to review the financial perspectives , not to finance the nice things for the boys , as has always been the case , but to finance its own priorities : transEuropean networks , research and development , and Northern Ireland .
An essential programme for Northern Ireland , which was promised by the Council , has been refused and , on 14 October , Ecofin confirmed that it will not engage in a review of the financial perspectives .
That is a stark fact of life : the Council not willing - or should I say not able to , engage in dialogue ; a Parliament which is stretching out its hand , which wants to review essential points for better democratic control for a better budget and therefore for a better European Union .
That , unfortunately , is the climate in which we find ourselves .
I call on the President-in-Office of the Council present here - who , on a personal basis , has always tried to be very helpful - to transmit this message to the Council so that between the first and second readings we will be able to resolve a few of the outstanding issues .
What we have before us , therefore , is a will on the part of Parliament to look centrally at the three priorities which the Council itself has indicated , i.e. research and development , trans-European networks and Northern Ireland as well as work , of course , in the context also of Community programmes which we ourselves have indicated are essential - RETEX and RECHAR - to secure one overall approach aimed at creating a significant reserve which can then be looked at jointly by the Council and Parliament .
This is a way in which we can fill in the Interinstitutional Agreement in such a way that a positive result can be found .
I just wish to add one specific point since I mentioned Northern Ireland .
So that there is no ambiguity about this - and we have had also within this Parliament an important dialogue on this point - at this stage it is clearly the wish - also expressed in a recent letter by Mr Hänsch to the President-in-Office of the Council - to have an overall approach towards these three programmes .
But Parliament sees an important priority for Northern Ireland ; sees it as an essential priority because it was not Parliament but the Council which refused to set up the necessary funding for the ECU 300m programme .
The chairman of the Committee on Budgets himself , has been quite instrumental on this point .
So in our resolution we will indicate very clearly that whatever happens in December at second reading , we will finance the promise of the ECU 100m .
It is essential that the Council also takes its part of the responsibility and that at this stage it looks at it in conjunction with the other issues which I indicated .
I now come to a few of the specific items which Parliament finds essential in the budget .
On category 1 we have made less progress than we had hoped .
We have made some progress , because at least the concept that we are going to establish a reserve in the budget has now finally been accepted .
We call on the Commission and Council - which has not been very helpful on this point - for next year 's budget to further develop this concept so that we will have marked developments already at the stage of the pre-draft of the budget by the Commission .
We should put an end to the situation that the estimates of the Commission are so large that even unforeseen things can simply be financed without any review in the course of the year - as BSE is now demonstrating .
We should end a situation of no democratic control even where compulsory expenditure rather than non-compulsory expenditure is involved .
In category 2 : frankly speaking , the cut on the part of the Council seems to have very little to do with a considered view of what to do about Structural Funds , but rather it has been shown to be a simple budget-cutting operation , without reflection on what it will do for the development of the Structural Funds .
This rather anticipates the fact that some of the Member States , as is mentioned in the resolution , have not found the proper ways and means to cofinance the Community instruments set up by Parliament and the Council at an earlier stage .
This is very regrettable .
It seems that the Member States are hesitant to make use of the European Community obligation to finance social and economic cohesion .
Although we in Parliament are concerned about the rate of implementation , it cannot be used as an excuse to cut the budget in the way indicated .
In Category 3 we have developed a number of horizontal approaches .
The 1997 budget continues the efforts towards ' greening ' the budget which began last year , but with a more instrumental and horizontal approach and we hope that the Commission will shortly set up its task force on green technology .
We have also adopted a horizontal approach to equality of men and women in society .
It is precisely at the time when perhaps budget funding is rare and scarce that it is necessary to pay attention to equality between men and women .
We should note at this stage that we cannot accept the fact that the Council has been blocking essential programmes such as employment and job creation , which have always been seen as priorities .
We have entered ECU 25m on the line which the Council has so far refused to unblock and it is an important priority for Parliament .
We hope that we can resolve this issue during the forthcoming conciliation procedure with the Council .
We have also added the suggestion that ECU 10m should be allocated for an initiative enhancing the employment potential of the ' third system ' .
The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment has been instrumental in this respect and we would welcome a positive response from the Council , even at this late stage .
The behaviour of the Council in the field of energy has been simply scandalous .
The Council has cut 80 % of the budget when the Commission has already cut something like 40 % .
It is time that the Council considered future energy policy and whether something should be done about renewable energy and energy saving .
Consequently we are putting 30 % in reserve in order to enter into a political dialogue with the Commission and Council on the future of energy policy .
I come to information policy .
As part of the overall review of its management , which is also being carried out within the Commission , we believe that , at a time when European integration is increasingly coming under attack , the European Union should at least make itself visible in its external information policy .
We have put substantial sums in reserve in the hope and expectation - and I very much welcome the presence of President Santer at this moment - that the Commission will make serious efforts towards the development of a central information office in close cooperation with Parliament , as a background to the important information programmes decided last year on the Euro , the Citizens First campaign and the Intergovernmental Conference .
We hope there will have been progress on this point by the time of the second reading .
We welcome the fact that , under the leadership of Commissioner Liikanen , the Commission increasingly sees that management tools can play a central part in developing a Commission which is credible to the outside world .
Just a few points on external policy .
We had an interesting debate yesterday with Commissioner van den Broek on the issue of Turkey .
A debate on Turkey was held in Parliament in 19 September .
We believe that it is important for a signal to be given in the budget as well , to indicate that , where human rights are increasingly under threat , as Mr van den Broek said yesterday , the Community will not be seen to be financing projects other than those that promote democracy , human rights and civil society .
We hope that the discussion we had yesterday has been also understood by the Commission .
This does not mean that we have no trust in the Commission , but it is essential that policy is carried out on the basis of dialogue with Parliament so that Parliament has a chance to review any specific orientations or decisions before they are adopted .
In the field of foreign affairs we have fulfilled our part of the commitment on the Mediterranean .
The Mediterranean was a priority last year .
We have voted ECU 200 billion in the negative reserve .
As far as possible we will see that these programmes in conjunction with PHARE and TACIS are financed .
This should , of course , not be to the detriment of the important priorities of areas outside Europe .
Europe increasingly - President Santer said so a few minutes ago - has external global responsibilities : responsibilities towards Africa , Latin America and Asia .
The tendency of the Council to disregard external development priorities is worrying .
Europe cannot become an inwardlooking organization .
It should shoulder its external responsibilities as much as it can .
I come now to the whole issue of Yugoslavia .
Europe has a responsibility , although it has not at the present time , perhaps , the central responsibility .
But within the framework of our financial means we should take very clear account in the budget of the fact that the European Union is after all financing five to six times more than other forces including the United States .
It is essential that the budget , in a limited way , is a reflection of that point .
Fisheries is another point of contestation with the Council which we hope we can resolve with the President-inOffice in the coming few weeks .
On the issue of fish it is clear that , so far , the views on what is compulsory and what is non-compulsory expenditure do not coincide .
But the least we can achieve is a code of conduct so that we are not placed in the miserable situation , after the Commission has put forward the preliminary draft budget , of suddenly being faced throughout the year with requests in respect of external commitments entered into in negotiations Parliament is not aware of and in situations where we then simply have to foot the bill .
It is for that reason that we are calling on the Council and the Commission to agree to a code of conduct so that at least , when a request for new money is received , the responsible Committee on Fisheries will be aware of what the situation is .
Finally , I said earlier that this is a very difficult time , not so much financially but politically and institutionally .
Parliament wants to negotiate in good faith but , in the strategy which we have agreed , there is unanimity in this Parliament that we will not be taken for a ride .
I hope these messages will have been received carefully by the President-in-Office .
We look forward , even in the few months available , to some of the pressing , outstanding issues being resolved and to our achieving a budget at the end of the year .
But that is not only a matter for Parliament .
It is also a matter for those who bear political responsibility in the Member States .
Finally , it is also a matter for the other branch of the budgetary authority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the first reading the Council has granted an overall amount for all of the other institutions of 1 , 484.17 MECU .
Bearing in mind the amount of 2 , 760.48 MECU granted to Part A of the Commission budget , this has left an available margin , under Heading 5 , of 107.35 MECU .
It should be pointed out that the preliminary draft budget , within the framework of administrative cost for all institutions , overshot the limit of Heading 5 ' Administrative Costs ' by 14.5 MECU .
As part of the deliberations , the Committee on Budgets has shown its interest in the double requirement for the institutions systematically to assess financial activities for the Union 's budget in order to improve the cost-efficiency ratio , and also to limit the creation of new jobs to commitments already made through enlargement .
In this way , the message gets across quite clearly and without any ambiguity before the great challenge which is the Community budget for the year 1997 . Administrative cost cannot be excluded from the belt-tightening which is imposed on all Member States with a view to monetary union .
However , the rapporteur thinks that this climate of austerity and rigour in budgetary matters should not come in the way of the conditions needed for the proper functioning of the institution .
Therefore , having considered the functional needs of the institutions and on the basis of updated information , the rapporteur has tabled amendments which would bring about an increase of 1.37 MECU compared with the Council 's draft budget .
This increase is shared out as follows : for the Court of Justice , 1 , 138 , 700 ECU ; for the Economic and Social Committee , 90 , 158 ECU and for the common structure of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , 142 , 348 ECU .
Of this overall amount of 1 , 37 million ECU , 225 , 486 ECU refer to measures aimed at staff : 18 upgradings for the Court of Justice , 3 for the Economic and Social Committee , 6 upgradings and the allocation of 1 ad personam for the common structure .
But I must also point out the following points .
As for the European Parliament , staff measures confirm the forecast made in May and this first European Parliament 's reading means that no increases have been to the establishment plan .
As for the Court of Auditors , the discussions going on with this institution since the creation of a draft budget by the Council has shown that there is a deficit of auditors due to the larger scope of controls carried out by this institution as a consequence of the Union 's enlargement .
However , given that it is impossible to take these needs into account , the Court of Auditors should put forward more explicit demands as part of an overall project bearing in mind all parameters together .
Therefore , I should draw your attention to those paragraphs in the resolution referring to the Court of Auditors .
As far as the Ombudsman is concerned , amendments to the organisational structure would , in effect , supply those criteria which were adopted for inter-institutional cooperation .
As rapporteur I should like to point out that the proposed amendments which have been tabled are in compliance with the conclusions of the tripartite talks which took place in April of this year concerning a freeze on staffing .
Now I turn to the appropriations in other budgetary lines and I would like to emphasise the issue of auxiliaries .
For the 1997 budget , the situation is as follows : concerning the common structure , we have increased the line of auxiliaries by transferring credits from one article to another by 78.94 % .
As for the Court of Auditors , the change is 36.5 % compared with the credits initially authorized .
This situation , Mr President , overturns decisions taken by the budgetary authority since the increase to the ' auxiliaries ' line is at the cost of credits earmarked for posts already authorized in the establishment plans .
An ad hoc policy is being developed which affects the genuine management and programming policy for posts authorized in the establishment plans of the institution .
To end this chapter on staff , I should like to point out the sharp drop , without sufficient justification , which has been observed in the ' special advisors ' line in the budget of the Committee of the Regions .
Therefore , I call upon the Committee of the Regions to provide information on this line and in particular on the arrangements for awarding different contracts to special advisors in respect of the provisions in Article 82 of the Statute .
To conclude I should like to point out the need for institutions to respect the provisions of the financial rules and , for this purpose , I point out the obligation for the common structure of the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions to establish an analytical accounting system and the need for the Court of Justice to present a genuinely analytical budget which is not merely a presentation of footnotes without any further explanation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the second consecutive year , I have the task of submitting for Parliament 's approval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , a motion for a resolution on the draft ECSC operating budget for 1997 .
Quite apart from its historical and traditional importance , the establishment of the ECSC budget provides each year a unique opportunity of reviewing the situation in two sectors which are fundamental to Europe 's industrial success , and in particular of comparing our economic activities with those of the rest of the world .
It should be underlined first of all that the figures available to us , which are considered to be final , demonstrate that in 1995 , for the first time since the ECSC was created , imports of coal outstripped internal production .
The significance of this needs to be fully appreciated .
It does not prevent the Commission from counting on substantial growth in 1997 , however , and without wishing to inflict too many figures on the House , I should nevertheless like to supply you with the main data .
In 1997 , ECSC activities should be seen against a background of real growth in Community GDP of 2.4 % , as against 1.5 % in 1996 .
Steel production , after recording an increase of 2.6 % in 1995 over 1994 , is likely to fall by 1.7 % in 1996 compared with 1995 and settle at approximately the 1995 level in 1997 , with the probable loss of 9000 jobs in this sector .
Coal production is likely to continue its downward trend and to record an estimated reduction of 5 % , mainly as a result of imports , which in 1995 - as I just said - for the first time outstripped internal production : 139 million tonnes as against 137.5 m tonnes .
Production is due to fall from 128.4 to 122 m tonnes , entailing the loss of approximately 7000 jobs and once again requiring implementation of the measures laid down in the ECSC Treaty .
The Committee on Budgets is therefore asking the House to approve - having done so itself - the table annexed to the motion for a resolution , which proposes accepting the levy rate of 0.17 % set by the Commission , in line with Parliament 's previous decision to accept the Commission 's proposal for a progressive reduction .
The Committee on Budgets is also proposing to modify slightly the breakdown of expenditure as shown in the table , although I shall not go into detail on this , as it would take too long .
I should like to draw Members ' attention , on the other hand , to a new element in the ECSC budget .
And what in fact is new in the draft budget that we are submitting to the House this year ?
It is the proposal to include in the ECSC budget , from 1997 onwards , a fund of ECU 5 million designed to allow - and here I shall read out the remarks - ' the remainder of the reserve to be set aside as start-up funding for the establishment of a body subject to the political and budgetary control of the Community institutions and which would inherit in 2002 the residual assets of the ECSC ' .
As the House is aware , this issue has been the subject of several debates and , in particular , a report drawn up by Mr Colom i Naval , which we have already discussed on various occasions .
By putting in place this appropriation of ECU 5 m , we shall provide Mr Colom i Naval with a basis on which to finalize his report on the future of the ECSC after 2002 .
Indeed , although we have not yet decided on the shape that the ECSC should take after 2002 , I believe that the members of the Committee on Budgets are united in agreeing on the need for ECSC activities to continue in one form or another .
By entering this ECU 5 m appropriation , we shall provide for the continuation of ECSC activities after 2002 , and give Mr Colom i Naval the means to implement the policies that he will be proposing to us .
Mr President , the Foreign Affairs Committee is particularly concerned with Category 4 of the Budget , but more importantly with the politically sensitive aspects of our external spending .
I am thinking first of the question of Turkey , which has been discussed already .
Obviously Parliament will listen carefully to the Commission and to the Council , but in addition we will watch very carefully indeed actual events , not only in Turkey itself , but also in Cyprus .
We will be consistent with the resolution that we tabled , but I hope that colleagues , whatever the circumstances , will keep an open mind , bearing in mind the supreme importance in geostrategic terms of Turkey and its relationship over a long period with the European Union .
I support the ambitions of our colleagues who are concerned with the developing world .
We want to make sure that we have a presence around the world - in Latin America , Asia and elsewhere - and so the Foreign Affairs Committee endorses the focus on those areas .
But we also need to be concerned about the more immediate neighbourhood : the PHARE programme , the TACIS programme , and now the MEDA programme .
On that we will be retabling a very few amendments to reinstate the preliminary draft budget figures on democracy and human rights programmes in the PHARE programme , in the TACIS programme and in the MEDA programme .
We found that in the debate last week in the Committee on Budgets there was some ECU 120m left in the margin on Category 4 .
We think it appropriate to spend a very small proportion of that on the political priorities of this Parliament and the Foreign Affairs Committee .
We will also be putting in some remarks on Hong Kong , Tibet and Macau . These are important aspects of policy .
We also hope that the Budget Committee , whose Members are here present , will continue to consult with the Foreign Affairs Committee as with other committees because we all have priorities ; we recognize the importance of making decisions , but let us make sure that they actually take a balance of the interests of all the committees in Parliament .
Mr President , just a few moments after sitting down , I rise to speak again , this time in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
In view of the limited time at my disposal , I shall address only two issues .
The first concerns a subject that is close to the heart of the chairman of our committee , Mr von Wogau : the information campaign on the single currency .
We are now a little more than two years away from the introduction of the single currency , and it is clear that the overall efforts to sell this idea to the European public have been largely inadequate .
That is why the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs insists that a substantial appropriation should be earmarked for this purpose , and the Committee on Budgets has supported it on this point .
I should also like to refer briefly to another subject close to the heart of the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , namely support for small and medium-sized industries and enterprises .
In the vote in the Committee on Budgets , an appropriation of ECU 25 million has been entered in the reserve .
Whilst our committee generally welcomes this measure , it is calling on the Council and the Commission to adopt and implement the regulation on the ELISE programme as quickly as possible .
Mr President , since my speaking time is very short , I shall address myself to only two matters .
Firstly , the Council 's social policy cuts are unacceptable , and both the Committee on Social Affairs and the Committee on Budgets reject them .
These cuts are detrimental to the social dialogue ; they seriously jeopardize and , in some cases , nullify the efforts being made to combat social exclusion .
Only recently , we celebrated World Anti-Poverty Day .
Action in favour of the elderly and disabled , and against racism , is being jeopardized .
It is worth bearing in mind not only that all these EU actions and projects in recent years have brought and are bringing the Union 's activities closer to our fellow citizens , but also that they make a very real contribution to raising awareness right across civil society , through the work of associations and NGOs .
Therefore , the risk being run by the European Union in imposing these cuts - and in this context I think the recent elections in Austria and Finland give both ourselves and the Council food for thought - is that the lack of confidence in Europe will increase , a sentiment which I am afraid is becoming ever more widespread among our fellow citizens .
This is why the House cannot accept these cuts and , as the rapporteur said , it is proposing the launching of actions to promote the development of the non-profit-making sector in the Union . This sector can meet two objectives : on the one hand , to create employment at local level and , on the other , to respond to new requirements in terms of welfare , the environment and culture - requirements which neither public nor private initiatives are able to satisfy at present .
My second point relates to the Structural Funds and the Social Fund .
The Committee on Social Affairs and Employment proposes to reinstate the PDB figures for payments .
The ultimately political debate on the future of the Structural Funds cannot be allowed to degenerate into an accounting operation .
We cannot accept these cuts , as they would place an even greater strain on implementation , already difficult in certain countries .
Other Members will be speaking on this matter , and I feel that the two points I have raised must be taken into account .
Mr President , I also want to address the issue of the Council 's decision to make cuts amounting to one billion in structural fund payments in the 1997 budget .
The Council , and indeed our Liberal rapporteur , has argued that , at a time when Member States are slashing budgets to meet EMU convergence criteria , the EU should make a symbolic gesture to cut funds and payments in structural funds in 1997 .
Yet as the rapporteur himself admitted , the EU budget is so small as to make no difference , and we know it will make no difference when it comes to meeting those criteria .
So this can only be a question of gesture politics .
And I would remind the Council that we have no macro-economic conditionality criteria on mainstream structural funds .
Mr President , we have seen many gestures - at Essen , Madrid and Florence - on tackling unemployment and using structural funds for new initiatives on territorial pacts for employment .
We know that structural funds are the main EU instrument to tackle unemployment and create jobs , yet some Member States , and indeed our wealthier partners , are concerned to extricate themselves from those commitments that they made at Edinburgh to spend structural funds within the time-limits , slowing down and freezing their funds in 1997 .
Jacques Santer this morning said there is a public crisis of confidence in the EU .
The Confidence Pact for Employment can re-establish that confidence but if we say to Member States they can go slow on spending on their programmes designed to tackle unemployment we are downgrading the vital role of the structural funds in job creation .
The Council 's decision to cut payments therefore - I contend and my committee contends - is politically indefensible : we cannot possibly make EMU acceptable to people in our regions by abandoning our flanking policies of structural funds critical to funding EMU .
With this decision the Council is reneging on its commitments at Edinburgh to meet spending targets and , as a result , I think there is a real risk that in the long term structural fund programmes will be hugely underspent and money will then go back pro rata to the Member State and be lost to the regions .
Perhaps this is the real hidden agenda of some Member States and the Council in not meeting their cofinancing commitments , not only in 1997 but in 1998 and 1999 .
I therefore ask the Council to reconsider this ill-advised strategy .
It gives a poor public signal at a time of public crisis in confidence .
EMU cannot mean no employment schemes in our region .
It is technically indefensible because several Member States have an appalling record on structural fund implementation and this cut allows them to continue that record of not spending on structural funds .
The Regional Committee and the Socialist Group will not be party to a shoddy strategy which is designed to rob our regions of funds which are necessary at this time .
We want the hypocrisy to stop and we want to see those commitments made on structural funds and on the Northern Ireland programme respected .
Mr President , I would agree with those Members who have already said this morning that this year is a time for budgetary restraint .
Governments across Europe have to recognize that and so should the European Community , and particularly this Parliament .
But a period of restraint can be useful in so far as it concentrates minds on what should be our real priorities and how we get real value for the money that we spend .
In setting out the Union 's action plan for the next year , the President of the Commission , earlier this morning , once again put growth and employment at the head of our priorities .
He was right to do so .
In that respect I would argue that expenditure on culture and education must not be seen as a non-essential luxury item ; as an optional extra .
The vitality of European culture must be seen as an important engine for economic vitality .
Just think of the film and television industry , think of tourism .
These will be the major growth sectors for employment in the 21st century , creating far more employment opportunities than old-style , heavy engineering .
European media and European tourism rely on a vibrant and vital cultural life .
Hence it is important that we do not regard culture budget lines as soft targets for budget cuts but rather essential elements for economic prosperity .
Similarly , expenditure on education , particularly the SOCRATES programme , can only be seen as critical in helping young Europeans become effective workers in the single European market of the next century , able to use it and exploit it to the full .
That is why the Culture Committee has resubmitted its amendments , proposing that the money spent this year on the Year of Life-long Learning should be added to the SOCRATES budget for 1997 .
President Santer says he wants Europe to do less and to do it better .
I totally agree .
Let us build then on what has already successfully started rather than , as we often seem to do , dabble with too many new initiatives .
If we want youth and culture to take us seriously , we must take them seriously .
Mr President , it takes a considerable degree of optimism to be the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development , given the way that the axe has been wielded repeatedly at the various stages of the budgetary procedure .
We are fond of emphasizing that the European Community is also a community of values , but for anyone seeking to support the demands of the third world , this begs the question of whether there is any place for solidarity in the European value system .
There is absolutely no truth in the claim which is sometimes made that development policy involves issuing a blank cheque .
Our population policy is successful , our literacy campaigns are successful , and we do not wish to see those successes called into question .
We should certainly prefer to hear constructive proposals , rather than criticism of the unsatisfactory cost-benefit ratio in the development sector .
And we do not object to the setting of specific priorities for development .
But when we read , in connection with the MEDA programme , or PHARE and TACIS , of rates of growth beyond the wildest dreams of those engaged in development policy , we are bound to ask why we should celebrate the fact that the European Union 's competences include the promotion of development cooperation , if it only has our half-hearted support .
I welcome the compromises that were achieved at the last minute , and I would urge that we should defend them and consider for a moment the promises that we have made to the poorest countries .
I hope that we shall be able to keep them .
Mr President , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs wishes to see effective action and majority decision-making in the legal sector .
The Member States are wasting huge resources on ineffective controls at the internal frontiers , while at the same time there are not enough resources for combating international crime .
We wish to have a strong and effective Europol , and to see international drug crime combated effectively .
We are in favour of common rules on asylum and joint action in dealing with the major international flows of refugees .
We wish to play our part in combating xenophobia and promoting the integration of foreigners into our society .
The committee asks for the EU 's budget to be drawn up on this basis .
We are calling on the Commission to play an active and dynamic role and to take its opportunity .
To a large extent , this sector is one towards which the public is favourably disposed , and there is also support for amending the Treaty in nearly all the Member States ' governments .
I am ashamed that not only the United Kingdom , but also my own country , Denmark , has entered reservations , but that must not lead us to give up : it should encourage us to take action .
I should like to thank Mr Brinkhorst for the work he has done in this area as well , and for the skilful way in which he presented Parliament 's views a few minutes ago .
Mr President , if speaking time were calculated on the basis of amendments tabled , one minute would indeed be adequate .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs has submitted only a small number of amendments , but they are very much to the point , and I should like to draw them to the attention of the House and , one last time , to that of the rapporteur .
The first relates to our committee 's wish to reinforce the Prince programme , which is an extremely important one if we wish economic and monetary union and the IGC to be a success , and if the message is to be successfully conveyed to the citizens of Europe .
The committee has also thought of linking to this an awareness campaign , an idea which has been taken up on condition - of course - that it will not work to the detriment of the more broadly-based consumer information campaigns already under way .
The committee has also requested an increase - with all due caution - in the grants we make available , in view of the fortieth anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome .
I hope that this message will be heard on Thursday for the benefit of , amongst others , some extremely important bodies such as the European University Institute in Florence , which would otherwise not find in this year 's budget the sums they need to cover their operating costs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Fisheries would like the three following amendments to be accepted :
First of all , in budget line B 2-901 , on the financial participation by the Community in control and surveillance activities in the waters of Member States , to be returned to the quantity provided for in the preliminary draft budget approved by the Commission : 39.5 MECU instead the 33 MECU now earmarked .
This amendment has already been accepted by the Committee on Budgets .
Secondly , setting up a new budgetary line for non-industrial coastal fishing ( B 2-522 N , with 10 MECU ) .
This amendment has also been accepted by the Committee on Budgets , and 4 MECU have been earmarked .
Last but not least , we call for an increase in the budgetary share for B 7-800 ( International Agreements ) , by 36 MECU , bringing it from 276 , 4 to 312 , 3 MECU .
This initiative has not been accepted by the Committee on Budgets .
The official Commission stance is that the amount earmarked for this budgetary line should be enough to cover all of the Community 's obligations in this area and that , if at the end of the budgetary year this is exceptionally not the case , it ought to be possible to transfer funds to meet any extra needs by use of the ' Notenboom ' procedure .
However , according to figures supplied by DG XIV , the amount available is clearly insufficient to meet the needs for international agreements .
Our position , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , is that we should not begin a budgetary year in the certainty that the budgetary amounts earmarked for this budgetary line are insufficient to meet any obligations arising from international fishery agreements already signed by the Community - agreements which represent one of the fundamental bases of the common fisheries policy - which explains our amendment which has already been retabled by the Committee on Fisheries and which should be adopted .
The Committee on Women 's Rights decided to pursue a limited number of priorities in the budget procedure . Our first aim was to secure ECU 12 million for the Fourth Action Programme for equal opportunities for men and women - in other words , twice the amount allocated by the Council .
The Committee on Budgets has approved a figure of ECU 10 m .
Secondly , as a follow-up to the Beijing conference on women , we wished to facilitate action to combat trafficking in women and violence against women , and to support the NGOs that are working in these areas .
Thirdly , we wished to see a horizontal approach to ' mainstreaming ' - the inclusion of equality of opportunity in all policy areas .
We therefore put forward a package of amendments to the remarks on a number of budget lines , and these were approved by the Committee on Budgets .
However , three budget lines were not approved , and we are proposing to reinstate them .
We now expect the Commission to set up an office within its administration to pursue and evaluate mainstreaming , and to take the initiative when there are delays in implementing it .
Mr President , this year 's budget has thrown up problems .
One problem is the lack of legal base for renewable energy and energy efficiency .
We need those programmes for our environmental aims .
We are setting particular store by the SAVE II programme which we want to see enhanced .
It is vitally important for competitiveness and the environment that this programme is enhanced .
On nuclear safety , we think it essential that countries in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe have the sort of help in training their inspectors that they need directly from DG XVII , and not through the sometimes convoluted PHARE and TACIS approach .
It is of crucial importance that research and development generally - with its role in job creation and in the protection of the environment - is well-financed .
It is all the more astonishing that the Council of Ministers has not yet agreed to this and made provision to allow R & D to continue .
Most of the amendments proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights have been approved , and I am grateful to the Committee on Budgets for that fact .
One problem still remains , which we shall continue to face for a considerable time , and that is the length of time it takes to process cases before the European Court of Justice and the Court of First Instance .
The procedure at present is much too lengthy , and this makes people less willing to accept European law .
The main cause of the problem is that the French translation sections at both courts are severely under-staffed .
I would strongly urge all the members of the Committee on Budgets and the Members of the House to take a less stringent approach to new recruitment in the coming year and not to overlook the two courts , so that we can achieve greater popular acceptance of European law .
Mr President , for future years , if we could stick by the agenda as originally planned , it would be more constructive , because we should be looking at the monitoring of existing expenditure before we come on to new expenditure planned for 1997 .
Looking then at what is a novel procedure , I would like to make three particular points so far as the implementation of the ongoing budget is concerned .
We should not be thinking in terms of gloom and doom but should be reasonably optimistic that in this particular part of European Union activities we are able to provide more transparency and more certainty to European taxpayers that there is now tighter monitoring of the way in which monies are spent .
In the 1996 budget , when it was initially framed , we set out three priorities .
The first was rationalization in terms of information policy , the agencies and nomenclature .
We had a second priority which was reform of the procedures : this involved greater scrutiny of the executive committees ; the interinstitutional function of the Union ; the question of the use of the reserve to enable Parliament to make sure its priorities were carried out by the Commission and , lastly , innovation in terms of a number of new programmes which we had put into the budget in 1996 , including elements for the information campaigns for Europe , Sarajevo and small- and medium-sized enterprises .
The question then arises : how has this budget been implemented during the current year ?
The fact is that we have had better overall implementation in Category 1 ; where the forecasts have perhaps been set too high , we have adjusted them in the 1997 budget .
Where we have had lower utilization of the structural funds in Category 2 we will also , I suspect , be adjusting that when we come to vote the 1997 budget .
In several specific lines there have been problems of implementation , but overall we have had more effective implementation .
Why is that ?
In part it is due to the Commission , and thanks to Commissioner Liikanen , we have had information earlier in the process through what I would now call the Bourlanges rather than the Notenboom procedure , and we have been able to channel this information on existing budget management more accurately into our decisions to be taken on the 1997 budget .
But we are left with the tricky problem of the legal base , which will be common both to the 1996 and the 1997 budget , and the only way we can resolve that is through an interinstitutional agreement , Mr President-in-Office , by the second reading at the latest , otherwise we will find management problems which will grow in time rather than lessen .
Let me turn to a few comments on the 1997 budget from the budgetary control point of view .
It is clear that we have already set out the guidelines for identifying value for money in the operation of the management of the budget and that we shall continue with them during the 1997 procedure .
Indeed , in the guidelines of our rapporteur general , we have made sure that monitoring of the existing budget runs in parallel with the creation of new credits in the 1997 budget .
Obviously this is going to be made more difficult where the Council has cut back significantly in terms of many internal projects , even if the utilization and management of these lines is really effective .
When it comes to Parliament itself , where we have made progress and where we will still make progress is by making sure that the specialized committees working with the Committee on Budgets and Committee on Budgetary Control can make sure that money is being spent wisely and here I come back to the first point I made .
It will mean greater transparency and more effectiveness in the way in which the budget is established and , therefore , greater reliability so far as European citizens are concerned .
Mr President , I am pleased at the opportunity to address you again today .
On 18 September I had the honour to present to this plenary the draft budget for 1997 , which was established by the Council on 25 July .
On that occasion I outlined to you the main political considerations guiding the Council in its budgetary decisions .
It is important to recall those considerations as Parliament is preparing to decide on its first reading of this budget .
I would like to recall also that the Council 's first reading was preceded by a conciliation with Parliament during which a broad level of agreement was reached on the main items of the 1997 budget procedure .
The Council is of the opinion that respect for strict budgetary discipline is an unavoidable constraint for the Community budget this year , when Member States at national level are facing some very tough and difficult budgetary decisions .
To achieve this budgetary discipline , the Council decided to reduce the preliminary draft budget by ECU 1 , 000m in agricultural expenditure as well as a further ECU 1 , 000m in the payment appropriations for structural measures .
Furthermore , significant savings in headings 3 and 4 of the Financial Perspective were also proposed which should go hand in hand with the abovementioned reductions .
I would mention that , with regard to the provision for agricultural expenditure , the outcome of the conciliation procedure was successful and that the Council endeavoured to take account of Parliament 's concerns in this area .
As I stressed on 18 September , the Council considers it essential that the European Parliament go along with this overall restrictive strategy concerning expenditure in the fields of agriculture and structural actions .
Moreover , the rigour imposed by the financial and economic constraints on all Member States in 1997 cannot spare headings 3 and 4 of the Financial Perspective .
Despite the strict approach of Council , it allocated considerable amounts in favour of a number of actions which represent , in its view , particular priorities at this time .
Research , education and youth , environment , internal market and the TENs have all been included .
In the area of ' external measures ' , the Council 's priorities were : cooperation with Latin America and Asia , the Mediterranean third countries , PHARE and TACIS and ex-Yugoslavia , among others .
In all these fields , the Council accepted commitment appropriations at - or slightly below - the level of the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
As regards payment appropriations , the Council took into account the implementation rate on these budget lines during recent financial years , in conformity with the agreed need for budget entries to be as realistic as possible .
However , for a number of the lines in headings 3 and 4 , the Council is of the view that next year 's particular constraints - linked mainly to the paramount objective of achieving EMU - require that savings are realized as well .
There are , of course , areas where major political efforts are being made by the Union and its institutions , often in association with other world powers .
These include our efforts to promote peace and reconstruction in various places , including Northern Ireland .
Through our participation in these actions , we demonstrate the political strength and cohesion of the European Union and its identification with , and interest in helping , those in difficulties .
The European Parliament has been extremely supportive of the Northern Ireland Peace Programme .
Speaking as one who is personally involved in the peace process negotiations , I welcome the efforts which have and are at this time being made by Parliament to ensure that the political impetus for this programme is maintained .
In particular , I welcome Mr Brinkhorst 's assurance here today about funding for the Northern Ireland Peace Programme , and I thank him for that .
I would like to turn now to the question of the revision of the Financial Perspective , which , I know is of very special interest to Parliament , as has been put to me on many occasions .
Your position is , of course , extremely understandable .
After all , the Commission and President Santer put proposals to the Florence European Council for increased expenditure on TENs and , to a lesser extent , on research and SMEs .
At the July Ecofin , my colleague Ruairi Quinn in his capacity as President of the Council , set up a High Level Group of Personal Representatives of Ministers for Finance to consider the proposals further .
The Group 's report indicates that the budgetary difficulties of many of the Member States make it very difficult indeed for them to contemplate increases in budgetary expenditure either domestically or at Community level .
While it is not possible , despite the presidency 's best efforts , for the Council to reach agreement at this time on a revision of the Financial Perspective for 1998 and 1999 , Ministers have noted the funding available from the EIB and existing budgetary resources .
Under these circumstances , I appeal to Parliament to bear in mind the difficulties of the present budget procedure .
I would also like to stress the positive role which the current Financial Perspective has played in ensuring the necessary financing of Community policies , as well as its role in avoiding futile disputes between the two arms of the budget authority .
In that context too I wish to take the opportunity to pay tribute to Mr Samland , Mr Brinkhorst and to Mr Fabra Vallés and other members of the Committee on Budgets .

Having met with them on some six separate occasions during or before the Irish presidency , which is I gather in excess of the norm , I have found them willing to engage at all times in constructive and meaningful dialogue on budgetary issues and I hope they have found me to be the same .
I take this opportunity to thank the Budget Commissioner , Mr Liikanen , for his cooperation , help and advice .
I would like to turn now to the question of the legal basis , which was discussed at our earlier conciliation meeting of 25 July .
At Mr Samland 's recent request , I sought to raise this issue at a high level and accordingly Parliament 's concerns were conveyed to Ministers at the October Ecofin meeting .
As you may know , there have been several technical meetings between the three institutions on the legal base .
I want to assure you that the presidency will make every effort to progress this matter with a view to reaching - if at all possible - an agreement between the three institutions when we meet on 19 November , the date of the Budget Council .
In the course of the ad hoc conciliation last July , the Council agreed also to examine , with the European Commission and the European Parliament , a detailed mutual information procedure to be applied in respect of international fisheries agreements .
Following the technical discussions between the three institutions , the presidency is now pressing for political progress towards concluding an acceptable arrangement on that issue as well .
These are the main points I wish to make before this Parliament 's vote on its reading of the draft budget for the financial year 1997 .
I can assure you that the Council will examine in depth and with care the results of your first reading .
On behalf of the presidency , I can assure you that I will spare no effort to work with Parliament and the Commission so that , at the end of the year , the most appropriate budget for our Union can , in all circumstances , be adopted .
Thank you , Mr President-in-Office .
We now have to suspend the debate because of voting time .
It will be resumed at 3 p.m. this afternoon .
Votes
Mr President , this concerns a Commission proposal which was rejected in committee and which we should actually have voted on at the July part-session .
Talks have started with the Commission , but it has decided that the final negotiations on a new document cannot start until Parliament has rejected the existing proposal in plenary .
All we need to do now , as everyone in the House agrees , is to reject the Commission proposal as it stands as a formal confirmation that we do not accept it , and then the Commission can propose a new document straight away and the negotiations can continue .
( Parliament adopted the draft legislative resolution )
Cultural issues are first and foremost a national and inter state matter .
It is impossible to have a policy which covers all cultural projects .
Each case must be considered in its own right .
If the issue is one of supporting a Member State & # x02BC ; s initiative without a supranational decision , the project should be considered according to its subject matter .
If it is one of creating EU institutions which first take in money from Member States and then allocate these funds , it is doubtful whether the EU should become involved .
If coordination at European level is required it ought to take place via the European Council .
Sanz Fernandez recommendation
We have voted today against the recommendation for second reading concerning a Community action programme in the field of cultural heritage , the Raphael programme , just as we voted against the programme at first reading .
Amongst other things , the Raphael programme is aimed at supporting projects which are of interest to the Community as a whole , which help to improve the way in which the cultural heritage is represented , and which have a European dimension .
Firstly , we do not believe that it is the task of the EU to concern itself with the cultural sector ; this is definitely a matter for the Member States .
Secondly , we take the view that the actual aim of the programme is too narrow .
When a European dimension is referred to , what is envisaged is not in fact a genuinely European dimension , but an EU one .
The European cultural heritage is not limited to the EU Member States , but includes the whole of Europe .
Guinebertière report
Provided that it does not invite too much fraud , the establishment of a European Guarantee Fund for the promotion of European film and television productions is to be welcomed for a number of reasons .
First of all , it enables us as individual nations and as the Union as a whole to take a stronger stand against America 's audiovisual imperialism , which is already far too intrusive .
There are also socio-economic reasons : encouraging productions in Europe must inevitably create work , which in turn should lead to new jobs .
I would have liked to add that there are cultural reasons , which is , after all , what you would expect .
Unfortunately , it has to be said that some film and television productions are more evidence of cultural disintegration than cultural creativity .
Finally , I regret the fact that so little , if anything at all , is said about the need to review moral and ethical standards in television .
Whatever happens , we must not allow subsidies to be used by all kinds of second-rate producers to peddle their negative disinformation to the television viewers .
We must not allow the tyranny of the television screen to lead to what Vladimir Volkoff so accurately and succinctly describes in his most recent work , ' La Crevasse ' , as stupefaction .
I voted no to this report .
There is absolutely no reason for the EU in a " project imposed from above ' to allocate SEK 750 million ( ECU 90 million ) to support European TV and Cinema productions , particularly when the whole project appears to be directed towards activities in other countries , e.g. the USA .
Support of this type should take place at National level .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this House , it would seem somewhat superfluous to advocate the need for a special Guarantee Fund to promote cinema and television production in Europe .
Mrs Guinebertière , in her commendable report , and the Committee on Culture , through a formal act , have already expressed opinions in this respect which I completely endorse .
But it is not a matter of preaching to the converted here ; the problem is to convince the governments of the need for the Fund and , in particular , of the urgency of channelling resources into production .
Many aspects of the Commission 's proposal are open to discussion : the procedures , the timescale , the monitoring of the project portfolio .
On the other hand , the House has shown considerable maturity and discernment in its attempts to improve the Commission 's proposal , by means of the Guinebertière report , the opinions and the amendments .
What is quite intolerable is the continued sabotage of the proposed Fund by certain governments .
Of course , the Commission 's proposal is not perfect . But as today 's debate has revealed , it can certainly be improved .
We cannot continue to tolerate the attitude shown by the governments on 11 June , whereby when there is disagreement over some aspects of a proposal , however important they may be , it is simply consigned to the waste-paper basket and thus denied any dignity , value or urgency .
Above all else , the very reasons for it are denied .
The Council 's attitude here is utterly wrong and should be censured at the highest level , beginning with a clear-cut rebuke from Parliament and its President .
It would be truly insulting to the House if , in the light of a formal act in the shape of the vote on the Guinebertière report - no doubt a favourable one - we had to engage in yet another trial of strength with the Council ; and this time not on specific aspects , but on the very principle underlying the Commission 's proposal , namely the attempt to rescue Europe 's cinema industry from grave financial crisis .
Authors , directors and actors wishing to make a film in Europe must literally go begging to producers , banks and finance companies .
And since banks and financial institutions demand very onerous legal guarantees , that leaves only producers , who are without doubt attracted far more by the commercial than the cultural aspects of a project .
They invest very small amounts indeed nowadays , and only when the so-called ' entrepreneurial risk ' proves to be almost nil .
That is their job , I have no doubt .
But this vicious circle is putting tens of thousands of people out of work every year .
And even worse , the cinema in Europe is rapidly becoming subordinate to that of the United States , in terms of both quantity and quality .
Not only as an MEP , but above all as a cinema professional , I wish to express the extreme concern that is being felt throughout the cinema industry .
It is not by chance , in fact , that the cinema world welcomed the proposed Guarantee Fund as a final glimmer of hope .
I therefore appeal to you , Mr President , to make a formal approach to the Council - with all due respect for your independence - to find out exactly what it intends to do about the Fund .
Does it wish to retain the principle ?
Very well , but then let it revise the text as necessary - and without wasting any more time .
Does it wish to review the financial framework ?
Fine , that can be discussed - but as a matter of urgency .
Does it wish to consign the whole idea to the waste-paper basket ?
Let it do so - but in the knowledge that conservative and progressive governments alike will have to account for themselves in full to public opinion , because we do not intend to give in to either blackmail or sabotage .
Finally , I would make a similar appeal to my colleagues here in Parliament .
It is , in a sense , our historic duty as an institution to approach our own governments and urge them to take a timely , positive decision in support of the Fund .
I call on all those - a large number , I hope - who have come out in favour of the establishment of the Fund to put pressure on their national governments .
In short , let us ensure that this issue of the Fund is not the umpteenth confirmation of the political and institutional weakness of this House , crushed and scorned by the questionable decisions of the governments .
The creation of the European Audiovisual Guarantee Fund is part of the framework of the Community 's activity to reform the European audiovisual area on two fundamental fronts : on one hand , regulation - in other words reshaping the Television without Frontiers Directive in order to establish a clearer and more efficient legal framework , to favour the development of television broadcasting activities in the Single Market , and also to relaunch and to consolidate the European programme industry through the MEDIA II Programme and the creation of supplementary machinery , closer to the market and aimed at mobilising resources such as the European Audiovisual Guarantee Fund .
I am completely in favour of the creation of this Fund because I am convinced that the philosophy which underlies it - sharing risks , following market criteria , mobilising private investment , stimulating and rewarding professional effort - is European audiovisual production itself .
The system has borne fruit in recent years in Spain , in the policy for defending and fostering Spanish film production .
Now what we need to do is apply a similar system on a European scale in order to face American domination of this market .
Añoveros Trías de Bés report
I voted no to this report .
There is no legislation in Sweden on the protection of utility models .
The issue has been considered in a government report as a result of which legislation was considered unnecessary .
There is no reason whatsoever to introduce legislation which would impose regulations on Sweden from above that we ourselves consider unnecessary at home .
EU legislation ( Directive or Regulation ) would also involve increased cost for companies , entrepreneurs and innovators .
The EU should , on the other hand , use all means possible to stimulate new patents and inventions .
This could be brought about through increased information and a lowering of the cost of patent applications .
We have voted against the report from Julio Anoveros Trias de Bes .
Sweden does not have legislation on the protection of utility models .
A Swedish government report on the protection of utility models was withdrawn through lack of interest .
In comparison with patent rights , the protection of utility models has a weaker legal position .
Legislation at EU level would lead to high costs for those applying for protection of utility models , in particular the cost of translating the application to the official languages of the Union which innovators would have to pay .
What is required , however , is that the EU should recommend that Member States reduce their costs for patent applications .
Japan and the USA currently have significantly lower costs in this area than the countries of the Union .
As a consequence of this , the EU ought to review current convergence policies which are forcing drastic cuts in countries and thereby limiting opportunities for State financial assistance to small and medium sized innovators for patents .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

1996 budget implementation - 1997 draft general budget - 1997 draft ECSC operating budget ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 87 and the three reports by the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , the 1997 budget has an important role to play in the strategy of the Union , to meet the challenges and to regain the confidence of the citizens of Europe .
The 1997 budget needs to be a rigorous budget .
The Union budget must contribute - within its modest limits - to the efforts of all Member States to restore their fiscal health .
These efforts are inevitable . They will permit a successful start to economic and monetary union which is without doubt the most important project of the Union for the remainder of this century and beyond .
All institutions have recognized the need for rigour as the cornerstone of the 1997 budget procedure .
This demonstrates their responsibility .
The Commission presented a preliminary draft budget in April with a rate of growth ' without BSE ' below the rate of inflation , with significant margins in categories 3 , 4 and 5 , and with a zero increase in personnel except for enlargement .
A majority in Council has gone a step further and established a ' zero growth ' draft budget .
This was mainly achieved by budgeting ECU 1 billion less in payment credits for agriculture and structural funds .
Given the substantial under-execution of these categories in recent years , this is not a totally unrealistic assumption .
But - and we must remember this - the underlying regulations remain unchanged and will need to be fully financed from the 1997 budget .
If the European Parliament leaves the cuts in categories 1 and 2 intact it will demonstrate that it too is willing to accept a strategy of rigour .
But the amendments accepted in the Budget Committee also show strong support for the Trans-European Networks in the transport sector , for research and development and for the peace process in Northern Ireland .
This keeps alive the joint efforts of the Commission and Parliament for these priorities of the Union .
In fact , from the beginning of the year , when President Santer proposed a ' confidence pact ' for the Union , the Commission has been stressing that the Union needs a forward-looking strategy for growth and employment .
Along with budgetary rigour there needs to be investment in the future .
As one tangible element of such a strategy , the Commission proposed a revision of the Financial Perspectives for 1998 and 1999 along with a commitment to exceptional rigour for 1997 .
It was confident that its proposal would respond to requests from several Councils but , in particular , of all European Councils since Essen .
The outcome of the deliberations of Ecofin has been disappointing .
In spite of the support of many Member States , Ecofin on 14 October 1996 was only able to state that there is no agreement in present circumstances for a revision of the Financial Perspective proposed by the Commission .
Because of the negative attitude of the Council there is now in front of you an alternative solution for the year 1997 : to strengthen the financing of the revision priorities using all the margins in Categories 3 , 4 and 5 .
This approach has the merit of respecting the overall ceilings of the Financial Perspective .
The institutions should be able to come to an agreement on it without delay .
The discussions between the institutions must include the question of legal bases .
The Commission is working with the Irish presidency to come to a conclusion before the end of this budget procedure .
An agreement would considerably facilitate Community financial policies .
With regard to administrative expenditure , Parliament 's amendments generally restore the workability of the administrative budget of the Commission without relaxing its rigour .
I am grateful for that .
But still I hope the Commission and Parliament can continue to work on a few points which would leave no doubt about Parliament 's objectives without weakening the Commission 's institutional independence to decide on the best way of achieving them .


Let me conclude on this item by thanking the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , and the rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst , as well as the rapporteur for the other institutions , Mr Fabra Vallés , and all the members of the Committee on Budgets for their work in the 1997 procedure .
As this is a joint debate also on Parliament 's opinion on the operating budget for the European Coal and Steel Community for 1997 , I would now like to react briefly to the report by Mr Giansily .
The Commission will examine the opinion of Parliament carefully .
I note agreement on the resources and , in particular , on a levy of 17 % .
On the expenditure side , if account is taken of the implementation options , it would indeed appear possible to strengthen the aids for redeployment as well as for coal and steel research , for social research funds have already been provided for within the coal and steel research programmes and within the 4th research framework programme .
I note your proposals to finance preparatory activities for coal and steel sector activities after 2002 .
This is part of the broader debate about ECSC activities after the expiry of the ECSC Treaty .
The Commission has not yet adopted a position on this question .
The report of Mr Colom i Naval will be timely in stimulating reflection , and I am looking forward to the debate which - as I understand it - has been scheduled for the plenary session in November .

Let me for now thank you , Mr Giansily , as well as , again , the chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Samland , and his colleagues , for your work on this issue .
Mr President , following this morning 's debate , we now get on to the political input , rather than just the input from the committees .
Speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , our priorities from the very start have been to concentrate on those issues which would bring about job creation .
We have been trying to show that we are serious about this in contrast to the words which the Council has continually poured out since Essen about job-creating projects while never coming up with the resources to make those a reality .
Indeed , it is also in contrast to the Commission .
I do not mean this as an insult to you , Commissioner Liikanen - you and the Committee on Budgets have a very good understanding - but it is ironic when we see a PDB with cuts in expenditure and then officials from the Commission ask Parliament to reinstate those cuts .
That smacks of hypocrisy .
In the Socialist Group we have tried to be open in our approach to job creation .
We openly admit that to achieve that goal there would need to be a revision of the Financial Perspective , especially for those three areas that Parliament has seen as priorities : the Irish peace process , research and development , and trans-European networks .
As in the past our position is to go along with the Article 203 strategy that was outlined in the Budgets Committee last week .
What we said was that if you really want to create jobs , if you really want to put money on the line for TENs , then it has to be more than paying for studies , you have to have the money there to actually create the projects and the work .
That is why we are prepared to go along with Article 203 to make sure that the money goes to TENs , goes to research and development and , at the same time , that the Irish peace process is not left out of those priorities .
Having said that , we also recognize that the Ecofin Council of 14 October in effect killed off any revision of the Financial Perspective .
Our role as a group is not to come along , make a lot of noise and then happily back down .
If we cannot get support in this House , if we cannot get 314 votes , our group has not yet made a definitive decision but I would assume that we would go along with the strategy outlined by Mr Brinkhorst at last night 's Budgets Committee .
That means creating the ECU 300m reserve , highlighting within that at least ECU 100m for the Irish peace process , and then deciding where the rest of it would go .
One assumes it would go to research and development and TENs .
That is a position we are prepared to support .
It does not help our case when we get lobbied by all and sundry .
When we took that decision at the first reading of the budget in committee and highlighted the strategy of going for Article 203 , I made the point that the telephones of Europe would begin to ring .
And they certainly have , from Prime Ministers and Foreign Secretaries and everyone , to such an extent that we will not be taking that course of action .
I have come to the conclusion that the telephone is mightier than the sword because it seems to achieve one heck of a lot more than we do by manning the barricades !
Today I got a note from the United Kingdom Permanent Representation asking us in effect to vote against the amendment that we voted through in the Budgets Committee .
It starts off by saying : ' The proposal for a special support programme for peace and reconciliation was made by the President of the European Commission , Jacques Delors , on 7 December 1994 . ' Wrong .
It was not made then , it was made several months earlier by the European Parliament .
What Mr Delors did was to get the figures wrong .
He said ECU 300m instead of ECU 200m and we have had the problem ever since !
But the note goes on to say - and I love this bit : ' Parliament 's justification for the proposed reduction , ( that is , the Council has not met their request to raise the ceiling on structural funds spending by ECU 100m to replace resources from the reserve ) , will not be understood in the areas concerned , particularly at this sensitive time ' .
That is probably true , but it is also an admission by one member of the Council that what we have said all along is actually fact , that it is because the Council has not come forward with the extra ECU 100m that we have this problem .
It does not help when we get stuff like that put around , Mr President , especially at a time of sensitive negotiations .
I would like to make a point about some of the amendments that will be put in by the Socialist Group .
In Category 2 , we will be retabling the amendments of the Committee on Regional Policy .
That will mean that we will be asking for the ECU 1bn in payment appropriations to be reinstated within the budget .
That is quite clearly the position of our group .
We will be supporting the amendment from the Committee on Regional Policy and the Committee on Budgets in regard to reinstating the funds for RECHAR and RETEX .
By the same token , we will be supporting the Budgets Committee 's proposals to ensure that the ECU 100m for the peace process is there , but not at the expense of Community initiatives that this Parliament considers a priority .
I turn then to the resolution in Mr Brinkhorst 's name .
It is quite lengthy .
In paragraphs 71 , 72 and 73 it touches on the area of comitology .
What it says there it means , and the message to the Council is quite clear .
If you do not cooperate in this area , then there may not be trouble in 1997 but there certainly will be in 1998 .
Mr President , what we have to consider first of all when we have a look at the context of the 1997 budget are the tremendous difficulties which the Council President referred to before the votes , just before our lunch break .
We have Member States who are cutting back or keeping a freeze on their national budgets as the public sector deficits have been cut back , not only to be competitive in the global economy but also for the rationale of the single currency towards the end of this decade .
Speaking on behalf of my group , I think we are right , therefore , in making sure that we act responsibly in this budgetary process and we contribute towards that goal ourselves and indeed the position of the European People 's Party right from the start of this process , after our Budget Committee votes ten days ago , has been to underline two particular principles .
The first is that we go for a zero growth budget because that is in line with Parliament 's commitment of responsibility in the budgetary process and therefore we , in contrast to the Socialists , will not be voting for the Committee on Regional Policy 's amendment to be voted back but we will be voting for responsibility in the structural funds , as in other parts of the budget .
Secondly , perhaps as important , if not more important , is to vote in terms of keeping the commitments which Parliament has entered into and particularly the interinstitutional agreement .
We do not agree that we should go to Article 203 which in essence - if Mr Wynn would admit this - would actually rip up the interinstitutional agreement .
We think that we should actually use the agreements which we enter into , try and ensure , as now , that the strategy of Parliament evolves between first and second reading and encourage the Council to come along with Article 12 ( 2 ) to have a discussion with us so that we can then revise the perspectives , but within the framework of the interinstitutional agreement , rather than simply tearing it up and saying ' we don 't use this ' .
It would to me , and I think to my Group as a whole , certainly be the wrong step for Parliament to take , while we are in the process of negotiating the Intergovernmental Conference , as it would show us being an irresponsible partner in the budgetary process .
We are in favour of awareness at this particular time of the difficulties of the European Union , both in terms of a budgetary freeze and of negotiating within the frameworks that we have already negotiated .
There is however the question of how we can actually achieve that within the frameworks which have been set out .
We believe that the proposal put forward by the general rapporteur of putting 300 million in a general reserve , with 100 million specifically allocated to Ireland so it is absolutely copper-bottomed , provides the guarantee that Ireland will have one hundred million at the end of the budgetary process , in whichever category we finally allocate it .
That must be a real fundamental principle .
But , as for the allocation of the rest of the 300 million , that will be in the final analysis for the budgetary authority to decide at the end of second reading .
But in terms of job creation , if you think that simply by putting another 100 million on the trans-European networks we are going to solve the unemployment problem in the European Union then I am afraid that is not our view on this side of the House .
What we must think of in this negotiation - and I direct my final remarks to you , Mr President-in-Office - is that we must have understanding and flexibility from your institution as part of the co-authority of the budgetary process , to make sure the things that you have signed and that we have signed are things which we can actually make work in practice .
Situations have changed since we signed up in 1993 ; we must make sure that it can survive as a living entity .
Otherwise the risk is that , when it comes to the revision of the Financial Perspective next year , you will find a more than reluctant partner on this side of the budgetary authority when it comes to continuing with something which is rigid and clearly will be unoperational in the longer term .
Mr President , the preparations for the vote on this budget required the Committee on Budgets to engage in a dual exercise , which merits first and foremost , I believe , a dual salute : to the chairman of the committee , Mr Samland , and to the rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst .

On 25 July , the preliminary draft budget , which was based on estimates showing an almost 4 % increase on the budget for 1996 , was cut back to a zero growth budget .
The reasons for this were commendable , and our group supported them .
Indeed , how could the Member States be expected to accept an increase in the Community budget , when they are reducing expenditure in their national budgets in a bid to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria ?
That fact being established , Mr Brinkhorst 's original strategy was severely hampered , inevitably leading the Committee on Budgets to propose cuts .
While expressing my group 's overall satisfaction , I should like to make a number of basic comments on the decisions taken with regard to this budget and reaffirm a number of principles which we believe to be elementary common sense , at the risk of giving the impression that we are repeating ourselves .
Firstly , on the subject of agricultural expenditure , I should like to hammer home once again the need to distinguish between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
Directing my remarks - beyond Mr Brinkhorst - to Mrs Guigou and Mr Brok , who are representing Parliament in the IGC negotiations , I wish to point out that the common agricultural policy is not a budgetary instrument .
It is an economic tool for regulating the markets which , for obvious reasons , is subject to estimated budget entries .
How could we have dealt with the mad cow crisis , for example , without the flexibility of this mechanism or without the compulsory entry of appropriations ?
Appropriations under Category 1 must retain their compulsory nature .
I would then comment briefly on the revision of the financial perspective .
Clearly , the Committee on Budgets , on which the Interinstitutional Agreement confers very specific responsibilities regarding budgetary matters , wishes to exercise those responsibilities in a precise framework and well in advance .
It is natural , in my view , that the conciliation process should apply fully in this context , but this is also the reason why our group does not agree to Parliament making use of Article 203 of the Treaty , since we believe that the Interinstitutional Agreement is an important step forward in the sharing of our responsibilities .
With regard to the absence of legal bases , I believe that our general rapporteur is right .
It is extremely important to make swift legislative provision for the unrestricted use of appropriations entered in the budget .
I should now like to say a few words about the figures .
Clearly , staying within the zero growth budget , there was not a great deal to allocate .
Our group , especially its Irish membership , is shocked at the fact that ECU 100 million of the appropriations earmarked for support for the peace process in Northern Ireland have been put in reserve .
More than the budgetary realities , it is fear that Parliament 's vote may be wrongly interpreted by the general public which leads the UPE Group to reject the entry of this ECU 100 million in the reserve .
We sincerely hope that a satisfactory solution will be found at second reading .
We also have some reservations concerning the fate meted out to ' Euronews ' .
While it is true that this European television channel is having problems in getting off the ground and achieving financial stability , we must be careful not to jeopardize it further by creating financial restrictions which are too tight .
As regards the research programmes , placing ECU 100 m in the reserve opens up possibilities at second reading , and our group supports this proposal .
Lastly , I come to our group 's favourite topic last year : the MEDA programme .
Let us stop focusing on Turkey and behaving as if Anatolia and south-east Turkey were the whole of the Mediterranean .
Let us not forget that , of all the countries eligible under the MEDA programme , Turkey is the richest , and consequently the least affected economically by restrictive measures .
That is why , once again , we cannot accept the possible entry in the reserve of appropriations earmarked for the MEDA programme .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot imagine that there are many fans of pop music among the members of the Council .
Unless I am mistaken , however - and would that I were - a David Bowie hit seems to have mysteriously become their theme tune .
The song is called ' We will be heroes , but just for one day . '
Yes indeed , those were heroes who met in Essen , Cannes and Madrid to trumpet the news that , of course , all Europe 's efforts would be focused on tackling unemployment .
And to this end , the call has been repeated for the trans-European networks to become , in themselves , the engine of economic recovery .
The news was trumpeted of an additional ECU 100 million for the Irish peace process - and the Council 's unctuous words made the headlines .
However - and it is a bitter reflection on the credibility of European promises - headlines were just about all those unctuous words were good for : here and gone in a day .
And then it was back to grey reality , back to the same depressing old refrain : how can we make savings ?
Given the present state of national budgets and the need to cut public debt in the run-up to monetary union , no one can avoid the pressure for financial rigour .
But does the Council 's proposal really represent financial rigour ?
There are cuts of ECU 1 billion on agricultural spending , but in view of the substantial excesses of last year , that is hardly a convincing figure , indeed I regard it as a dishonest figure .
The fact is that what we save today will be swallowed up by the BSE crisis tomorrow , and resolving that crisis will continue to be a drain on our resources for years to come .
As for the ECU 1 billion cut in spending from the Structural Funds , that is not a cut at all - if you will forgive me for saying so - but merely a book-keeping trick , because everyone knows that our commitments still remain .
The Council should instead have taken a serious look at the problem of where our Structural Fund expenditure is going .
But no , that would have required too much foresight !
After all , the net contributors are already looking forward to getting back the money that will go unspent in 1998 and 1999 .
The idea seems to be that the best way to make policy is not to make it .
But that then begs the question : where does solidarity come in ?
So much for the summits .
Their other pronouncements are all so much hot air - and let the House watch what becomes of them !
In fact , we did more than watch - we lent a hand .
And yes , savings were made , but again I have to ask myself : for what purpose ?
For the peace process in Ireland ?
Wonderful ! ECU 100 m , carefully scraped together from other policy areas , for the Council 's rubber cheque .
For the trans-European networks ?
Forgive me , but does anyone in the House still believe that ECU 352 m - plus another ECU 100 m - is intended as a signal for job-creation , particularly if there is no longer any guarantee of co-financing in the Member States ?
It is time that we stopped harping on about the trans-European networks .
We also made savings for research .
Yes , but the question is : what is the point , so long as research priorities such as renewable energy cannot be implemented because you - the representatives of the Council - refuse to provide the necessary legal base ?
However , that does not worry the heroes who go to Rio and trumpet the importance of protecting the environment - ' just for one day ' - while back in Europe , out of sight is out of mind , as far as the problems of CO2 are concerned .
We cannot honestly claim that this represents investment in the future .
And who will bear the burden of these savings ?
Who else but those least able to do so , in particular the developing countries .
There is nothing in this budget that will strike a chord with the people of Europe - and certainly not the sound of the future !
This is not a recipe for shaping Europe , but merely for administering it .
The minor highlights of the budget are simply exceptions that prove the rule .
At last , ECU 3 m has been allocated to the tribunal on the former Yugoslavia , a body deserving more than symbolic support .
Unfortunately , our initiative to protect the budget against steeply rising pension costs did not entirely get off the ground .
The view that future pension provision for Community officials cannot continue to be handed on to each successive generation as a gaping hole in the budget gained some acceptance , but unfortunately Members could not bring themselves to put their own house in order .
Our credibility will be further damaged by our failure to set an example on environmental policy if there is no movement on environmental audits .
It is all very well to talk about the ' greening ' of the European Union , but you know what they say about people who live in glass houses .
Making savings requires courage and vision , a willingness to abandon cherished privileges , to axe projects that are going nowhere , and to shape policies for the future .
We can have no assurance on that score from the ' heroes for just one day ' , but perhaps there is a message for us in the Tina Turner song - ' We don 't need another hero ' !
It may be that all we need is a little more courage !
Mrs Müller , we shall see what music accompanies the Council 's reply !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of my group , I should like to begin by paying tribute and offering sincere thanks to the general rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst , and to the rapporteur for the other institutions , Mr Fabra Vallés , for having carried out what is undoubtedly one of the most arduous tasks of the parliamentary year .

I thank them for having brought to a conclusion , at least in this first stage , a budget which had a difficult birth and even worse growing pains , thanks to a Council which some have put to music , whereas I would resort to poetry and say that it is very reminiscent of Rimbaud 's ' Bateau ivre ' , since it is , to my mind , incapable of charting a steady course . Despite quite rightly calling for budgetary rigour within the Member States , the Council thinks it can apply this in a devious way to the Union 's budget , which is the only instrument for consolidating and explaining to our citizens the advantages of economic , monetary , and perhaps soon political union in Europe .
Over a ten-day period , we have seen - and this should come as no surprise - the triumph of anti-Maastricht parties in two national elections .
Even worse will happen if this Council continues short-sightedly trying to scrimp and save , when this budget should in fact have been the impetus for growth in our European Union .
It has therefore been difficult for this House to react to an allegedly rigorous budget which is the result of deviousness , given that rigour is applied to agricultural policy , but then there is no hesitation in doubling expenditure in one particular sector - beef - to the detriment of other policies which , not by chance , have for the first time caused certain countries to vote so spectacularly against Europe .
The Structural Funds are being subjected to ' accounting discipline ' , undermining or at least appearing to undermine that idea of economic cohesion , that desire to travel together along the road to union , which lies behind the Structural Funds .
And then in a timid , niggardly way , a few tens of millions are trimmed from major sectors that are crucial to the workings of our internal structure , from development aid and from humanitarian aid .
I hope that this trend will be corrected on Thursday , allowing us to hope that in next year 's amending budget it will be possible to reinstate some of the appropriations left out of our humanitarian aid budget .
The image being given to the citizens here is that of a Europe in decline , one step behind where it ought to be .
It was finally decided not to carry out the major structural investments provided for in the famous Delors plan , of which we still have a vague memory . Alas , every day that dawns proves how right that thinking was , and how wrong is the present attitude of our political leaders , not only in the Council but , I believe , elsewhere too .
We regret that enthusiastic backing has not been given to the proposal of other , more influential groups which , like ourselves , were calling for the Council to be challenged , and for us to go further on the basis of the Treaty itself , whereas we fear that the rather more modest strategy adopted on the basis of Article 203 might ultimately prove unsuccessful .
We are of course pleased that some budget lines - I am thinking in particular of those designed to reinstate certain appropriations , for example the lines on the long-suffering people of Tibet - have been approved , and we hope that the Commission will abide by them this year .
In short , we shall vote in favour of the Brinkhorst report , as I said , despite our doubts as to how effective a weapon this will be against the Council .
Mr President , under the good influence of certain Member States , the Council 's draft budget forms part of a rigorous approach to public finances that should be highlighted .
We welcome this difference in comparison with the recent past .
The preliminary draft budget for 1996 provided for an increase of more than 8 % in commitment and payment appropriations .
Similarly , this year 's PDB provides for an increase of 4 % in commitment appropriations and 3.1 % in payment appropriations .
This rise is once again excessive , and the Commission 's efforts inadequate , considering what is currently being done in many Member States .
The Council 's draft budget , on the other hand , provides for a 0.3 % reduction in comparison with the budget for 1996 - a reduction , that is , of ECU 900 million divided evenly between agricultural and structural expenditure .
The Council has thus taken on board something to which we have frequently drawn attention : the existence of nonutilized payment appropriations - which , for the years 1994 and 1995 , were worth ECU 9 billion .
Unfortunately , Parliament 's Committee on Budgets is not falling in with this trend .
As usual , it thinks in terms of Parliament 's prerogatives , of power relationships and politicking .
There is no hesitation in keeping non-priority budget lines without a legal base .
There is no hesitation in talking about ' reserves which are contrary to the principles of budgetary orthodoxy ' .
And there is no hesitation in envisaging the ceilings laid down in the financial perspective being exceeded : we do so for this year , and of course for those which follow .
Acting in this way , we are not heading in the direction of the much-trumpeted economic and money union , for which substantial appropriations are being made available , and we are not improving Europe 's image among the citizens of the various nations which make up the European Union .
So a good opportunity has been lost , and our group will be unable to support this budget if the Committee on Budget 's amendments are retained .
We are in favour of savings : savings that will change the budgetary mentality which has prevailed in this House for a number of years .
Mr President , I followed the debate in the Committee on Budgets with interest , but the French and Flemish non-attached Members will be unable to vote in favour of this draft budget , because they fundamentally disagree with it .
They do so , firstly , for the reasons that have just been set out in an excellent manner by Mr Fabre-Aubrespy .
They do so , secondly , because this budget makes inadequate provision for the major sectors in which action on a European scale would be effective : the aerospace and aeronautical industries , and indeed the major infrastructure projects .
Adding ECU 100 million to the reserve for the trans-European networks does not make much sense when we are talking about an entire continent .
And they do so , thirdly and above all , because the essential purpose of this budget is to buy support for the federalist project with the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , by creating indebted clienteles at local and national level .
It may well be agreeable to provide funding for yachting harbours and guest-houses tucked away in the countryside , but this is not action on a European scale .
There are not only local and national clienteles .
There are also countless organizational clienteles : consumer , antiracist , feminist , federalist and environmentalist organizations , and so on .
In this area , everything is done with a total lack of transparency .
The rapporteur , Mr Brinkhorst , has tried hard to bring some degree of order , openness and transparency to these subsidies , but he was not supported by the committee 's left-wing majority , which wants obscurity to continue to reign supreme in this area .
There are also trade union clienteles , and this is a particularly interesting and significant point .
Through a dozen or so budget lines - and the amounts increase considerably from year to year - the major trade unions will receive more than ECU 50 million .
The explanation is simple .
While the preparations for the single currency and generalized freedom of trade are putting tens of thousands of European workers out of work every day , the European message must be put across . And what better way to do this than by buying the complicity of the major trade unions ?
That is the reason for these budget lines .
The university clienteles have not been forgotten : the ' Jean Monnet ' programme is designed to create support within the universities .
I shall add a final point .
This is a propaganda budget . Indeed , every year more than ECU 100 million is devoted to propaganda , including the manipulation of public opinion .
Commissioner Oreja has explained that EU money is paying for videos promoting the Union to be broadcast on peak-time television .
All this is done in a clandestine way , since it is not made clear that these are promotional videos .
We cannot support a budget which appears to be designed to manipulate public opinion .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , the process of drawing up the budget for 1997 has seen a trend which threatens to shake the foundations of budgetary harmony .
Both Article 203 of the Treaty and the Interinstitutional Agreement of 1993 provide for substantive negotiations between the two arms of the budgetary authority - Parliament and the Council .
However , it has been notable in 1996 that substantive negotiations of this kind have not taken place , because the Council has refused to enter into them .
Seven official and unofficial trialogues with the Italian and then the Irish presidencies produced the same result - nothing .
The presidencies were unable in each case to obtain the approval of the Council for the oral and written promises that they made .
Now , with the further refusal of the Ecofin Council to revise the financial perspective for 1998 and 1999 , and with the fact that there is still no agreement on legal bases or on fisheries policy , one has to conclude that the majority of Council members are failing to do their duty as laid down in the Treaty and refusing to engage in substantive negotiations .
It is up to Parliament to determine the implications as regards the budgetary procedure .
By contrast , the European Parliament has kept all the promises that it made in Mr Brinkhorst 's guidelines .
When decisions have been taken , such as those last Thursday in the Committee on Budgets , Parliament has left substantial margins in Categories 3 , 4 and 5 .
In this way , it has created the conditions for implementing the key priorities which have been promised repeatedly , not by us , but by every summit since Essen in 1994 .
The figures that we decided on were below the level of the Commission 's preliminary draft , for the first time since 1979 .
However , they were subject to conditions which the Council has failed to observe - notably the revision of the financial perspective .
We were not responsible for elevating the trans-European networks to the status of a jobcreation strategy : it was the Council which did that , under the German presidency .
We were not the ones who wished to make ECU 300 million available for the Northern Irish peace process instead of ECU 200 m .
It was the Council meeting in Essen that made out the cheque , although they have since tried to stop it being cashed .
The plan now is to take the money away from some poor regions to give it to other poor regions .
And now that Parliament has pointed this out , there is an outcry in the Council .
Where were you , Mr President-in-Office , a fortnight ago yesterday when the Ecofin Council refused to revise the financial perspective , with the result that the decision was taken not to make the additional ECU 100 m available for the Northern Irish peace process ?
That would have been the time to point the finger at those - such as the British Government - who are now writing clever letters asking us to please find the ECU 100 m after all .
We jointly agreed a revision of the fourth Framework Programme for research and development .
But now the Council seems to be blithely dismissive of its own previous assurances .
However , the question of whether the EU sends out signals in favour of job-creation cannot be a matter of indifference to this House .
That is why we shall do our utmost to see that financing is also found for the three priorities of the TENs , research , and the Northern Irish peace process - even , if need be , against the wishes of the Council .
And we shall not allow red tape to prevent us from shifting available resources from the margins of certain categories into other categories , in order to fund these priorities .
How would any Member of this House go about explaining to the voters that although there is cash available in various categories , it cannot be used ?
The purpose of the Interinstitutional Agreement is not to prevent policymaking , but to facilitate the budgetary process , and we shall be guided by it .
We would therefore urge you , for the last time , to embark upon the essential process of negotiation between the first and second readings .
Mr President , the distinctive feature of the 1997 budget is the Council 's proposal to cut the Commission 's preliminary draft budget by ECU 1 billion in the agriculture sector and ECU 1 bn in the area of regional policy .
Our group supports that approach .
We are in favour of an austerity budget , and we wish to see spending pegged .
However , we disagree with the Council 's proposals for cuts that will affect the internal market .
But we refuse to renounce the Interinstitutional Agreement , because we have committed ourselves to an austerity budget , and in that respect our position differs from that of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
At the same time , however , I would call on that group and the Green Group - whose spokeswoman , Mrs Müller , talked of a book-keeping trick in relation to cuts in the Regional Fund - to approve the Council 's proposal , because the fact is that the commitments will be translated into payments as soon as the money is required .
In principal , therefore , the other side of the House could also support the Council proposal , and we should be doing our duty by agreeing to an austerity budget .
That is why our group continues to call for savings in Categories 1 and 2 .
We would also urge that the peace process in Northern Ireland should be supported , and we wish to see support for a European research and development policy .
I believe , too , that there is a good case for seeking support for small and medium-sized businesses , because surely , if they receive support , it is in such businesses - rather than the trans-European networks - that jobs will be created .
In that respect , I agree with the two previous speakers .
I have one further point to make : I am totally against the proposals on the MEDA programme and Turkey which were discussed yesterday in the Committee on Budgets , and would involve moving funds to the reserve if human rights abuses take place in Turkey .
If Parliament wished to be consistent , we would have to do the same thing in the PHARE and TACIS programmes .
I would therefore advise the House once again to remain consistent and to pursue a policy that is credible .
If we seek to make expert reports a precondition , then we shall have to do likewise in the other programmes too .
Mr President , I will be confining my contribution to one subject of vital importance to the island of Ireland , namely the Peace and Reconciliation Fund .
It is a fact that two weeks ago the Committee on Budgets voted to cut the Peace and Reconciliation allocation by £ 78m .
This was a profoundly misguided move .
It showed an erosion in the practical commitment of this Parliament to the peace process and , in the words of Commissioner Wulf-Mathies , it revealed a lack of solidarity .
These sentiments were also echoed by the Taoiseach and Tánaiste of my country .
Since then I have worked with my colleagues to ensure that this vital funding is safeguarded and thanks to our efforts progress has been made and the present compromise proposal represents a step forward .
I wish to put paid to one myth which has been peddled in this House about the peace process funding .
The original justification for the cut was that the uptake was slow .
That is the only justification given .
Monies were being transferred to RECHAR and RETEX programmes and there was no question of finding the money elsewhere .
There are enough projects on stream to ensure that all the funding can be drawn down .
There is ongoing tension between the institutions of the European Union , the Committee on Budgets and the Council , but let us say hands off the Peace and Reconciliation Fund !
Do not meddle in this , even if there are problems between Parliament and the Committee on Budgets and the Council of Ministers .
As I galvanized opposition to the original cut I was accused of mischief-making .
This was a petty response to an issue of profound importance .
I was heartened by the widespread support for my stand and I should like to thank the Irish Government , including the Taoiseach and the Tánaiste , Commissioner Wulf-Mathies , the Irish and British industry bodies , my party leader and the parties of Dáil Eireann and of course the British Government which has also supported this .
To those who snipe from the sidelines , I would ask are all the latter mischief-making ?
Of course they are not .
I should also like to take this opportunity to thank the President-in-Office , Hugh Coveney , for his support and the degree of consultation he has engaged in .
I have no intention of responding to the undemocratic attack on me by the leader of the Socialist Group , the English MEP Pauline Green , or to Mr Samland .
I welcome the change in attitude and I will only be happy when this is back on its own budget line .
I deal with facts , not with personalities .
Mr President , this first reading on the budget is a defining moment but , as we know , it is not yet the definitive moment in identifying and setting our priorities for 1997 .
My personal priority today , as with the last speaker , is on the issue of financing the peace and reconciliation process in Northern Ireland .
As a point of departure , I recall that it was the European Parliament , first of all the European institutions , that insisted that the Union should show its solidarity with and support for the peace process .
We agreed to allocate ECU 200m to this task and subsequently the Council raised the ceiling to ECU 300m but refused to revise the Financial Perspective to provide the necessary finance for the additional ECU 100m .

The budget gap is the responsibility of the Council of Ministers and the Council has steadfastly refused to remedy the deficiency .
The Council has not honoured the logic of its own declarations .
To its credit , Parliament is now proposing to accord yet again the highest priority to Northern Ireland from within its own reserves and margin for manoeuvre to make good the deficiency of ECU 100m left by the Council .
Lest there be any misunderstanding or misrepresentation , such as today 's ill-informed letter from the UK permanent representation , let the clear message go from here today that , first and last , it is the European Parliament which has acted and continues to act as the primary guarantor of funding for the peace process in Northern Ireland .
On Thursday we will vote on a package of priorities for Parliament 's reserve in which Northern Ireland will be accorded the priority of being the first among equals .
This reserve accumulates resources across a number of budget categories .
To guarantee the allocation for the peace process in Northern Ireland , the Council must now facilitate this accumulation of reserves between the first and second readings .
For the Council not to do this would add the injury of indifference to the insult of refusing from the outset to provide adequate finance .
Our vote will allow this House to place the deeply sensitive issue of the peace process in Northern Ireland above our day-to-day political concerns .
I would like to appeal to all groups in this House to lend their support to the package of amendments now proposed and let us from Thursday onward ensure that we transcend partisanship , if some perceive it to have existed .
On the issue of uptake Mr Gallagher is perfectly correct : the uptake is not a reason for trying to slow things down .
But that was not necessarily the primary intention in Parliament of those who observed the fact that in a divided community cross-community grass-root development takes time and that is why we have seen a slow uptake .
But there is a message for Northern Ireland as well : accelerate the uptake and help those of us fighting for your cause in this House to be justified by next December in asking the Minister - I know that his and his government 's good will is there - to back a realistic and fair package for Northern Ireland , which we will vote on Thursday .
Mr President , the financial Europe does exist but the Europe which we are all much more concerned with , the socially cohesive and economically homogenous Europe , is still a dream .
The differences between its territories have become greater and inequalities have become more profound , and these proposals for budgetary cuts , inter alia to the Structural Funds , do not exactly help to reduce those differences .
Undoubtedly , that social Europe is the most difficult aspect to achieve because it means that political decisions have to be taken which are not inspired by the well-worn principle ' every man for himself ' , which the situation of State and Community budgetary austerity seems to have converted into a universal axiom .
Given the Council 's draft budget we can only think that , if there are plans to reduce these Structural Funds at the very moment when the regions most need extra help in the process of applying the convergence criteria , this is due to the fact that it is tacitly renouncing the policy of economic and social cohesion and turning it merely into an instrument of the States ' whim , and my Group is against such a blinkered policy .
Mr President , the Committee on Budgets initially appeared to wish to set a budget at first reading which would have considerably exceeded the financial perspective and made confrontation with the Council inevitable .
Since then , a compromise has been reached which is much more moderate , but the ECU 300 million entered as a general reserve means that the margin available still exceeds that provided for in the financial perspective .
We feel that this is both undesirable and unnecessary .
Extra scope could have been created by reorganizing and reducing funding in Category 3 , where there are many programmes for which the Member States are mainly responsible .
The budget headings here are seen as important for promoting employment , and this is a priority for us too , but it is widely acknowledged that the Union can actually do very little here .

The ECU 100 m earmarked for Northern Ireland in the ECU 300 m reserve should be released immediately , and the ECU 100 m set aside for the TENs reduced if necessary .
The TENs are undoubtedly one of our top priorities , but the amount already included in the budget and the loans from the EIB and the EIF should mean that the projects can go ahead without any financial problems in 1997 .
In our opinion , therefore , there is no need to have a general reserve of ECU 300 m , which is only likely to lead to institutional problems at second reading .
Finally , on the subject of agriculture , the procedure followed needs to be revised to give the Committee on Agriculture a greater say in determining agricultural expenditure .
The amount currently allocated can only be provisional , and there is still a great deal of uncertainty , particularly as regards the beef package .
Whatever solution is found to this problem , it must not be at the farmers ' expense .
Mr President , before anything else , I should like to make three preliminary remarks :
First of all , as draftsman for the revision of financial perspectives I am worried and irritated by the demagogically motivated polemic about the Northern Ireland programme .
I am personally very much involved and completely behind the combat led by John Hume and I can tell you that , many years ago , more than ten years ago , Mr Hume invited me to the first meeting and I have returned many times to Northern Ireland , trying to make my very modest contribution to finding a peaceful solution to the conflict there .
But what is important here is the institutional position and , as draftsman , I am fully behind the support which the European Parliament has always given to the peace programme and complained when the Council unilaterally decided to increase it from 200 million ECU to 300 and yet it was the Council itself which refused to meet the extra 100 million ECU funds . ( In any case , it was never said that this was for the year 1997 but instead for the whole period of 1997 to 1999 . )
The Council has known now for more than a year about this timetabling and is now refusing to revise the financial perspectives - and this was pointed out at the first meeting with the Irish presidency last July .
Unless there has been a mistake or an omission , I was present in person at the same time at that very meeting where the Council was represented .
Secondly , the amendments should not alter or block the MEDA Programme .
Thirdly , for good or ill , I speak on behalf of the minority in the Socialist Group which opposed the denunciation of the inter-institutional agreement .
Now I should like to come to the crux of the matter : the Council said that it approved the austerity and rigour project .
These are very fine words and they have a good ring to them .
But I should like to explain to you what this austerity and rigour consists of : first of all , a 1 billion ECU cut to the EAGGF-Guarantee Fund ( with the extremely rigorous exception of beef and veal COMs and ' mad cows ' ) .
This is compulsory expenditure and therefore as flexible as chewing gum .
This figure is plucked out of the air but the exceptions are not .
In the Structural Funds there are another 1 billion ECU worth of cuts in payments - except for Objective 1 and Objective 6 areas .
Why ?
In order to obtain the vote of the poorer countries and the new Scandinavian partners : that is rigour for you . ' Exemplary rigour ' , ladies and gentlemen .
And so , we have made a few blind cuts to the internal policies - Category 3 - and the exterior policies - Category 4 , to save a miserly 500 million ECU ( in the full knowledge that the European Parliament would restore the preliminary draft credits , at least ) .
To summarise , what has happened is a 1 billion ECU cut to the Structural Fund , representing 0 , 01 % of Community GDP .
No-one who wishes to enter monetary union will be excluded because of that or for the indebtedness which might call for its pre-funding .
The fact that some governments do not wish to finance the fight against unemployment or reconversion activity cannot lead to an a priori reduction in these funds .
If nothing is actually done in the autumn , there are measures - such as a corrective budget - which means that they can be paid in good time and that would avoid the European Parliament the shame of approving a budget whose only message would be undermining the fight against unemployment .
Mr President , as regards tourism , over 40 Members of the European Parliament have tabled two amendments in which we ask that the same number of similar amendments by the Committee on Transport , which the Committee on Budgets strangely rejected , should again be included in the budget .
Concerning those amendments , namely at position B5-325 on funding for the HOSPITALITY Programme and at position B7-830 , the Committee on Budgets not only deleted the sums in question but also went as far as deleting those two positions entirely .
In other words , it eliminated tourism entirely from the budget and has countermanded Parliament 's firm view that European tourism must be subject to Community regulation and support .
I remind you that in Parliament 's resolution concerning the IGC , we explicitly called for the inclusion of an order for tourism .
Finally , if the Transport Committee 's amendments tabled again by the 40 Members are not accepted next Thursday , this will create confusion , a real irregularity , since if the report on the HOSPITALITY Programme is approved by Parliament next Friday , there will be no money with which to fund it .
Let me say a few words about the trans-European networks .
It is just as well that at yesterday 's meeting the Committee on Budgets did not overthrow the interinstitutional agreement on financial perspectives so far as the trans-European networks are concerned .
The Council 's commitment on trans-European networks via the interinstitutional agreement is politically very important and must not be undermined and overthrown by the European Parliament itself by subtracting sums to cover gaps in the budget or to build up reserves .
Something that Parliament established with a great deal of effort for the sake of Europe 's peoples during the conciliation procedure , ought not to be discarded in order to cover incidental funding difficulties under other budgetary headings .
Mr President , in a sense , this is indeed a budget typified by rigour , since it is a ' zero growth ' budget which reduces by over ECU 2.5 billion the appropriations for agriculture , the Structural Funds , internal policy and external actions .
Leafing through the document 's hundreds of pages , however , one gains the distinct impression that the rigour applies to certain sectors , the most productive ones as it happens , and comes to an abrupt halt at other sectors , where it would have made more sense to act .
Here are a few examples : first , staffing policy .
The personnel of the Community institutions has increased by over 50 % in the past ten years and is still growing , even though their efficiency seems to be declining alarmingly .
Yet this budget does not even touch on the need to halt the steady inflation in staff and the associated costs , except in an amendment from our group .
Next , the Commission 's external offices .
Some members of my group discovered something recently which few people know , namely that the Commission has over 230 offices in non-Community countries - more even than the number of nations in the world .
The costs are exorbitant - around ECU 35 million in 1997 just for upkeep - whereas their usefulness is open to question in many cases , and certainly non-existent in some of the remotest areas of the globe .
A truly rigorous budget should not overlook this absurd and unproductive expenditure .
Finally , buildings policy .
Here , Parliament itself is the cause of the scandal .
In both Brussels and Strasbourg , we are carrying out gigantic building projects , both of them marked by systematic violations of our own rules .
The total cost of the two projects - over ECU 2.5 bn - is forcing Parliament to stint on the resources needed to carry out our normal duties .
I shall end there , Mr President , although the unconvincing aspects of this budget do not stop there and will lead me personally to vote against it .
Mr President , over the years , there has always been disagreement between Parliament and the Council as to what constitutes compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
In December last year , the Court of Justice ruled that Parliament , the Council and the Commission should decide this question among themselves .
With this in mind , the ad hoc procedure for agricultural expenditure was started this year .
In July , the House decided by a large majority that ECU 556 million should be placed in the reserve , which meant that Parliament would also have a say in how the money was allocated .
I can still hear everyone congratulating themselves on this , even though the amount involved was actually only 1.2 % of all expenditure under Category B1 .
The ad hoc procedure is now over , and it has produced a reserve of ECU 62 m , and ECU 1 billion in savings .
Now , I am naturally all in favour of making savings where this is possible , since there is no point in spending money for the sake of it , but ECU 62 m seems a very poor result compared with ECU 556 m .
Parliament now has a say in how 0.15 % of the EAGGF is allocated .
My reaction is that we can do much better than this in future .
Something else that needs to be improved in future is the House 's internal democracy .
The conclusion of the ad hoc procedure meant that the Committee on Budgets was not able to examine any of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
What was the point of all that work ?
I think the House needs to have much better procedures in future , not just in order to improve democracy here , but also so that Parliament 's democratic control over the agriculture budget can be improved as well .
Mr President , this is yet another budget of austerity and essential stagnation .
A budget that goes hand in hand with the drastic cuts imposed in the Member States as they approach the critical decision on accession to the third phase of EMU .
The immediate victims of this policy are the broader social strata of working people , farmers and craftsmen , since Mediterranean agricultural products are mortally affected by the new reduction of budgetary allowances for them and by the more general anti-farming framework of the CAP review .
Action to eliminate social and regional inequalities is restricted by the unacceptable reduction of Structural Fund resources .
Special action to combat unemployment remains wishful thinking and so demonstrates the hypocrisy of the related declarations .
Mr President , I also want to point out that a positive element of all this is the transfer to reserves of the finance earmarked for Turkey in the context of Customs Union .
I cannot , however , say the same about the allocations for the MEDA programme that concern Turkey , which we should find a way of freezing until that country demonstrates practical respect for international law , and for the human and democratic rights it is provocatively and unrestrainedly violating .
Mr President , I wish to address my remarks to paragraphs 45 and 46 of Mr Brinkhorst 's report , as Parliament 's special rapporteur on the satellite agencies .
In 1996 I was given responsibility for carrying out a thorough investigation of satellite agencies as part of the 1997 budget process .
We had several questions we wanted to ask : where they were going , what they are doing and how do we pay for them ?
Two working documents have been produced on this subject .
In 1996 we adopted an interim strategy of putting a global reserve on the satellite agencies to ensure that the Commission came up with a harmonization of regulations with regard to those agencies and also to ensure that the agencies themselves employed budgetary rigour .
I would like to thank the Commission on the work they have done by meeting us half way on the report they have given on part of the harmonization .
Our strategy for 1997 , following the visits , has been rather more different .
We wanted to focus on the specific needs of agencies and this year there will be no global reserves on those specific reserves for agencies on an ad hoc basis but only reserves for agencies for specific reasons .
I would like to draw the attention of the Commission and of Mr Liikanen sitting there to the recommendations that I would like to make .
The first one is on the question of own resources .
All of the agencies have own resources , especially London and Alicante , and it is important that we , as a budgetary authority , develop a single concept of how to quantify them and how to deal with them .
Re-use of own resources qualifies as income for the European Union and only the European Union and the Committee on Budgets and the budget partners can budgetize own resources within its budget .
Through the Haug report on London and Bangemann statements later , I would like a report from the Commission for the 1998 budget on the question of budgetization .
The second question is on the presentation of the budgets for the agencies .
We have to move now towards management by objectives where we can get the agencies to operate on project lines , bringing together costs in terms of staffing , equipment and resources .
This would help clarify matters and enable us to look at areas of overlap .
Thirdly , on the question of buildings , with regard to CEDEFOP we are recommending that reserve be placed on the new building in Thessalonika because there has been no start yet .
We are therefore recommending placing ECU 1.7 million in reserve .
Fourthly , on the question of pricing policy I am recommending that we have a review of the London agency because the current pricing policy is inadequate to meet its needs .
Fifthly , on the question of Bilbao I am placing one million in reserve with the three million budget on a recommendation that we get a report and a business plan from those agencies .
We still want individual discharge procedures separately and we look forward to the Commission coming forward with that .
Finally , I would like to thank the Commission and the budget authority for their support on my work and , with that , I hope that the agencies get better support , both from the nation states and in Parliament itself .
Mr President , for the first time , the Committee on Agriculture and the Committee on Budgets have worked together with the Commission to produce a more accurate evaluation of compulsory expenditure .
I should like to thank the rapporteur , who has worked so hard to make this possible .
For the first time , the Council has decided on a linear reduction in much of the compulsory agricultural expenditure , with the exception of beef , since the Member States would prefer to have a supplementary agriculture budget later , rather than paying high agricultural contributions in advance in 1997 , some of which they can subsequently recover .
The Council has specifically guaranteed funding for compulsory agricultural expenditure by openly mentioning the possibility of a supplementary budget .
It has , for the first time , accepted an albeit modest reserve for agricultural expenditure , funded by possible savings from certain budget headings .
The House will have to deal with this new situation very carefully in terms of procedure .
For the first time , the Council and the Committee on Budgets have decided that the ad hoc procedure on compulsory agricultural expenditure could be concluded before Parliament had voted on the draft budget at first reading .
This means that , likewise for the first time , Parliament will not be voting on any amendments on the agricultural items in Category 1 .
While the developments I mentioned earlier are to be welcomed , this last point has meant that the agriculture budget has not been handled properly this year .
Most of the members of the Committee on Agriculture feel that their work has been undervalued , and this is threatening to undermine cooperation between the Agriculture Committee and the Budgets Committee once again .
To avoid this in the next budget negotiations , we need to deal with the entire agriculture budget in detail in June , before the ad hoc procedure is concluded .
Moving on finally to the treatment given to the compulsory and some of the non-compulsory expenditure in the beef sector , this has been specifically excluded from the linear reduction , but is still at an unrealistically high level .
The ad hoc procedure will have to be restarted once the Council decides to amend the amounts which have been set , and there will then have to be a supplementary budget , rather than clawing the money back from farmers ' incomes .
The BSE crisis calls for special measures , but the Council is not the only one able to handle this : Parliament too is more than capable of developing appropriate measures to deal with this exceptional situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the point has been made on a number of occasions that the European Union 's budget for 1997 cannot be seen as a separate issue from the Member States ' national budgets .
It is indeed true that 1997 is an important year for the Member States in terms of meeting the convergence criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty , but we must not exaggerate .
I have just done a rough calculation that the volumes we are dealing with in the European budget are the equivalent of only 0.1 to 0.25 % of the gross national product for the national budgets .
There is another link between the Maastricht criteria and the budget debate .
To try to compensate for the negative impact which meeting the convergence criteria would have on jobs , the Commission and the Council decided as early as in 1993 to publish a white paper , the Delors White Paper .
This has been endorsed time and time again at various European summits , but its implementation has always been contested by the Finance Ministers .
Finally , at the beginning of this year , the new Commission President , Mr Santer , announced to Parliament and the public at large , amid great pomp and ceremony , that there was to be a European pact on employment , a kind of slimmed-down version of the White Paper , which would require a review of the financial perspectives .
However , Ecofin 's decision last week has put paid to this pact as well .
The Council must bear most of the responsibility for this , but I have to say that the Commission has reacted very , very weakly to the humiliation heaped on its President by successive decisions from the Council .
The European Parliament has a vital role to play here , not least because of the substantial budgetary powers that we enjoy .
In recent weeks , various pro-active strategies have been put forward , and the rapporteur has made a number of proposals which we have supported .
Unfortunately , thanks to a large section of the House , particularly the PPE Group - more so than the Europe of Nations Group , which is at least committed to an intergovernmental approach - the compromise we now have before us no longer sends out any clear political signal , and I therefore regard this , Parliament 's first reading of the 1997 budget , as totally unrepresentative .
Mr President , we are faced with something of a paradox here .
Parliament listens to the Council , but the Council does not listen to Parliament . In fact , the Council does not even listen to itself .
Parliament listens to the Council .
It is not self-evident that we should do what we are doing and , contrary to what the last speaker has just said , the political message that we are sending out is very clear .
We are assuming our share of the rigour . We are assuming our share of the responsibility .
We are accepting a zero growth budget - apart from the Structural Funds , which are obviously bound to increase .
We are accepting an overall levy which is more than four points lower than that which could be permitted .
We are agreeing to make substantial efforts with regard to the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds .
However , the Council is not listening to Parliament .
As Mr Samland pointed out , on all the issues that we have raised , in which we have a common interest and which we are discussing - whether it is the code of conduct on fisheries , legal bases or revision of the financial perspective - we are confronted with a brick wall .
Worse still , the Council does not even listen to itself .
I picked up a copy of the President-in-Office 's speech this morning .
He said that the Council 's priorities were education and youth - this is on page 3 - the environment , the internal market and the TENs .
And what do we see ? Education and youth - down 12 % on last year ; the environment - down 9.3 % on last year ; and the internal market - down 35 % on last year .
When we read this , we could be forgiven for thinking that it is clearly better for a project not to be among the Council 's priorities , if it wishes to receive funding .
Despite all this , we are starting off very moderately .
We refused to allow the Interinstitutional Agreement to be upset .
We are sending the Council a message of readiness for dialogue , of openness and moderation .
Seize that opportunity !
The Interinstitutional Agreement is at stake .
It can only work if both our institutions are prepared to make compromises .
Parliament has a habit of talking tough at the beginning and then softening up as things go on .
Today , we are starting with moderation .
Do not assume that this will be followed by a cave-in .
Mr President , last week the President of the Commission was dealt a tremendous slap in the face by the Ecofin Council , yet I have the impression that his only reaction has been to turn the other cheek .
When I look at what Parliament is doing , I have the feeling that we have reacted in exactly the same way , despite the fact that the House supported every aspect of the Commission 's pact on employment - even those groups who now seem to be trying to distance themselves from it - and thereby accepted that if Europe really wants to do something about its employment policy , its budget needs to contain some elements of a realistic funding policy . These have now been entirely eliminated by the Ecofin decisions , and are not likely to be reinstated if we continue with our present attitude towards the budget .
Now is our chance to restore the heart of the pact and the prestige of the Commission , which I feel has been seriously damaged . But we have ducked the issue , we have come up with a weak compromise which actually , as the budget Commissioner said , quite suits the Council , in that it no longer needs to carry out its threats for the second reading .
So Parliament has , in my view , done exactly what it always does in the budgetary procedure : it has put back a little of what the Council took out , and I do not think that there is a single voter in Europe who is still taken in by this charade .
On the subject of the Structural Funds , I regret the fact that my group feels that the ECU 1 billion cut by the Council should be reinstated , because I do not approve of money being included in the budget unnecessarily .
I think it was Mr Giansily who reported that ECU 9 bn of the payment appropriations earmarked for the Structural Funds in previous years have been carried over .
The payment appropriations are already ECU 23 bn behind schedule .
What this means is that we have an tremendous problem with the Structural Funds , but the solution does not lie in including unnecessary funding under bogus headings in the budget .
I have one final comment about Turkey .
I regret the fact that we have still not been able to create a MEDA reserve , because I do not think that entering a set of remarks in the budget is enough to counter legislation .
And finally , for the benefit of my Irish colleagues , I think we need peace in Ireland , particularly Northern Ireland , rather than war in the European Parliament , which is what many of the Irish Members appear to be waging at the moment .
Mr President , I should like to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council , my old colleague in the Irish parliament , and thank him for his cooperation so far through the budgetary procedures and for his understanding of the difficulties , particularly his understanding of Parliament 's position .
We may have some disagreements about details but I think that the objectives that we have in this House are shared by the President-in-Office in relation to most matters .
We have to acknowledge that these are difficult times to frame a budget .
There is huge pressure on public finances in most Member States arising from the need to control inflation in preparation for economic and monetary union .
This has unfortunately created a climate in which it is difficult to find the resources necessary to finance all the policies that Parliament would like to see developed , particularly in relation to unemployment and Third World development .
I am very happy to note that in this difficult situation the institutions of the Union have stood by their commitment to continue with the increase in structural funds - the funds devoted to the regional policies of the European Union .
We are on target to meet the commitment on the doubling of the structural funds at the end of the present programme .
I think that the poorer regions of the Community should appreciate what Parliament , in particular , and all the institutions are doing in this respect .
I regret the dispute that has arisen in relation to Northern Ireland .
This has been so much discussed in the budgetary procedure here today that it is hardly necessary for me to refer to it .
All I want to say is that I have recognized the good faith of Parliament from beginning to end .
I remember when this budget line was first proposed within the Committee on Budgets .
I remember that Mr Wynn was rapporteur and that his proposal was unanimously accepted and supported by everybody .
Parliament has never gone back on its commitment to support this fully .
There is a difficulty in finding the money , but I support Parliament in its belief that it should not be taken out of structural funds .
I want to thank everybody for their understanding on this matter and say that I hope we will not have any more controversy about it .
Mr President , I should like to focus on one element of this year 's budget negotiations , namely the Structural Funds .
The European Parliament has one overriding priority , as does our group , and that is to combat unemployment .
In this context , the Structural Funds are an important instrument .
Several amendments were tabled on this issue in the Committee on Budgets , but none of them found majority support .
So what is the situation now ?
The Group of the Party of European Socialists wishes to reinstate ECU 1 billion in the Structural Funds , in order to avoid creating the impression that the European Parliament is turning its back on structural policy .
The alternative is the ECU 1 bn cut which is proposed by the Council .
However , it will make absolutely no difference what the House decides .
Over the next few years , billions of ECU will be repaid to the Member States because they failed to make use of them within the Structural Funds .
The money was not fully taken up , not even in the new German Länder .
It is no longer open to the European Parliament to decide whether any use could still be made of this money .
All we can do is sit back and watch taxes that were paid to Europe being returned to the Member States , which will use them for plugging holes in their budgets , rather than creating jobs .
In my view , the European Parliament must in future demonstrate that it will not tolerate resources being wasted - in the Structural Funds or elsewhere - or Member States failing to fulfil their obligations .
We must consider how to deal with those Member States which fight for every available ECU for their under-developed regions , but then fail to stand by their commitments .
To do that , however , we need a joint strategy - one that will command a majority in the House and which can no longer be left to the Council .
There are ways of achieving such a strategy .
But we need to use them .
Mr President , the most striking thing about this whole budgetary procedure is the Council 's negative attitude towards social policy .
I think it is scandalous that the Council has still not understood that without a social policy , Europe is completely handicapped .
Social policy is something which the people of Europe can identify with and which often affects them directly , and we must not allow it to be systematically undermined as it is now .
The socialists , who are in power in eleven of the 15 Member States at the moment , should make sure that their social awareness is shown by their government representatives , as well as here in the House .
The European Structural Funds in Category 2 are another issue which concerns me .
I and my group can agree with cutting ECU 1 billion from the payment appropriations as a feasible and necessary step as Europe prepares for EMU and has to make savings .
But I cannot accept that the cuts should be made only from Objectives 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 .
These are the principal objectives of the social funds and account for only 15 % of their total volume .
The Council has made the wrong decision and is guilty of discrimination .
The Netherlands also shares in this guilt , since the government 's stupid attitude placed it in a position of isolation in the Council and helped to get the decision adopted .
Mr Zalm , the minister who led the negotiations for the Netherlands , fulfils the traditional definition that ' in matters of commerce the fault of the Dutch is giving too little and asking too much ' .
I fear that the Netherlands will run into even more difficulties in the future because of its government 's attitude , which is like someone who has a pound to spend and expects to be able to buy a Rolls Royce .
Finally , I would point out that the Council 's hostile attitude has also created major problems in Category 3 , which Parliament has succeeded in resolving thanks to its inventive use of the funding available and the fact that it has the final word on this category , rather than the technocrats in Brussels .
Mr President , other speakers have already pointed out what a pathetic figure the Council has cut in the present budgetary procedure .
In contrast to its ringing declarations of support for employment policy , the budgetary procedure has seen quite the opposite approach being adopted .
Let us think of the cuts in social policy , internal policies , energy policy , and the rest .
The list also includes structural policy , although we should not engage in shadow-boxing on that issue .
Ultimately , it will make no difference at all if we include a billion more or less : the real scandal is that ECU 23 billion has so far gone unspent - at a time when there are 18 million people out of work in the Union .
The fact that this discrepancy between appearances and reality occurs behind closed doors should not lead us to think that the people of Europe fail to recognize it .
Perhaps , indeed , the latest election results go to show that only opposition parties can now be successful at the polls .
Despite the attitude of the Council , the Socialist Group has tried to support the employment policy .
We regret that those on the right of the House have been unable to give that policy their full backing .
Mr President , the Community budget for 1997 has been drawn up in the spirit of Maastricht .
However , it is our duty to contribute in every way towards addressing the major social problems faced by Europe 's citizens .
The Council 's cuts to the 1997 budget are large , and serious commitments are being ignored .
I would like to make some comments on the Structural Funds , Turkey , and the internal policies .
For plainly financial reasons the Council has cut the Structural Fund appropriations by a billion ECU .
The sector of structural activity contributes towards modernization , the reduction of inequalities and the creation of jobs .
The European Parliament must restore the amounts specified in the draft budget .
In Category 3 there are many actions that contribute towards job creation , such as the trans-European networks , action on behalf of SMEs , and action for tourism .
The promotion of those actions is a priority .
Finally , we support the freezing of all credits concerning Turkey under the finance regulation and MEDA , on the grounds of that country 's behaviour in the context of human rights and its aggressiveness towards Greece and Cyprus .
Mr President , there is growing dissatisfaction in Europe and in the EU with politics in general and with the EU in particular .
This was seen in the recent vote to the European Parliament .
One explanation for this is that many EU citizens are worried about increased unemployment and a deterioration in the provision of welfare .
I think it is important that we take seriously this concern and these signals which are now coming from the citizens of Europe .
It is important to show that the EU has a human side and that we are prepared to live up to the proud declarations which we have previously made , in particular those made at the summit meeting in Cannes on the TransEuropean Networks and other important initiatives against unemployment .
I consider that one good way of showing this and a first step forward is to accept the budget proposal which the European Parliament is now putting forward .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying that I have listened with interest all day to everything that has been said and I intend to convey it to the members of the Council .
For those who were not there when I made my own address , I just wish to refer to five points in it which , in fact , were raised again and again in many of the contributions .
Firstly , the need for budgetary rigour in 1997 in the context of EMU : I do not need to labour that point , it is well understood here and I want to thank Parliament for its acceptance of that somewhat unpalatable truth which all of us have to confront .
I also mentioned the extreme difficulty in the present budgetary climate in Europe of revising the Financial Perspectives for 1998 and 1999 .
Having explained at some length why that was causing severe difficulties , I have to say that it will not be possible to persuade the members of the Council to revise the Perspective in the present climate .
However , I am much more hopeful that we can make serious progress on at least two of the issues which have been identified widely here .
On the question of legal base , I hope , come the meeting on 19 November , that we will be able to report serious progress and that we will be able to reach a compromise and an understanding with Parliament .
I hope too that we can make similar serious progress on fisheries agreements .
In relation to the subject which has created a great deal of heat in my own country - that is the threat to the peace programme in Northern Ireland - all I want to say about that is that I have never listened to such unanimity of purpose , both in this House and I know too amongst each of the countries which I represent as President , about any issue as there is about this .
So that , irrespective of the difficulties , technical and otherwise - I accept that there are some - that exist between the two arms of the budgetary procedure , it is incumbent on both sides to solve this difficulty , and we will solve it .
On the subject of the structural funds : I just wanted to mention that the reduction of ECU 1 , 000m in appropriations is conditional upon Objective 1 and Objective 6 regions being fully safeguarded .

It is also clear that this cut is most unlikely , in any circumstances , to affect any structural fund commitments in 1997 .
Finally , I wish to say that it simply is not true to state that the Council is not listening or is not negotiating in a meaningful way with Parliament .
However , the climate is particularly difficult for individual Member States in the shadow of EMU constraints and requirements in 1997 .
This has severely limited the ability of the Council - and my ability - to compromise with Parliament .
I would therefore ask for some understanding of that particular difficulty which confronts us all .
From a budgetary perspective , 1997 is almost a unique year , both for the problems which it has presented for individual Member States and , in consequence of that , for the problem that it inevitably confronts this great institution with as well .
Having said that , and despite Mr Samland 's views , I commit myself again to trying my best , with my colleagues in the Council and with your own distinguished representatives , to reach a fair compromise and to work out a budget at the end of this year for next year .
Mr President , I wish to come back on four points .
Firstly , on the Financial Perspective ; very often in the European debate one asks : economic and monetary union or employment ?
The Commission 's reply is economic and monetary union and employment .
That has been the reason for President Santer 's proposal and the underlying logic of the whole proposal .
We have chosen trans-European networks and research because they were Council priorities but also because they were proposed by the former President of the Commission , Jacques Delors , in his White Paper .
We regret that the Council was not able to accept our proposal and for that reason we greatly appreciate the support we have received from Parliament .
In this rigorous budgetary exercise Parliament has found ways to keep these ideas and objectives alive and this is extremely important .
In the same spirit the Commission will do all it can to ensure that this can be implemented .
Secondly , on structural funds , the Council cut the payment credits by ECU 1 billion .
I want to make it totally clear here that there is no change in the underlying regulations .
They remain the same .
The Council cut the estimates of spending .
The Commission must implement the budget according to the regulations so if the payment credits are not sufficient to cover the commitments , we must bring an amending budget to the budget authority .
I cannot comment on the discussions here in Parliament but I assure you that the Commission will guarantee that all the commitments will be covered by payments provided the budgetary authority is prepared to accept , if necessary , a proposal in the form of an amending budget .
Thirdly , I greatly appreciate the President-in-Office of the Council 's words on the legal base issue .
It is extremely important now for the three institutions to show their willingness to resolve this issue .
Anyone who has worked more on the budget and less in legal issues is always surprised that we spend hours , days , weeks and years on discussing legal matters when the amounts of money involved are minimal .
This operates against a clear , coherent budgetary policy .
I really hope that a solution can be found to these difficult institutional problems to make the financial management of this House credible in all fields .
Finally , Mr Wynn took up an issue which has also sometimes surprised me .
He complained that Commission officials come to the Committee on Budgets and to other committees to propose increases in the Commission budget proposals .
Mr Wynn should not listen to them .
There is only one Commission position .
The Commission is the institution which has the confidence of Parliament and it makes a collective proposal which is a political paper to Parliament .
If some officials do not understand that , it is only a sign of their bad judgment and Mr Wynn should not pay any attention to that .
If they defend our proposals they are doing what is expected of them .
I hope that the Commission proposal will be accepted .
If Parliament wants to change it - I hope it does not but it has the right to do so - I would hope that it does so on its own initiative and not on the initiative of some Commission officials .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 10 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 5 p.m. and resumed at 5.30 p.m. )

Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time to the Commission ( B4-0971 / 96 )
Question No 41 by Gianfranco Dell 'Alba ( H-0734 / 96 )
Subject : International Criminal Court and human rights
Given the importance of the work carried out by the ad hoc tribunal on the former Yugoslavia and the progress made by the United Nations preparatory committee responsible for drawing up draft statutes for the International Criminal Court , and following the adoption by Parliament of a resolution on this matter on 19 September 1996 , does the Commission not think that the setting up of an international criminal court will provide an important lever with a view to ensuring respect for and promoting human rights and humanitarian law throughout the world ?
I am particularly grateful to Parliament for raising this question , since it draws attention to an important issue .
As you know , Mr President , the European Commission has supported the setting-up of the ad hoc tribunals on the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda by providing funding for various projects .
We have provided over ECU 2 million for the tribunal on the former Yugoslavia , for example .
Now that these two tribunals are in place , the Commission and the Council feel it is vitally important that a permanent International Criminal Court should be set up to bring criminals to justice at international level .
A court of this kind would have to deal with the following issues : serious violations of humanitarian law , serious and systematic human rights violations and crimes against humanity , irrespective of where they are committed .
Progress in setting up this court depends on the negotiations in the sixth committee of the United Nations General Assembly , which is preparing a draft statute for the court .
The Union Member States have also actively supported these negotiations .
From the ECU 300 000 under budget heading A 3030 , which was introduced by the European Parliament , the Commission has already funded projects by non-governmental organizations to promote the setting-up of the International Court .
Once it is set up , the Commission will certainly be prepared to consider providing financial support for its activities .
I would therefore stress the importance of the ongoing negotiations , including the inter-state negotiations that are to be held on this subject , probably in 1998 .
It will be a long haul , but let us hope that our efforts will be rewarded .
Mr President , I should like to thank Commissioner van den Broek for having come in person to answer my question .
I am grateful to him for his statement , and I can tell him that on Thursday , in all likelihood , the European Parliament will vote at its budget sitting for a specific line , with appropriations of ECU 3 million , for the permanent funding of the two ad hoc tribunals , with a view to the establishment of the Permanent Court . Therefore it seems to me that here too we see eye to eye with the Commission , to which I would address the following supplementary question .
At its last part-session , the House voted unanimously in favour of a resolution calling for a clear commitment not only from the Council but also from the Commission - to the extent that it is competent - to act in accordance with the recommendations of the preparatory committee for the United Nations sixth committee , namely that a date should be set in 1998 for the work of the constituent conference of the Court .
Can the Commissioner assure me that the Commission - to the extent that it is competent - will support this date in the sixth committee ?
The Commission does not , of course , have the power to do this as such , but it can work with the presidency and the Member States to try to speed things up .
As the honourable Member is aware , preparations for the setting-up of the International Court have already been going on for some years , and we hope that the establishment of the two ad hoc tribunals on Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia will provide the impetus that is required .
The main problems here are problems of international law , and the aim is - and this was why I mentioned 1998 - for the countries involved to meet in 1998 to adopt the statute for the Court .
The current United Nations General Assembly is expected to make further recommendations on when to convene this meeting , and we shall then have a better idea of whether the 1998 deadline is likely to be met .
But I promise the honourable Member that if we have the chance to speed up progress in any international forums , we shall certainly do so .
Question No 42 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0802 / 96 ) :
Subject : Single Currency
The changeover to a single currency will have practical implications for the computerized systems used to record financial transactions by the business , commercial and banking sectors .
The inability of many of the computer software programmes now being used by the business , commercial and banking sectors to cope with the transition from 1999 to the year 2000 will cause further difficulties at roughly the same time .
What proposals does the Commission have to minimize these problems , particularly for the small and medium-sized business and commercial sectors ?
The honourable Member 's question draws attention to a very specific problem .
Indeed , the introduction of the single currency will require the modification of a large number of software programmes .
The changes made necessary by the launch of the euro on 1 January 1999 will largely coincide with the efforts under way to tackle the so-called ' year 2000 ' problem , which is well-known to computer specialists and which means that , unless the software is modified , many computers will display the date 1900 in the year 2000 .
As the honourable Member will be aware , this problem will affect the large majority of computers in the European Union .
The Commission is at present working actively with the Member States and representative organizations both to assess the needs and to determine the possible procedures for adaptation .
As regards the assessment of needs , the implications of economic and monetary union for the software used in our businesses vary according to the modifications that are envisaged .
It is probable that the standardized modification of computer systems - what is known as the ' standard software package ' - will , in most cases , be easier to carry out than the individual adaptation of software specifically designed for particular businesses .
We could favour this option , especially by promoting the use of software including multi-currency facilities which make it possible to carry out conversions and transactions simultaneously in the euro and in a national currency unit .
With a view to drawing up a full list of the measures needing to be taken as part of the preparations for the single currency , the Commission is at present actively consulting all the interested groups and bodies on the implications of the introduction of the euro for computerized systems .
As regards the procedures for adaptation , in its present consultations , the Commission is favouring concerted action with the sectors in question and the sharing of information .
Hence it is encouraging the mobilization of computer products and service industries .
Similarly , it is promoting the holding of training seminars for staff responsible for data processing in user enterprises .
The Commission is already recommending to businesses that they should provide for the incorporation of specific measures relating to the euro into their regular software maintenance programmes , and thus carry out the changes made necessary by the introduction of the single currency at the same time as those required by the transition to the year 2000 .
Lastly , within the framework of the information programme on the euro , which the Commission is developing in partnership with the European Parliament and in collaboration with associations representing SMEs , the Commission is currently drawing up practical guidelines designed to meet the specific needs and concerns of the SME sector , especially in the field of data processing .
As the honourable Member will see , the Commission is well aware of the efforts in favour of small and mediumsized businesses and commercial sectors which this transition requires .
I can assure him that , in close coordination with the national administrations and representative organizations , the Commission will endeavour to facilitate the adaptation of the public and private sectors in each Member State .
I merely want to thank the Commissioner for his very comprehensive reply .
I am pleased that every effort has been made to evaluate the needs and the changes .
I do not think it is necessary to ask Commissioner de Silguy to ensure that , if any preferential treatment is needed , he does not forget the small and medium-sized companies .
I wish to compliment him on the attitude that he has taken towards those companies since he became a Commissioner .
Question No 43 by Per Stenmarck ( H-0748 / 96 )
Subject : Airline cartels and alliances
It has become increasingly common in recent years for airlines both inside and outside Europe to form cartels which generally involve cooperation on code-sharing , departures , prices and services .
The Commission has given its blessing to cartels formed between EU airlines and thus given its approval to the formation of cartels in this sector .
It has recently begun examining whether cartels formed between EU and US airlines are compatible with EU legislation .
Does it take the view that cartels of this type encourage competition and benefit consumers ?
If so , how does the formation of cartels benefit purchasers of transport services and consumers ?
I should like to begin by drawing a distinction between alliances and mergers within the European Union - on which the Commission has for a long time had clear rules , as it has shown in a number of recent cases - and transatlantic alliances between American and European airlines .
As far as the situation in the Union is concerned , we have recently had to deal with two cases . The first was the merger between Swissair and Sabena , where the Commission ensured that before the merger could be allowed to go ahead , a number of undertakings had to be given not only by Sabena and the Belgian authorities , but also by Switzerland as a non-member of the European Union .
Negotiations were held with Switzerland to ensure that the necessary slots were made available , and to obtain the Swiss authorities ' agreement that there would be sufficient competition on the routes between Belgium and Switzerland .
Explicit conditions are always applied with operations of this kind , where necessary .
The second case concerned Lufthansa and SAS .
This was a cooperation agreement rather than a merger , but here again the Commission adopted a very transparent approach in imposing a number of obligations , and we also published the agreement in the Official Journal so that competitors could submit their observations .
The Commission then took these into account as far as possible , mainly in order to ensure that there would still be sufficient competition on the routes between Scandinavia and Germany . In other words , if competitors want to fly these routes , then Frankfurt must make profitable slots available and Lufthansa must surrender some of its slots for others to use .
This is how we have dealt with cases in the European Union .
When it comes to alliances between American airlines and Union airlines , things are slightly different , since the Council of Ministers has , curiously enough , not given the Commission the power to investigate such alliances on the basis of specific rules .
This is why we have had to base our examinations on a little-used article , Article 89 .
This has been much in demand , since as you know , various alliances have been suggested recently , such as British Airways-American Airlines , Lufthansa-United , SAS-United , Swissair-Sabena , Austrian and Delta , and agreements between KLM and North-West Airlines and British Airways and USAir .
All of these agreements are now being closely examined , not just because there are so many of them , but also because we can see that the restrictions on competition will not apply on the transatlantic routes alone . After all , if British Airways and American Airlines are going to work together and they handle 70 % of the traffic between Heathrow and New York , then this is something we need to look at very closely in terms of its effects on competition and consumer protection .
Alliances of this sort also have a clear impact on competition on the European Union market , particularly since American airlines can carry out certain activities here which are not open to our airlines on the American market .
There are many reasons why the Commission is taking a rather closer look at these alliances and , if necessary , it will have to impose certain conditions or else even propose other measures .
Finally , I should also like to point out that in some Member States , such as the United Kingdom and Germany , the national competition authorities are also looking at the whole question of these types of alliances .
I hope that they will be consistent in their approach and that they will not reach conflicting conclusions , in other words I hope that the national authorities will be able to work with the Commission to ensure that similar positions are adopted and similar conclusions reached .
May I begin by thanking the Commission for the detailed and , as I see it , very positive answer on the whole .
Currently , there is not the amount of competition within certain transport sectors that would be considered desirable .
In my opinion airlines are such a sector - despite all the deregulation which has taken place .
The lack of " slots ' is one obstacle which prevents competition from functioning as it should .
The continuous building of cartels between various national airlines is a further example .
The losers are often the consumers , in other words , the passengers and purchasers of transport services who are forced to pay higher prices and accept a worse service than would otherwise be necessary .
I see the Commissioner & # x02BC ; s answer to my question as a step in the right direction but I would still like to ask a further question of him and that is : What concrete measures are being considered by the Commission to promote competition in international aviation to the extent which , I consider , could be of benefit to passengers .
The mere fact that we investigated these cases under Article 89 - and Neil Kinnock and I acted in complete understanding - shows that we are concerned about competition but also about the protection of consumers and users .
We need to make this move in spite of the fact that in 1987 the Council of Ministers did not give the Commission the necessary powers because it restricted us to what is happening inside the market of the European Union .
Having said that , on the one hand we must admit that inside the Union and across the ocean and even beyond that , there is a need for cooperation amongst airlines .
It would not be a good idea to go against that principle .
But , at the same time , we must be very careful about the effects on competition , consumers and users - and this is exactly what we are trying to take into account .
Commissioner , there are two parts to my question .
First of all , on the subject of internal mergers , do you not think that mergers which give the airlines concerned a dominant position on the market in a particular country might not be called a cartel or monopoly , since air travel is by definition a transfrontier operation , so that the Netherlands market is not a separate entity , but competes with the Belgian and German markets and so on ?
Secondly , and this is also addressed to Commissioner Kinnock beside you , on the subject of transatlantic cooperation and mergers , is it not the case that the Commission has been instructed to enter into negotiations far too late by the Member States , since the United States can operate on domestic routes or at least on intraEuropean routes in Europe , whereas European airlines cannot operate on domestic routes in the United States , and therefore have no choice but to form an alliance ?
It is indeed true that from now on we must regard the European Union market as a unit , particularly since cabotage is going to have to be introduced very shortly .
You know that we are now very close to total liberalization , even on the national markets , and I know that there is still some opposition to this .
Neil Kinnock has today given the Commission his report on the implementation of the third package , which details some positive and some negative aspects , and I am sure that he will be only too pleased to explain these to you .
As far as alliances and the agreements which some Member States have concluded with the United States are concerned , you know what our position has been from the outset : even when I was responsible for transport , I always said that once we started dealing with our own internal market , it made sense for the Union to become responsible for at least some of the aspects relating to third countries .
Unfortunately , at that time not one single government out of the twelve , including your own , was in favour of this : they were all unanimously against .
And what has happened since then ?
The United States has had carte blanche : it has been able to conclude open-sky agreements with a number of Member States which allowed it to penetrate our market further still , in addition to the fact that it already enjoyed certain advantages which our airlines did not have on the US market .
Who is to blame ?
The national governments , not the Commission , which has been saying for years that we must not allow this to happen , we must try to join forces to ensure that a balance is maintained .
However , Neil Kinnock has been working on this for some time now , and we must hope that the outcome is the only logical one : that now that the Union has a common air transport policy , its effects must also be felt outside the Union .
I should like to ask if the Commission is considering any measures within Europe to further increase cooperation between airlines to encourage the merging of duplicate flights between major cities ?
I represent Heathrow Airport , one of the major airports in Europe .
For example , every day from London to Brussels there is a British Midland flight at 6.55 in the morning .

There is a Sabena flight at 7 a.m. , a British Airways flight at 7.15 a.m. , all going direct to Brussels , all using fuel , all crowding the air .
The same is true all through the day and for many routes to major cities across Europe .
Rarely are all of these flights full .
Even if they were , it would still make sense , I suggest , to have one larger airplane operating .
With proper consumer safeguards I believe it would make environmental sense , it would be safer , there would fewer flights , fewer manoeuvres , less air congestion ; it would free space on runways and at airport gates ; it would make landing easier and obviate the need for dangerous stacking .
Does the Commission have any plans to encourage this valuable sort of cooperation ?
If not , why not ?
On this point we clearly disagree .
It took a long time before there was some competition on some routes , to the advantage of the consumer .
No-one can defend the tariffs as they were years ago .
These were very often , and rightly so , criticized in this House .
Therefore we needed a common policy to ensure that competition in that sector should be real .
It is only real on some routes today .
Commissioner Kinnock is better placed to comment than I am today because he is looking at this very closely .
There is some competition .
For instance , you now have cheaper fares between Brussels and Rome and between London and Brussels .
When I fly to London and back , by the way , the plane is usually full .
That might well not always be the case but we feel that competition as such is a good thing and we would like that to apply to more destinations than at the moment .
Having said this , there is obviously a need in the European Union for further cooperation and eventually mergers .
There are probably too many airlines in the European Union .
Let us leave it to the market to decide to what extent there will be mergers and cooperation , because we are not against that in principle ; on the contrary .
But if it is happening we would make sure that whether by merger , acquisition or cooperation , it happens with full respect for competition and the rights of the consumer .
I should like to thank the Commissioner for his reply and congratulate him on the recovery of his cherry-picking venture from the dark forces which some people thought were at work .
Question No 46 by Florus Wijsenbeek ( H-0673 / 96 )
Subject : Driving bans and frontier procedures in central and eastern Europe
Is the Commission aware that an increasing number of central and eastern European countries , particularly such countries as Hungary and Poland which are important for transit traffic , are introducing restrictions such as a weekend driving ban on road transport ?
How does the Commission propose to maintain transport connections , particularly in the case of road transport to Scandinavia and the CIS ?
The effects of the recent bans by Hungary and Poland have been discussed in the framework of the association committees with the countries concerned .
Hungary and Poland have both undertaken to ensure that the driving ban does not have a discriminatory effect on international traffic .
In particular , we have been assured that clearance at border crossings will not be interrupted during the period of the ban and that vehicles can park after crossing into the country and continue their journey as soon as the ban ceases to apply .
Other measures , including improved information for hauliers and reasonable rates for accompanying combined transport services across the country are also being taken .
We will naturally continue our contacts with the Hungarian and Polish authorities so as to ensure the minimum of disruption to international freight services .
The growing recourse to weekend bans underlines the need to promote alternatives to road freight transport on certain heavily used routes in Central Europe .
It highlights in particular the advantages offered by short-sea shipping in the Baltic as a means of access to Scandinavia and to the CIS .
We will continue to work both inside the Union and with our partner countries in the region to improve the efficiency of services .
I would point out to the Commissioner that the answer he has just given contradicts the answer I received from Commissioner van den Broek to a written question which I addressed to him on 17 September concerning the problems of weekend driving bans in Hungary .
Not only have these bans now spread to Poland , but in his reply Mr van den Broek said that he would contact the Hungarian authorities and that the Commission would try to take measures to combat the adverse effects of the long delays at borders .
I see that Mr Kinnock now merely suggests that we should use road transport less and trains more .
You will be well aware , Commissioner , that the train connections with Central and Eastern Europe are very difficult and that there is therefore no alternative to road transport .
I should like to know exactly what you and Commissioner van den Broek intend to do in practice ?
There are a number of concrete steps being taken and I should say in response to the honourable Member that his question actually specified Hungary and Poland and that the response , as he would expect , was prepared in conjunction with Mr van den Broek , so there is no inconsistency between responses he has previously received and the one that I just gave him .
Our specific and concrete actions to ease the congested and difficult traffic conditions in Eastern and Central Europe include the use of the PHARE funds to improve conditions at border crossings , to improve the training and development of personnel in customs services and , indeed , to encourage hauliers wherever possible to use the facilities offered by various governments to transit their loads across countries - even at weekends - on freight rail .
Unfortunately there has been no readiness to take up that kind of offer .
Now when we and the Central and Eastern European country governments are striving , within the limited resources they have at their disposal , to try to ease the traffic problems for the greater convenience of western hauliers I hope that there will be a more ready response than has proved to be possible in the past .
I sympathize with and well understand the frustrations and indeed the additional costs incurred in this area .
But we are only going to be able to develop a full and successful response if we get the cooperation of all parties both in the Union , outside the Union and of course in the commercial services .
This is a difficult problem for those of us living in Scandinavia - I myself come from Sweden .
We often hear about it from people and companies we have contact with .
It is taking too long for the problem to be resolved .
I hear nothing in the answer about when these actions and contacts with Hungary and Poland will bring about a stop to the driving ban and when the problem will be resolved .
I would like to see an addition to the answer .
How long must we residents in this part of Europe wait for the problem to be resolved ?
It is rather difficult because , as I am sure both the honourable Members who raised the question on this issue understand , when we have Member States that are imposing weekend bans in order to resist the pressures of traffic - entirely understandably - it is rather difficult for us to be pious or self-righteous about the imposition of comparable bans in Eastern and Central European countries whose populations are feeling the same irritation as a result of the congestion on their roads caused by heavy lorries , roads which are much less adequate even than those that we have in the European Union .
The fact of the matter is of course that these problems will not be fully resolved until we get much more effective multimodal use of transport for freight ; until we sustain and improve not only our own networks for the carriage of freight but those in the countries that are our neighbours ; and until there is more effective use , not only of other land modes , but of short sea shipping - about which I know neither of the honourable Members needs convincing .
Question No 47 by Hans Lindqvist ( H-0717 / 96 )
Subject : Rail projects , the Bothnia and Atlantic lines
The trans-European network , TEN , embodies a master plan for railways , roads , ports , airports , etc. on EU territory .
The Atlantic line is included in the TEN as a national project but the Bothnia line is not , as it is not included in the national rail plan .
Is the Commission prepared to review the priority projects and give priority to upgrading the Atlantic line ?
Is it prepared to consider a contribution / funding for the Bothnia line , a project based on regional considerations ?
Will it give priority to environmentally-friendly rail rather than roads , with the car traffic they generate ?
As the honourable Member may know , only the southern section of the Atlantic line is included in the nordic triangle which , as he will know , is one of the fourteen priority projects endorsed at the Essen European Council and then subsequently by this Parliament and by the Council in the decision on Community guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network .
The situation will not change until such time as the guidelines are revised , which is not scheduled until 1999 at the earliest .
I can report to the honourable Member who has raised the question that to date the national authorities concerned have not requested any financial support for this section under the trans-European network budget .
The Bothnia line , as the honourable Member correctly points out in his question , is not currently included in the guideline .
It cannot therefore benefit from funding under the trans-European network budget .
Inclusion of any project of course requires the specific agreement of the relevant Member State under the terms of Article 129 of the Treaty .
Finally , I can assure the honourable Member that the Community 's financial support for the trans-European transport network is largely directed at developing environmentally-friendly transport modes .
To illustrate the point , more than 66 % of the planned 1996 trans-European transport network budget is assigned directly to rail or to multimodal projects and just 15 % to road projects .
It was good to get an answer on both the Atlantic line and the Bothnia line , thank you for that .
I know that one of the projects is included and the other is not .
It is also true that we in Sweden must ourselves decide which project we will concentrate on to be able to participate and receive support via the EU and the TEN project .
All this is true .
It is also positive to hear that such a large part of the TEN project includes environmentally friendly traffic solutions and railways .
More however , could be done .
I , myself , would like to draw a conclusion from the answer that I received from the Commissioner : Is it right that we in Sweden will be able to receive support from the EU if we decide to concentrate on the Bothnia route and if a request is submitted from the Swedish Authorities that this project be included in the TEN project .
Can this be a conclusion of the answer that I received ?
The situation so far as aid from the networks budget is concerned is very clear .
A Member State would have to signify that a project enjoyed a particular status endorsed by that Member State and that it satisfied the requirements of Article 129 of the Treaty .
If it then made its submission on that basis the Commission naturally would give it the fullest possible consideration .
We are in the position of having recently adopted the relevant legislation both in terms of the financial regulation and of the guidelines .
It is generally true , therefore , to say that most Member States would be reluctant to shift their transport priorities in the short term .
Of course in the longer term the guidelines themselves will be subject to reconsideration and revision as is entirely appropriate .
It is very kind of the Commissioner to make promises and say that if everybody agrees there will be support and a certain percentage for environmentally-friendly modes of transport .
But the Commission is well aware that the funds available are insufficient and that the Ministers of Finance refused to add anything .
A percentage of virtually nothing comes to even less .
It is meaningless to make promises of financial support if you do not have the finance .
Is the Commissioner aware that we now urgently need better financing for the whole trans-European network infrastructure project and even more urgently for the environmentally-friendly projects ?
I am grateful to the honourable Member whose interpretation of what I said was less acute and indeed less accurate than it usually is .
I did not promise anything at all other than to fulfil our legal duty to give consideration to the submissions made by Member States .
That I promised to do .
Of course promises and the truth are sometimes the same thing and this was one of those occasions .
I entirely agree with the honourable Member that additional funds could be used very usefully and for the profit of the Union as a whole in the Trans-European Network budget .
I therefore regret , as I have said publicly on other occasions , the decision of the Ecofin not to provide the top-up to those funds called for as long ago as December 1994 by the Essen European Council .
It has to be said , however , that the decision by the Ecofin earlier this month does not constitute a death blow for TENs .
TENs is very much up and going .
We are progressing through the expenditure of a budget of ECU 1.8 billion .
It is being used effectively .
It is naturally being supported by the European Investment Bank with expenditure thus far on investment of approximately ECU 6 billion and of course there are several projects which are achieving satisfactory progress .
I have heard it said in the wake of the Ecofin meeting , or at least in the wake of rather inadequate reporting of the Ecofin meeting , that TENs is dead .
Perhaps I could quote Mark Twain who was wrongly reported to be deceased .
He said : ' Reports of my death have been greatly exaggerated ' . The same can be said for TENs .
Question No 48 by Felipe Camisón Asensio ( H-0722 / 96 )
Subject : Recognition of commercial pilots ' licences
What are the Commission 's proposals to deal with the practice in some Member States of the European Union whereby commercial pilots ' licences gained in other Community countries are not recognized ?
Council Directive 670 / 91 on the mutual acceptance of personnel licences for the exercise of functions in civil aviation regulates the issue which concerns the honourable Member in his question .
To date the Commission has received complaints against three Member States - France , Spain and Belgium - all the complaints alleging misapplication of the directive .
The Commission has opened legal proceedings against those Member States under the provisions of Article 169 of the Treaty .
I must thank the Commissioner for the light he has shed on this matter which concerns pilots in the European Union who have trained in countries which are not the same as the country in which they wish to exercise their profession .
This is very worrying , as you yourself pointed out , especially in the case of Spanish pilots trained in Portugal , who number 300-400 .
It seems quite clear , after listening to what you said , that they must meet the obligations which are laid down on the reciprocal recognition of licences , which means the automatic validity of pilots ' qualifications in all of the Member States which have authorised it .
However , I must say , Commissioner , that we would have liked a much more practical response , especially concerning proposals for Commission activity to restore legality in the cases where pilots ' licences have not been recognised and about whether the regulation in force is sufficient or whether any supplementary regulation is needed on this matter , given that this is a subject of great importance and covers the much wider area of whether we can decide who holds powers in terms of air transport .
I am grateful to the honourable Member for the question because , as he says , this is a matter of considerable and legitimate concern .
If I give a little background on the specific provisions made by the appropriate legislation it might help .
Mutual acceptance of pilot licences is regulated by Council Directive 670 / 91 on the mutual acceptance of personnel licences for the exercise of functions in civil aviation .
Under the provisions of this directive Member States are obliged to accept , without undue delay and without additional tests , any licence issued to a pilot by another Member State together with the privileges and certificates relevant to that status .
The directive also provides that , when a Member State has reasonable doubts - after due examination of the licence presented for acceptance - as to the equivalence of the licence concerned , it may consider that additional tests or requirements are necessary to enable the licence to be accepted .
Even then , such tests or requirements should respect the principles of acquired rights and of proportionality .
I can inform the honourable Member of the current stage of legal proceedings which I referred to earlier .
In the cases of France and Spain , the Commission decided last July to institute proceedings before the Court of Justice if no satisfactory solution was forthcoming in the near future .
Several months later no solution has been arrived at .
So we are currently examining whether further measures envisaged by these states would resolve the issues that have been raised .
In the case of Belgium , the letter of formal notice , the first stage in infringement procedures , as the honourable Member knows , was communicated to the Belgian Government on 15 September and we await their response within the deadline of two months .
Question No 49 by Jan Andersson ( H-0765 / 96 )
Subject : Transport of goods by rail
It is very much more environment-friendly to transport goods by rail than by road .
Rail transport must become cheaper and quicker if more goods , especially long-distance freight , are to be switched to the railways .
Rail transport currently takes too long , partly because of the inadequate capacity of the rail network in many places .
Moreover , rail transport is expensive because freight cannot always be transported in both directions .
What action will the Commission take in order to increase the proportion of freight transported by rail ?
The honourable Member will be aware that last July the Commission adopted a White Paper on revitalizing the European Union 's railways .
It proposed a series of measures , including the introduction of market forces , clearing up railway finances , integrating the different national systems and improving infrastructure .
All those proposals were made with the specific aim of ensuring that railways work more like businesses in identifying markets , actively seeking customers and satisfying them by meeting their needs for efficient , reliable and keenly-priced services in order to enable rail to regain a greater share of the freight and passenger markets .
These measures should improve the general performance of the railways over time .
But there is a particularly urgent need for increases in the use of rail for freight .
The White Paper , therefore , included a proposal for the creation of international rail-freight freeways which are specifically designed to achieve rapid improvement in the competitiveness of rail freight .
On the freeways the infrastructure would be open to all railway enterprises and the conditions of access would be designed to interest new users with simple and attractive systems for charging and for allocating slots .
In the wake of a favourable reception from the Council of Ministers for the proposal earlier this month , the Commission is following up the proposal as a matter of urgency and substantial discussions with all of the interested parties , Member State governments and others involved in rail are already beginning .
Thank you for your answer .
Yes it is true , I have read the White Paper .
The reason for my question is that I was at a conference in Sweden attended by a number of companies including some from the transport sector .
I was informed how the company Avesta Sheffield had actually tried to use the railways for its long distance transport .
It was almost impossible because of the congestion on the railways and it was also very expensive .
Therefore , the company could not currently use the railways even though it would like to .
The Commissioner said that this was a matter of urgency .
This is absolutely true because large companies organise their transport systems a long way ahead .
If the railways do not soon become competitive they will not survive .
Railways must survive as they are the most environmentally friendly transport alternative .
I should like to respond to the honourable Member , very briefly , by saying that I strongly commend those companies , notably Swedish companies , which have made attempts over the years to develop their own direct links in order to shift freight from road to rail .
That is particularly arduous , of course , in the case of Sweden and will continue to be the case until the completion of the Øresund link .
I hope that they will feel that the proposals I have put forward and the active agreement of several of the Member States , indeed including Sweden , will produce the kind of result that they want of dedicated rail-freight freeways with a sensible system of management and a good system of pricing that really can prove to be commercially attractive to those companies which want to move large amounts of freight to do it dependably and at competitive prices .
If that turns out to be the case , as I am sure it will , the whole of the transport system , and indeed the economies and societies of the European Union , will benefit greatly .
A very brief question on the long term perspective . Is it not yet high time that we , when considering issues concerning the infrastructure , move away from the narrow perspective of company economic profitability and look at the total perspective and to the combined external effect of investment ?
That , of course , is absolutely true , especially since the studies done under the general framework of the Commission 's interest in trans-European networks have demonstrated that when the international social economic product is taken into account , the returns on infrastructure investment are substantially greater than when only the national social economic consequences are taken into account .
Effective and environmentally sensitive infrastructure development is , therefore , not only a development of merit by itself , it also has additional benefit for economies and societies and the Union as a whole when it is international and genuinely transEuropean .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 52 by Miguel Arias Cañete ( H-0725 / 96 ) which has been taken over by Mr Varela Suanzes-Carpegna
Subject : Italian Government plans for rationalization and conversion of drift-net fisheries
In July 1996 the Italian Government adopted a plan to end illegal fishing using drift-nets , so as to avoid United States trade sanctions .
The plan to abolish drift-nets evidently will involve some funding from Community sources .
From which budgetary headings will this Community co-funding be financed , and what will be the extent of such co-funding ?
Question No 53 by Josu Imaz San Miguel ( H-0773 / 96 )
Subject : Conversion of drift gill nets in the Mediterranean
In July of this year the threat of US trade sanctions forced the Italian Government to submit a plan to the Commission for the withdrawal of illegal drift nets .
The plan envisages Community funding to compensate for the withdrawal of such nets .
Since withdrawal is voluntary , vessels may opt to continue fishing with nets of legal length but , as stated in the Commission report on the 1995 season , the inspections carried out have not so far enabled proper checks on illegal nets to be made .
Does the Commission believe that the Italian plan will really make it possible for illegal drift nets to be eliminated ?
Is the Commission considering similar funding for the withdrawal of drift nets in the Atlantic ?
Does the Commission regard it as efficient for large amounts from the Community budget to be spent on this problem without actually solving it , which would require such nets to be banned once and for all ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you may know , since the beginning of this year the Commission has been urging the Italian Government not only to apply certain inspection measures at sea and on land to its drift net fleet in the Mediterranean , but also to take steps to convert that fleet in an attempt to eliminate the use of such fishing gear .
Following an inspection campaign mounted by the Commission for the second year running , the results obtained have convinced the Italian authorities that this type of fishing is no longer acceptable .
These inspections revealed in fact that drift net fishing in the Mediterranean is economically sustainable only if it is illegal , that is , only if the drift nets are considerably in excess of the 2.5 km length laid down in the existing legislation .
Given the results of this inspection campaign , on 25 July the Italian Government presented a plan for the conversion and rationalization of drift net fishing .
The questioners ask me for details of this conversion plan .
In general terms , the plan sets out a series of measures designed to bring about the elimination and destruction of drift nets , as well as the withdrawal of licences for this type of fishing , in exchange for Community and national financial aid to offset the social and economic consequences of this ban in certain regions of southern Italy which fall within Objective 1 and typically have a high rate of unemployment , with very little likelihood of alternative work .
Clearly , the Italian Government is convinced that the plan 's objectives will only be met if these measures are sufficiently attractive .
The Commission 's view is that the financial aid package which has been agreed should form a sufficient incentive to ensure the success of the plan , provided that the Italian authorities adopt all the other necessary measures outlined in the plan , in particular the part regarding sanctions .
The Commission has therefore asked the Italian Government to introduce an even more rigorous system for inspecting the conditions under which fishing is being carried out , and to provide for severe administrative and penal sanctions in the case of infringement .
Finally , the funding needed to implement the plan will be drawn from Italy 's present allocation under the Structural Funds , with no increase in the appropriations already earmarked for the programme period 1994-1999 .
As a rule there will be co-funding by Italy , but as far as the European financing is concerned , no additional monies have been authorized .
Fishing using 2.5 km nets is continuing in the Atlantic in accordance with the existing legislation , as emerges from the latest inspection campaign . As long as legislation permits the use of such nets , the Commission has no intention of taking any financial measures to encourage the cessation of this fishing activity , which is authorized in the Atlantic .
I hope that the honourable Members are also aware of the likely budgetary constraints in 1997 , especially in the fisheries sector .
The Commission would point out that any Member State can take an initiative within the Council to amend the Commission 's proposal , which has been before the Council since 1994 .
Any Member State may take the initiative of dividing the dossier between drift nets in the Baltic and in other zones ; every Member State has a right of initiative , and may amend or divide the Commission proposal which is before the Council .
As far as the Commission is concerned , it has embarked on a round of informal consultations with the Member States on the most recent data , including that from Italy , and the honourable Member will be well aware of the Commission 's workload as the year comes to an end : there is the satellites regulation , the MAGPs IV , and the regulation governing TACs and quotas .
In the meantime , we are exploring with the Member States the chances of finding a new majority to enable us to move this issue forward .
I think that in early 1997 , we shall have a clearer overview of what those chances might be , but I repeat that the Member States themselves are in a position to propose solutions and amendments to the Commission 's proposal .
Madam Commissioner , I wanted to ask you a supplementary question .
This plan is interesting and one of the aspects which you referred to is that it is based on voluntary withdrawal with large financial incentives .
But what would happen if those financial incentives were not enough to carry out the eradication plan in full and if these nets continue to be used ?
Does the Commission think that it can guarantee the plan 's success bearing in mind that , although there are only few nets left , its control - as the Commission itself has claimed - would actually be quite difficult ?
And will the Commission be taking measures so that the aid plan can lead to full eradication ?
Given that a total ban on drift-nets has been presented to the Council together with the 1994 proposal , the ball is now in the Council 's court , to use graphic terms . But I should like to ask another question of the Commission : will the Commission be presenting to the Council any type of report making an appraisal of all of the economic costs which the European Union would have to meet both for the elimination plans and controls of drift-nets so that , once and for all , it could call upon the Council fully to eliminate these nets in other areas of the European Union as well ?
The provision of funding to implement the plan is subject to the usual rules governing the Structural Funds and their disbursement .
The Commission intends to monitor very closely the progress made in implementing the various stages of the plan .
As we know , this is a complex plan with many different facets , and both the Commission and the Member State concerned are committed to very close scrutiny of the various stages of its implementation .
As for the second part of your question , any new Commission initiative will of course be duly justified and accompanied by reports on inspection costs , among other things . Such reports would be drawn up to substantiate any new Commission proposal , which would otherwise be indefensible .
Such an evaluation of inspection costs is part and parcel of the documentation which would serve to justify a new proposal , if - of course - the political conditions were to demand it .
Question No 54 by Mair Morgan ( H-0732 / 96 )
Subject : Safety of children at activity centres
With the increasing number of extra curricular activities and school visits throughout the European Union it is imperative that there are measures adopted to ensure the safety of children .
It is essential that activity centres that provide courses in activities such as caving , climbing and watersports are run by competent and qualified instructors .
What steps does the Commission plan to ensure that all Member States provide independent competent assessment and regulations of these activities and what plans does it have to facilitate the mutual recognition of qualifications in this field ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission would point out in reply to Mrs Morgan 's question that it has not examined the kind of problems she mentions , apart from those concerning ' all-in ' travel which are covered by Directive 90 / 314 : travel , holidays and tours where the package organizer is responsible for satisfactory provision of all the services on offer .
It seems to the Commission that this directive may well also cover some aspects of the situation described by the honourable Member .
I would add , however , that in 1990 the Commission presented a proposal for a directive on the security and safety of services . This proposal was withdrawn in 1994 because of considerable opposition from all sides , including the Legal Service of the European Parliament .
So the issue of the security and safety of services , to which a later question from Mr Teverson also relates , places the Commission in the somewhat unusual position of having to determine whether or not it is once again appropriate to propose a directive on this topic , given that the previous directive was withdrawn as a direct result of opposition from , among others , Parliament 's Legal Service .

I am pleased to see that this has come before the House before but unfortunately there was a different Parliament at the time .
I hope that , as you say , it will come before us again because I think it is very important that the safety of children throughout Europe should be a priority of this House .
It is also important to realize that unless we put these assurances in place , instead of encouraging children to travel abroad , we will see parents ensuring that they do not travel abroad because of fears for their safety .
That applies not only to outdoor pursuits activities , which - I think - are very good for children , forming their characters and encouraging them to participate .
So , I do hope that we will see this directive coming forward .
It is not only relevant to package holidays : it is important for anyone who wants to travel on this kind of trip abroad , in particular in terms of canoeing holidays , those kinds of things .
We should have adequate safety standards and qualifications that are mutually recognized .
We do this in academic terms , why can we not do it for sports facilities .
It is important that we set the kind of standards set by organizations like the one we have in West Wales .
In principle I share your concern and also recognize the importance of this issue but it is really the case that , for the moment , this is a responsibility of Member States .
What we are trying to see is if there is a margin for manoeuvre to allow us to come up with a new proposal which could be justified , and so start the process again .
But for the moment we are at this stage : we have to see if there is enough background and enough justification for a new proposal that could then possibly encounter fewer difficulties and less resistance .
I have listened with interest to the Commissioner 's response .
I do not think it is just an issue for Member States when you are dealing with an international situation .
Neither do I think it is always good enough to expect that all travel operators are observing high standards .
Whilst I support everything that my colleague , Ms Morgan has said , it is a wider issue than that .
It is not just about safety and activity centres where there are potentially hazardous activities taking place .
The recent tragedy , of which you will be aware , in the Auberge de Jeunesse in northern France showed a real problem in a potentially safe situation .
There have been other similar incidents in hotels , campsites , swimming pools , shopping centres , etc . , across Europe .
I wonder whether the Commission could perhaps consider a voluntary , or preferably a compulsory code of conduct or registration for youth hostels , hotels and similar sites that take groups of young people , particularly school groups moving from one country to another , where they are not familiar with local situations .
They are not aware of the local dangers perhaps .
They are looking for the best and most advantageous , cheapest deal .
It is something that must be looked at with a European dimension .
You cannot just expect it to happen locally .
We must encourage young people to travel to the different Member States .
I must confirm what I said before .
I share your concern , and our programme is to see if we can identify some margin of manoeuvre .
This is also necessary because this form of travel , particularly inside the Union , has very much increased .
It is very important that we ensure that safety measures are in place so that this process is not stopped , just the contrary .
It is important that parents feel that their children are protected when they travel in Member States .
We have also tried to develop a code of conduct , but up to now the results have not been very encouraging .
That is why we are again looking at the possibility of a directive .
We started work on a code of conduct , particularly among the Auberges de Jeunesse , but frankly speaking the result was not encouraging .
It was very timeconsuming trying to persuade them and so on , but at the end of the day the result was not particularly encouraging and so we are back to the other possibility again .
My own question for later on relates to a similar area .
I visited the hostel in question in Brittany with Caroline Dickinson 's father earlier this month and saw a very low level of security at that time , which has been improved , but obviously too late .
Could I ask whether the Commissioner would meet with Ms Morgan and myself specifically to try to find practical ways forward here .
We all know that the legislative process is long and winding and perhaps it is something that we may want in future .
But perhaps we could talk with you , Commissioner , and try to suggest ways forward with the associations that run hostels and similar activities internationally , and find a practical way forward so that parents can be sure of their children 's security when they send them abroad so that we have a quick practical solution to this problem rather than a theoretical one in the long term .
The Commission accepts the proposal and its services are certainly available for any further discussion that you wish .
Another thing which might be possible is to involve consumers ' associations in this issue and perhaps they have some broader documentation which could be helpful in our discussion to try to see what measures we could take to overcome the problem .
The involvement of both parliamentarians and the Commission services , but also the consumers ' associations would be an important element in a joint discussion .
Question No 55 by José Apolinário ( H-0747 / 96 )
Subject : Positions defended by the Commission at the recent NAFO meeting in St Petersburg
At the NAFO meeting of September 1996 in St Petersburg , the Commission , quite independently of any considerations as regards the conclusions on the distribution of quotas , accepted a distribution criterion for zone 2J3KL which will , in practice , be fixed autonomously by Canada , thus opening up the door to the abolition of the right of objection of the contracting parties to NAFO , via a new framework for conflict resolution .
Does the Commission not consider that it is , in fact , finally surrendering on matters of principle , thus neglecting and abandoning the defence of the Community 's interests in the NAFO area ?
The questioner draws attention to two decisions which he considers damaging to the Community 's interests .
The first relates to the future management of cod stocks in NAFO zone 2J3KL , and the second to the hypothesis that the objection procedure might be abolished if a new framework for conflict resolution were to be introduced .
I would emphasize that the questioner expresses opinions and interpretations on both these points which are not shared by the Commission .
In fact , as regards the measure relating to cod stocks , it has been agreed that in future , the management will be shared between Canada , whose waters contain 95 % of the stocks , and NAFO , which holds 5 % , and that these two authorities - Canada on the one hand and NAFO on the other - will set their respective TACs in close collaboration with one another and on the basis of scientific opinion .
The measure is worded in terms which clearly demonstrate - or so it seems to the Commission - that NAFO will autonomously set the TAC for the 5 % of cod stocks in the zone for which it is responsible , so that it will not be bound by the TAC applied by Canada to the 95 % of stocks present in its waters .
The Commission therefore does not think that this measure can be interpreted as granting Canada the right to exercise jurisdiction over the stocks in question , beyond the limits of its own exclusive economic zone .
Consequently , Canada will exercise such powers in its exclusive economic zone and NAFO will do likewise in international waters , it having been established that 95 % of the cod stocks are located in Canadian waters and 5 % in the international waters managed by NAFO .
As for the suspicion that the objection procedure might be abolished , I must say that the Commission has some difficulty in understanding the questioner 's concerns .
Firstly , the Commission has never considered that the objection procedure was applicable in cases of conflict .
Without prejudice to the right of objection , it is of course quite possible to engage in debate and dialogue with a view to resolving any conflicts , but without abolishing the objection procedure , for which legal provision currently exists , given that NAFO is not a supranational organization .
In our opinion - and not least from a legal viewpoint - the objection procedure remains necessary and legitimate , so much so that it must remain an indispensable part of discussions and relations between the countries belonging to NAFO .
Madam Commissioner , thank you for the precision of your replies which have clarified two aspects which , as far as I am concerned , were essential - they were questions of principle - about the content of the negotiations at the St Petersburg meeting .
I must confess , however , that I am not happy about the second aspect , the machinery for resolving conflicts .
In any case , I hope that the Commissioner 's declaration is the way in which the Commission is going to defend European interests at the working group which has since been set up in order to change the NAFO Convention regulations .
I should also like to know what measures the Commission is going to put forward at NAFO in order to strengthen checks on non-signatory countries , in other words on ships flying flags of convenience , and whether the Commission is giving its backing to the holding , in Portugal , in 1998 , of a meeting to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the NAFO Convention .
With regard to increased monitoring , particularly in respect of the vessels of countries which are not contracting parties to NAFO , the Commission is seeking to exert maximum pressure on the Member States , which are responsible for monitoring , to encourage them to carry out these duties within NAFO .
It goes without saying that monitoring raises a very thorny issue for the Member States , namely that of cost .
It is clearly unthinkable that every Community vessel will in future have an inspector on board ; by the same token , it is unthinkable that only direct monitoring will take place , which is why the Commission is drawing up a proposal for satellite monitoring .
This is a transparent , irrefutable form of inspection : there is clearly no possibility of error , and the system is certainly less costly than permanent on-the-spot checks , especially in a fairly extensive area such as NAFO .
These are the measures being taken by the Commission : we are inviting the Member States to carry out these checks , while remaining aware that the cost of physical on-the-spot checks over such a large area will undoubtedly be enormous .
Secondly , discussions are under way within the Commission to determine joint forms of participation for 1999 ; furthermore , we believe that since NAFO on the one hand and the NEAFC on the other are the only two regional conferences providing relative guarantees for international waters , and in the hope of reaching management agreements for the waters of other oceans , 1999 will be a key date when it comes to reopening the debate on monitoring arrangements in international waters , for instance in the South Atlantic or other oceans to which no management measures as yet apply .
I have no problem at all , Commissioner , with the agreement on managing area 2J3KL .
I think the Canadians have had a very hard experience in fish management and have probably learnt their lesson .
I have a problem with NAFO though .
It was brought to me by the Latvian Ambassador who visited last week and who tells me that they are still dependent on the old Soviet Union - Russia now - for their vote .
They do not have an independent vote as an independent state .
The same applies , presumably , to Estonia and Lithuania .
I think that it is perhaps time that the Commission supported those countries in having their own independent voice in NAFO .
Finally , on your recent visit to Britain , Commissioner , I would congratulate you .
You obviously annoyed the British fishing industry considerably , but that was only to be expected .
I still congratulate you on one remark made to me this morning - by an old Hull trawler-owner who still operates part of our deep-sea fleet - that at last you have got a Commissioner who says what she thinks .
Good .
In fact , we are already discussing this issue which not only concerns Latvia but also Estonia and others .
The issue of contracting parties is under discussion .
As you know , according to the NAFO rule , there has to be consensus .
As you can imagine - I do not need to tell you the details - this consensus is far away .
For all the reasons you have mentioned , in addition to all the others , we are already in favour of this request even though consensus is still required and some contracting parties are not so happy .
Question No 63 by Irini Lambraki ( H-0772 / 96 )
Subject : Combating sex tourism
The dramatic circumstances which came to light in Belgium in July constitute the tip of the iceberg of paedophilia and sex tourism .
What measures does the Commission intend to take in the field of tourism to reduce the number of cases - and curb the phenomenon - of sex tourism which discredits and outrages basic human values ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the sex exploitation of children is a manifestation of violence against them which inspires horror . It is a matter of priority for the Commission to combat the sex exploitation of children .
In undertaking certain commitments at the Stockholm Conference , the Commission submitted a related memorandum during the informal meeting between Ministers for Justice and Internal Affairs on 26 and 27 September 1996 .
Following that memorandum , there is to be an announcement .
Regarding the dimension of the problem so far as tourism is concerned , I would like to remind you that in its proposal of April 1996 for a Council decision on the establishment of a first multinational programme for European tourism , the Commission indicated the need to address the problems that we call ' sex tourism ' .
The Commission also called for the development and strengthening of the tourism industry 's codes of practice and self-regulation mechanisms against such practices , and for the support of initiatives to prevent them .
The recent tragic events in Belgium give new and added impetus to the conclusions of the World Conference against the sex exploitation of children , which took place in Stockholm at the end of August , and in particular to its action programme .
The Commission is now preparing a special announcement on the subject of combating sex tourism with child victims , associated with a draft recommendation to the Member States indicating a number of measures to address the problem .
Measures related to judicial cooperation between the Member States , such as the important problem of extraterritorial implementation of the penal orders applicable to sexually aggressive acts against children committed by citizens of third countries , are under consideration by the Council of Ministers for Justice and Internal Affairs .
The Commission 's initiative will take into account both the European Parliament 's related position and the recommendations of the Stockholm Conference 's action programme concerning tourism .
Our overall strategy will have two aspects : first , it will focus on the destination countries and use every realistic means , including the Union 's influence in the international arena where appropriate . And secondly , it will aim to reduce the demand , especially by strengthening cooperation and supporting the tourism industry and related NGOs , strengthening the industry 's codes of practice and self-regulation mechanisms , and improving the coordination of information campaigns .
As for the draft recommendation to the Member States , a number of factors must be taken into account , especially concerning the need to encourage national tourism administrations to establish preventive measures against sex tourism with child victims and to draw up guidelines for the tourism sector , in order to ensure that sex tourism travel packages are not facilitated , that codes of practice for the tourism industry are developed and strengthened , and that efforts by intergovernmental bodies and NGOs to combat sex tourism with child victims are supported .
Our efforts will also aim to promote the exchange of technical knowledge between countries , with a view to improving practical ways to prevent , suppress and mitigate the consequences of sex tourism with child victims .
The development of alternative forms of tourism in the relevant countries should also be promoted , to offer tourists a broad range of interests .
The Commission hopes that it will be ready to present the related special announcement at the beginning of November .
I would like to thank Commissioner Christos Papoutsis for the sensitivity he has shown over this issue and for his desire to contribute serious proposals towards the solution of this social problem , which has rightly shaken and outraged public opinion in Europe .
The massive demonstration in Brussels last Sunday bore witness to the agony , interest and determination of Europe 's citizens to exert pressure on governments and politicians to take action against this circle , whose activities disgrace the democratic and cultural values of Europe today .
However , I want to make the point that whatever action is taken cannot begin and end within the ambit of the European Union 's Member States alone .
The tragic events in Belgium last July shed the glare of publicity on the tragic fate of about 2 million children in South-East Asia and South America , who become the victims of sexual savagery and appalling torture for the gratification mainly of European and American tourists , while it is known that many underage boys and girls enter and circulate illegally from Thailand and the Philippines .
In these circumstances , combined with the fact that these circles are very active , it is perhaps necessary , Commissioner , to adopt a more collective approach rather than one that comes only from your side of the matter .
Do you have any such more collective proposals ?
Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Member for her question and to assure Parliament that we do indeed intend to strengthen our cooperation both with the industry and with the Member States , to develop a broader strategy to combat the problem .
At the Stockholm Conference the Non-Governmental Organizations spoke emphatically about the problem of child exploitation and we believe that our proposal also has the support of most Member States .
Of course , we are counting on the firm backing of the European Parliament .
Now , so far as the tourism industry is concerned , it is clearly conscious of how badly its image could be damaged if this phenomenon of sex tourism from Europe , with child victims , is allowed to continue .
Full cooperation by the sector is vital to ensure that these problems are addressed in a detailed way .
However , it must be stressed that we have observed notable initiatives that have been taken , that travel bureaux have undertaken , to combat sex tourism with child victims .
At the recent informal meeting of Ministers for Justice and Internal Affairs in Dublin on 26 September , the Commission tabled a discussion document which explains the activities carried out within the ambit of the European Union 's various bodies .
That document also describes four initiatives currently being prepared and which concern the movement of women and girls for sex exploitation purposes , and sex tourism with child victims by means of the provision of audiovisual services , in particular via the Internet .
I must tell you that though the Commission does not have the right to take initiatives in that area , we can make recommendations to the Member States on the adoption of initiatives within the scope of the Third Pillar , and that is what we will do .
I also want to assure you that the European Commission as a whole are fully aware of this issue , and in the coming months we will be doing our best to deal with it , always hoping , as I said earlier , for the European Parliament 's support .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 64 by Paul Lannoye ( H-0789 / 96 )
Subject : IAEA decision on the containers used for the transport of nuclear materials by air
The Board of the International Atomic Energy Agency in a recent decision permitted the transport by air of plutonium in pure or mixed form ( MOX ) in the containers currently used for road transport ( type B ) .
These containers are designed to resist crushing at a speed of 48 km an hour and not following an air crash .
Does the Commission approve of this decision which runs counter to the requirement that safety should be assured under all the conditions likely to arise during transport ?
Question No 65 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0791 / 96 )
Subject : Prohibiting plutonium flights over territory of non-nuclear EU States
The air transport of plutonium or raw fuel containing plutonium between reprocessing plants and mixed oxide fuel ( MOX ) production plants and nuclear power plants which use MOX , gives rise to nuclear transport flights over several Member States of the EU , some of which have renounced the nuclear option .
Does the Commission believe that each Member State has the right to prohibit such flights over its territory ? Question No 66 by Undine-Uta Bloch von Blottnitz ( H-0814 / 96 )
Subject : Transport of radioactive materials by air
In the USA the transport of radioactive goods by air is subject to much more stringent safety requirements than in the EU .
The requirements concerning transport containers are considerably stricter in the USA , stipulating for example that they must be able to resist a higher impact speed .
On what precise grounds does the Commission justify the discrepancies between the American and European safety standards , and how does it react to the presumption that European standards can hardly be adequate to ensure public health protection when states such as the USA impose much higher requirements on such transport ?
Ladies and gentlemen , safety during the transport of radioactive materials is a very serious issue and is governed by international regulations laid down by the International Atomic Energy Agency in cooperation with its Member States .
Those regulations are subject to continual review .
As the questions say , the Board of the IAEA recently approved revised transport regulations including specifications for air transport applicable to all radioactive materials .
The safety requirement specifications for air transport proposed by the IAEA are based on an extensive range of data and specific figures on air transport accidents , and are intended to ensure an adequate level of safety during the transport of any type of radioactive material .
In the revised regulations the IAEA proposes two types of packaging containers for air transport .
First , a type-B container for which the quantity of radioactive material transported by air is restricted .
For this type of container the same quantitative restriction does not apply to materials certified as low-dispersal materials .
For shipments of low-dispersal radioactive materials the shipper must prove to the relevant authorities in each country involved in the air transport operation that the strictest criteria applicable to low-dispersion materials have been complied with , as laid down by the revised regulations .
So far as we know , no material has so far been characterized as a low-dispersal material.-Secondly , the IAEA proposes a type-C container that permits the air transport of a larger quantity of radioactive material .
For such cases , the type-C container in question must satisfy much stricter requirements than the type-B containers mentioned earlier.I must stress that the revised IAEA regulations take full account of the most recent fundamental safety specifications of the IAEA , and are also fully consonant with Council Regulation No 96 / 29 of 13 May 1996 laying down basic safety conditions for the protection of occupational and public health from the dangers created by ionizing radiation .
As for the ability of Member States to intervene , the safe transport of radioactive materials , including MOX fuels , mixed plutonium-oxide uranium-oxide fuels , is governed by a system of multilateral approval in accordance with the IAEA 's transport regulations .
This means that approval must be obtained from the relevant authorities both in the country where the container was designed or from which it is being shipped , and in all the countries through or to which the shipment is bound .
However , the terms ' through which ' or ' to which ' explicitly exclude the term ' over which ' , meaning that the requirements for approval and notification of the shipment do not apply to a country over which radioactive material is being transported in an aircraft , provided the shipment will not be stopping in that country .
The revised IAEA transport regulations are to be put before the International Civil Aviation Organization in the coming months .
When they are incorporated in the technical directives of the ICAO , those regulations will be binding upon all the contributor states .
However , it is possible that the ICAO 's contributor states may adopt modifications of the technical directive conditions .
Examples of such modifications are the special administrative or technical conditions relating to flights over certain countries or the taking of stricter protective measures .
That was the option used by the United States for the air transport of plutonium and any contributor state may take whatever similar initiatives it wishes .
The only proviso is that such deviations from the conditions must be notified immediately to the ICAO , so that they can be published in the technical directives .
The Commission views the subject of air transport for radioactive materials very seriously indeed , and also takes an active part in the technical work of the IAEA .
The cross-border nature of air transport means that we have to act within the international framework laid down by the IAEA and the ICAO , whose positions are determined by their Member States .
Given that some of these air transport operations are between different Member States , and that air traffic over certain Member States is also particularly heavy - I am thinking of Belgium and Luxembourg here , looking at the schedule of regular flights - it seems more important to me to consider the introduction of Community rules , and not just regulations based on those of the International Civil Aviation Organization and the IAEA .
Secondly , can the Commissioner give me an answer as to the possible specific risks of the transport of mixed uranium-plutonium fuel , the rules for which are different from those for pure plutonium ?
I thank Mr Lannoye for his comments , but would like to point out that as mentioned in the Commission 's recent statement to the Council and the European Parliament concerning the safe transport of radioactive materials in the European Union , it emerges from an analysis of accidents and incidents in the transport sector that very few accidents result in appreciable exposure to radiation .
I agree , of course , that a more cohesive European Union involvement could be considered , but for the time being , that does not seem attainable in the context of the Council .
However , as I told you , the Commission attaches great importance to the subject of safe air transport for radioactive materials , and as I also said , it takes an active part in the technical work of the IAEA .
Now , in addition , as you know , we are contributing towards the formulation of IAEA legislation .
I also want to remind you that line B4-1020 of the budget for radioactive materials transport allows the Commission to finance studies , research , measurements or experimental programmes that aim to assess and further improve existing international regulations .
Within the scope of our powers and that of the Commission 's institutional framework , the Commission is doing everything it possibly can to be helpful along those lines .
Commissioner , it only takes one accident over a densely-populated area like Belgium and Luxembourg to have lethal results when radioactive material is transported - I should not have to remind you of that .
Would you now take steps to bar all air transport of radioactive material until the new IAEA guidelines can be urgently revised to incorporate the International Civil Aviation Organization 's own guidelines and requirements , because so far they have not taken them into consideration ?
The new guidelines appear to be designed specifically to accommodate the air transport of MOX fuel .
As the Commissioner himself has said , it has not been defined as low-leakage or low-dispersal material .
The new guidelines confuse it with low-dispersal material . Until we can clarify this confusion , could you please ban the transport of this material over the territories of the Member States and require organizations , such as British Nuclear Fuels Ltd . , to refrain from issuing misleading assertions that it has been officially designated as a low-dispersal material , because this is not helpful and , indeed , extremely misleading in this context ?
I thank Mrs Ahern for her question , which gives me the opportunity to repeat that from the very few accidents reported so far , it emerges that there has been no appreciable exposure to radiations .
However , those results are probably due to the stringent and consistent regulations that have been strictly enforced for several decades and whose adequacy and implementation is monitored and , as I said earlier , adapted to contemporary circumstances by special teams of experts .
Despite all that , however , it is clear - and here , I share the honourable Member 's concern - that an encouraging past in safety-related matters is not in itself good reason for us to rest on our laurels and become complacent , though it certainly does indicate that the integrity of the packaging can be preserved under a variety of conditions that arise in accidents .
Now , as for the problems of overflying the territory of a country , there is provision for a country to prohibit overflights of its territory provided the ICAO is notified of the cases for which the contributor state has enacted orders different from those embodied in the ICAO technical directives .
However , those orders should not result in discrimination .
I will mention the example of Denmark , which prohibits the transport of more than certain quantities of fissionable radioactive materials by aircraft overflying its territory , and the transport of such materials in certain types of containers , unless a relevant permit has been obtained from its national Civil Aviation Service .
That is an example showing that Member States can impose their own conditions , and on the basis of those conditions and their own laws they notify and maintain constant cooperation with the International Civil Aviation Organization .
I would say , Commissioner , that there has been no significant incident .
Obviously that is not an acceptable argument , because if there were to be an incident , large areas would be contaminated .
Of course , the only reason why we are now starting to transport MOX fuel rods in high style by air is that they are encountering serious blockades on the usual sea and road transport routes , because people simply do not want them .
But correct me if I am wrong : the transportation containers that have been used so far are of Type B , which can withstand an impact at 48 km / h .
Type C is built to withstand an impact at 324 km / h .
However , the figure required in America is 464 km / h .
The aircraft which crashed over a residential area of Amsterdam had an impact speed of 520 km / h .
Given the differences between these figures , surely you will agree with me that , on grounds of safety , the least we should have done already is to impose a total ban on the transport of nuclear material in Type B containers ?
As I said , with Type B we have a maximum impact speed of 48 km / h . Type C , which has not even been fully tested as yet , is designed to withstand impact speeds of up to 324 km / h , but the Americans are saying that the figure should be 464 km / h .
Our first task is therefore to come up with a standard set of rules , before we can even think of authorizing anything .
I thank Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz for her comments .
She is right that type-B containers do indeed exist .
It is logical that they should undergo a free-fall test for an object of rectangular section from a height of 9 m , which , as you said , corresponds to an impact velocity of 48 km / h .
It is true that such tests are carried out , and carried out onto an unyielding surface , as it is termed .
The term ' unyielding ' means that the target surface does not absorb any of the energy gained by the container at the moment of impact , and therefore , that all its kinetic energy is converted to energy that deforms the container .
From free-fall tests carried out on actually existing surfaces , it has been confirmed that the quantity of deformation energy is equal to that absorbed by the container during reference tests when the free-fall height is much greater than 9 m , i.e. when the impact velocity is larger .
Those are the specifications followed by some states .
However , this does not mean that every state ought to follow the specifications laid down by the United States .
As I said earlier , the cross-border nature of air transport entails that we must operate within the international framework established by the IAEA and the ICAO , whose positions are determined by their Member States .
So far , it has not been possible for the European Union to impose a uniform policy of its own .
My constituents live near a major international airport .
Even those who live under the flight path are happy to do so because of the economic benefits the airport brings to the conurbation .
However , there is an understandable concern about flights carrying nuclear materials .
One such accident is enough .
If there are different standards in different countries , including the USA which is the capital of the nuclear world , surely it is best to harmonize at the highest level the regulations , standards and conditions for transport of this material , rather than just leaving it to local decision ?
Mr President , it will not tire me at all to repeat that the Commission shares the concerns that exist in all sectors and all areas of the European Union .
Clearly , when such dangers exist , we cannot close our eyes to them and , as I said earlier , we cannot remain complacent because we have had safety in the past and because there have not so far been any such accidents .
We must adopt as many measures as possible , we must promote our technology , we must be careful , and we must study the facts .
And that is all the Commission can do .
As I told you earlier , the only thing the Commission can do at this time is , first , to cooperate with international organizations in analysing the data and the facts and in working out new proposals .
As for the European Union itself , we can take advantage of budget line B4-1020 to finance studies , research , measurements and other experimental programmes .
Beyond that , however , the Commission cannot override the Member States at a political level , because it is the Member States that participate in the international organizations and that adopt their own measures applicable to their own domain , and it is also the Member States that are responsible for collective decisions within the framework of the international organizations .
In any case , I reiterate yet again that precisely because we share your concern and recognize the likelihood that such dangers may exist - though we hope no such thing will happen - , we cannot be complacent .
For that reason , we are continuing our efforts within the scope permitted by the European Union 's institutional and legal framework .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.25 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Advertising
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0314 / 96 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 84 / 450 / EEC on misleading advertising so as to include comparative advertising ( C4-0325 / 96-00 / 0343 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the subject of this debate is comparative advertising .
The 1984 legislation prohibiting misleading advertising announced that legislation would also be needed on comparative advertising , and now , twelve years later , we are giving this its second reading .
It has taken the Council more than four years to deal with what is a very tricky issue .
Is the directive really necessary ?
I would say most definitely yes , because the national rules on comparative advertising vary so widely : it is banned in Belgium and Luxembourg , for example , whereas it is allowed in Germany , but only subject to very strict rules .
In a single market where we have the free movement of goods , products , services , persons and communications and a free press , all of which are regulated in the Treaty of Rome , unambiguous legislation is essential , yet far too much is left to the discretion of the courts in the Member States .
My attitude towards comparative advertising is not based solely on the consumer 's point of view .
The current situation in which such advertising is banned in some countries and not in others leads to a distortion of competition and handicaps advertisers and firms that wish to draw objective comparisons , as well as consumers , who are not given the opportunity to compare .
Moving on to the proposal itself , I have tried , together with the other members of the Committee on the Environment , to draw up a coherent set of rules which recognize the right to comparative advertising , but at the same time impose strict conditions to prevent any abuse of the possibilities provided for .
The proposal before us needs to be seen in conjunction with the legislation on trade marks , as I have said before .
An examination of the rules contained in this legislation has led me to conclude that the new proposal does nothing to undermine the protection provided for trade marks .
Any criticisms raised by a particular sector are more than offset by the positive comments we have received from others .
What I mean is this : the market leader in one sector may be against the proposal , but all the rest of the sector is urging us to implement it .
This brings me to Amendment No 11 .
I understand that the Commission , like some colleagues in my group , has a problem with Amendment No 11 , claiming - and this is why I would like to hear your comments - that if it is adopted , in other words if the subparagraph is deleted , it could cause problems for agriculture .
I should like to have a clear answer on this .
I can well imagine that it could cause problems for Coca-Cola or for some other kinds of trade marks , in that I think they are already protected under trade mark law , but I cannot see the link with agriculture .
I myself was also not entirely convinced of the need to have separate rules to protect the full or partial bans on advertising , including comparative advertising , laid down by certain professions .
My colleagues persuaded me that such rules were necessary .
Amendment No 20 , which replaces Amendment No 7 , and Amendment No 21 , which replaces Amendment No 14 , state that where there is a code of ethics which is not statutory but is generally accepted , there must also be separate rules which allow for comparative advertising .
Next there is the problem of whether or not to allow comparative tests .
In the original proposal , the Commission provided for the possibility of carrying out comparative tests as part of comparative advertising .
I agree with the Commission that this offers the consumer extra information and allows the manufacturers and service providers greater scope .
The Council , however , is not in favour .
Nevertheless , we would prefer to maintain the possibility of using comparative tests in comparative advertising , provided they are carried out by an independent body to ensure that they are objective and verifiable .
We have therefore retabled a number of amendments from the first reading .
There is just one comment I should like to make about self-regulation .
The system of self-regulation is an excellent way of dealing with complaints quickly and effectively , and voluntary monitoring can prevent problems from arising .
I am thinking here in particular of how market operators can be made responsible for their own actions .
The fact that it also relieves the burden on administrative and judicial bodies is , in my view , an added incentive for supporting the amendment on self-regulation that we have proposed .
In conclusion , as I said earlier , this report has struck a balance by permitting comparative advertising in principle , provided a number of strict requirements are met so that there is never any question of harming the rights of competitors named in the advertisements .
Advertisements must provide the consumer with clear , comprehensible information using simple and effective methods .
People will be better informed about how complaints should be dealt with and what conditions apply , and competition in the European single market will be given a tremendous boost .
Mr President , I should like to say at the outset that we are considering this proposal tonight after a delay of four years in bringing forward an effective amendment of the misleading advertising directive .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is to be congratulated on the fact that in three months she has produced a wide range of consensus in Parliament , which I hope the Commission will note , on the substance of these proposals .
Speaking on behalf of my group , I find very little ground for difference now after the discussions we had in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on this issue .
From a consumers ' point of view , the common position is to be welcomed .
We are supportive of the notion that comparison between products fosters healthy competition and informs consumers of what they can most effectively buy .
We believe that the provisions of Article 3 ( a ) set a limit to what that comparative advertising might be and we also support the rapporteur in her proposal to delete Article 3 ( a ) 1 ( g ) because , although we understand the lobby which constantly emerges where particular stimulating agricultural products are concerned , there is enough protection already in the directive without that suggestion .
We believe that the amendments which look at the need to respect the codes of conduct laid down by professional services again are now well chosen and have taken account of the debate on second reading .
We have all had representations from the medical profession and we should respect the ethics of self-advertisement in most self-respecting medical professions throughout the Community .
We believe that there are several amendments which go a little further , perhaps , than the rapporteur might have wished , but which I believe she is prepared to accept .
The first is the designation of 48 hours as the time within which an advertiser against whom it might be claimed that they are making misleading claims is required to supply evidence in support of the advertisement .
That is Amendment No 12 .
In Amendment No 13 , we look at the question of what I would call copycat advertising where a product which is to all intents and purposes the same - save for a single vowel or consonant - is advocated in an advert as though it were the original product .
We know there are examples of this .
There is a brand of jeans to which I shall not refer which is almost exactly the same in spelling as the famous Levis .
There are other products in the cosmetic and jewellery fields displaying the same phenomenon .
We believe that there should be protection , which we tried to set out in Amendment No 13 , against this kind of thing which takes a free ride on an established product .
I would like to say a word finally about the issue of self-regulation .
We follow the rapporteur in what she hopes to do here , but there are a couple of areas of concern which do not extend to outright opposition on my part but which I would like to raise in my last 15 seconds .
In Amendment No 19 , the rapporteur calls for a European umbrella body to coordinate the work of national regulatory bodies .
There is a European advertising standards alliance and we do not want to create some separate organization - some new quango , as we say in British usage - to replicate what that does .
Finally , I would like to think that with Amendment No 17 which calls for prior recourse to other established means of dealing with complaints that we have to have here a system which is absolutely clear .
Unless this directive has clarity , it will not work .
It has not always , in its stormy passage up until now , had that benefit .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her report .
It is a very difficult and sensitive subject given that some of our Member States do not allow comparative advertising .
I am grateful to Mr Whitehead for drawing my attention to Amendment No 13 which reads that comparative advertising is allowed so long as it does not present goods or services as imitations or replicas of goods or services bearing a registered trade mark or trade name .
I think that probably could actually apply to New Labour as the imitation of the Conservative Party , which is presently being offered !
It is very important that we get this right .
I would like to ask some questions of the Commission because Mrs Oomen-Ruijten has already started the ball rolling here and it would be very helpful if we had some clarification .
On the question of Amendment No 11 , on trade marks , it seems to me that this is dangerous , even though trade marks are actually safeguarded in the parts of the directive which immediately precede this .
But Amendment No 11 deals particularly with the reputation of a trade mark and it seems to me dangerous that we are going in this report to delete Amendment No 11 .
I very much value the Commission 's comments on that .

As regards the professions originally dealt with in Amendment Nos 7 and 14 and now basically replaced by Amendments Nos 20 and 21 , these represent something of a solution to the problem that has been raised with British Members by professional organizations , such as the British Medical Association and others , but there is a difficulty in Amendment No 21 in relation to the words ' professional services ' .
That could indeed relate to almost anything including , it has been pointed out to me , one of the , if not the , oldest profession in the world .
I wonder whether the sort of measure to allow codes of conduct to continue for the existing professions is adequately dealt with under Amendments Nos 20 and 21 .
Otherwise , people like lawyers , doctors , etc . , in all our Member States are going to be pretty worried that the comparative advertising directive would apply in full to them .
Finally , if I might draw the Commission 's attention to Amendment No 15 , which requires consent from third parties to comparative tests that they have carried out if a company wishes to refer to those tests .
I wonder whether the Commission feels that this consent is really needed under the comparative advertising directive .
As it is written in Amendment No 15 it would be extremely cumbersome to seek and to get that consent from the people who carry out the tests as Amendment No 15 states .
I would be very interested to hear whether the Commission is in favour of this amendment .
Again I congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on dealing so expeditiously with this difficult issue and I hope that it will not be long before we can have it on the statute book .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on her rapid work .
However , I should like to recall , in respect of designations of origin and all products which have a trade mark , how difficult it is for countries which only entered modern times very recently to obtain the name of a mark , to obtain a designation of origin and to obtain a geographical indication .
I think it is very unwise - and I am Portuguese and therefore I am very well aware of the pirating of the names ' port wine ' and ' Madeira wine ' - and I know how difficult it is to safeguard a mark which has world-wide renown on the market against imitations , doubtful publicity or comparative publicity aimed at undermining them .
Therefore , my Group will certainly not be voting for deletion of Recital 11 , nor sub-paragraphs f ) and g ) of Article 3a .
I do not think this is protectionism but simply rendering unto Caesar what is Caesar 's , respecting the effort made by anyone who has tried to maintain the quality of a given mark and offer guarantees to consumers who have chosen a genuine product .
If that had always been the case , perhaps now we would not be having this case of ' mad cows ' and if we could maintain designations of origin , perhaps then it would be possible to find out where the meat is coming from .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , comparative advertising is not a very easy subject for many Member States , some of which , including my own country , have banned it up to now .
It can , however , be very useful in helping to give consumers a clearer picture and more information , and it can also be a healthy way of increasing competition between comparable products .
But it is essential to ensure that certain strict requirements are met if we wish to prevent comparative advertising from being misleading .
The majority of our group believe that products which have designations of origin should only be compared with products with the same designation , and they therefore cannot accept Amendments Nos 5 and 10 .
They feel that comparability is an essential prerequisite for comparative advertising , and this would not , by definition , be the case here .
I would point out that Mr Eisma does not agree with the majority on this .
Finally , I also have personal reservations about Amendment No 15 . Obtaining the express consent of the person who carried out the test could lead to practical problems for certain sectors dealing with research and development .
If research has been carried out by several people or institutions in various different countries , it could be almost impossible to obtain consent .
In the pharmaceuticals sector , for instance , it is both customary and necessary to refer to comparative tests , so Amendment No 5 would impose a particular burden there .
I would also like to know what the Commissioner thinks about Amendment No 15 .
For the remainder of the report , we have a majority in favour of the rapporteur 's position .
Mr President , as consumers and citizens in all EU Member States have the right to decide for themselves which product is better than another , it is very important that these criteria should be objective .
This being so , it must also be stressed that the research institutes which make statements on the subject should be genuinely independent .
They must not , for example , be producers ' or industry 's own research departments .
We quite agree with Mr Whitehead that it is perfectly acceptable for the regulatory bodies to which consumers can turn and which can rule on the objectivity of tests and comparisons to remain national .
It is enough that coordination should be carried out at EU level , since some cases clearly concern matters which go beyond national borders .
On behalf of the Green Group I should also like to say that we believe that these amendments are perhaps formulated a little too diffusely where they refer to codes of ethics , which may be adopted , for example , by certain professional groups .
When it comes to debating what prohibitions are possible , we shall not , for instance , support amendments which refer to such codes of ethics .
They are not likely to be very objective .
Finally , we have tabled our own Amendment No 22 , which permits such comparisons to be communicated by means of labels and to refer to the composition or production methods of the product .
The background to the amendment is that in the United States Monsanto has brought legal proceedings against a number of small local dairies because they say that their products do not contain genetically modified organisms .
In our opinion such advertising should be permitted .
It ought to be possible for small producers - and big ones too , by all means - to state that their products do not contain a particular ingredient .
It should not be possible to maintain that this is a barrier to trade .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I am grateful to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , and in particular the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for the report on the Council 's common position regarding the adoption of this directive amending Directive 84 / 450 so as to include comparative advertising .
During the debate , I tried to note down the various requests from Members for me to explain the Commission 's position on individual amendments .
I hope that I have noted all the queries and that I shall be able to give a clear reply .
First and foremost , it should be remembered that the sole purpose of this proposal is to harmonize the legislation governing comparative advertising .
The basic objective is harmonization with a view to improving information for consumers , as well as facilitating the free movement of public services within the internal market , thereby guaranteeing the right to engage in comparative advertising .
It would seem worth drawing attention to the context , because although some of the questions and perhaps some of the aspects and concerns which have been highlighted may apply to other fields , they are possibly less relevant in this context , namely a directive serving to harmonize a situation .
The aim of the proposal , therefore , is to authorize comparative advertising under the same conditions in all the Member States , seeking at the same time to preserve fairness in advertising and avoid confusing consumers , who could perhaps be influenced by unfair and misleading advertising .
The Commission would state in this connection that it can accept only eight of the 23 amendments , some of which had already been tabled at first reading and have now been resubmitted .
The acceptable amendments are Nos 1 , 2 , 4 , 8 , 9 , 16 , 20 and 21 , which include the partially acceptable former Amendments Nos 7 and 14 , whereas the others are unacceptable , at least at this stage .
I shall now try briefly to explain why .
With regard to Amendments Nos 3 and 15 , referring to the use of the results of comparative tests - a subject which was raised by more than one Member - the Commission has concluded , after careful consideration , that the use of comparative test results for advertising purposes is linked only indirectly to the provision under discussion and hence to comparative advertising .
We feel that reference to these tests is unnecessary and can be omitted , given that our aim is to harmonize the provisions governing comparative advertising .
Since this subject remains an important one , it might be more appropriate to envisage an ad hoc legal instrument , whereas if the aim is harmonization , we do not consider the publication of comparative tests to be essential at this juncture .

As for the other amendments , in particular Nos 5 , 10 and 11 to which the rapporteur referred , we thought it appropriate , in view of the particular nature of the provisions on designations of origin , to prohibit comparisons of products whose designations differ ; in essence , the Commission is proposing that products with the same designation may be compared , and ruling out such comparisons for products with different designations .
For example , we could say that Parma ham can be compared with Parma ham , but not with Viareggio sausage .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendments Nos 6 and 18 , because it does not think that self-regulation - which we welcome in many sectors - can take the place of real and effective monitoring instruments ; although we very much favour self-regulation , we do not believe that it can replace the monitoring instruments which must be operated by the Member States , who are responsible for applying the principles of the directive .
Amendment No 12 is unacceptable because of the excessive and pointless administrative burden which its inclusion would place on advertisers ; I am referring in particular to the problem of the 48 hours .
As regards the question of comparisons of products presented as imitations - one Member referred to copy-cat products , singling out a well-known brand of jeans - we take the view that the reference made in recital 17 of the common position and the protection afforded by the trade mark are sufficient .
We cannot accept Amendment No 17 because we see it as superfluous , given that the freedom of Member States to decide on the control procedure is already covered by Article 4 ( 2 ) of Directive 84 / 450 which , as you know , is still in force .
Turning to Amendment No 19 , we believe that , quite apart from the unnecessary increase in red tape generated by the establishment of independent institutes , the principle of subsidiarity must prevail ; as regards the competent national bodies to which you refer , it should be remembered that these are not defined in law , do not have a common status and do not exist everywhere .
For these reasons , we cannot go along with your idea , although it may well be a valid one in theory .
Indeed , the fact that such bodies are not universal , coupled with their lack of a precise legal definition , would leave us in an ambiguous situation as far as the type of control is concerned , were your proposal to be accepted .
Finally , with regard to Amendments Nos 22 and 23 , these would introduce over-restrictive conditions in our view , thereby limiting the scope of comparative advertising .
I hope that I have also answered your question on Article 15 ; in any event , the House will no doubt understand the Commission 's reasons for not accepting some of these amendments .
I am convinced that the amendments which we have accepted will serve to improve the text .
That is bound to be the case , given the very positive spirit of cooperation prevailing between Parliament and the Commission in this and other fields .
I would end by pointing out to the rapporteur , who asked a question on Amendment No 11 , that - unless there is some ambiguity in the text - the Commission cannot confirm that this amendment excludes any reference to agricultural produce ; I would therefore repeat that - unless there is some difficulty with the text , which I am prepared to discuss - the Commission is unable to give the assurance you requested .
Mr President , I should just like to make it clear that Amendments Nos 5 and 10 are all about comparing products with the same designation of origin , whereas Amendment No 11 makes it impossible to compare two different cars with particular reputations and has nothing to do with agricultural products .
This is the answer I would like to hear .
The only point at issue here is trade mark law , which is what we are discussing .
Perhaps there is indeed some difficulty with the text , Mrs OomenRuijten .
Our view is that products with the same origin can be compared , and the same problem exists for products of designated origin and trade marks , where these are obviously of two different origins and relate to different products .
We maintain that only products of the same origin can be compared ; the question of trade marks , however , raises an entirely different set of problems .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Health monitoring
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0285 / 96 ) by Mr Poggiolini , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Decision adopting a programme of Community action on health monitoring within the framework for action in the field of public health ( C4-0354 / 96-95 / 0238 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , we are now examining the recommendation for second reading concerning the common position established by the Council on 14 May with a view to the adoption of a Community programme of action on health monitoring within the framework for action in the field of public health .
As I had the opportunity to say at first reading , this programme is crucial to improving the success of all the health programmes which have been and are to be adopted .
The common position of the Health Council , adopted unanimously , accepted only two of the 44 amendments agreed by Parliament at first reading - Nos 17 and 20 - and partially accepted 17 more , in most cases in the version proposed by the Commission .
In short , the Council 's text sets out a programme of action which is utterly inadequate in terms of its funding , its temporary nature and the fact that the essential basis for a proper functioning of the system has been removed .
We can thus only express our dissatisfaction , and that is why I have tabled 19 amendments in this draft recommendation , adopted unanimously on this occasion too by the Committee on the Environment on 25 September .
In essence , they cover four fundamental points .
Firstly , there is the progressive harmonization of data and of the definitions and methods used to collect national health data .
Everyone , including the Council , recognizes that the Member States ' health data are often incomplete , indeed frequently non-existent , and not comparable .
I would therefore stress that all we are seeking to do here is to harmonize the scientific jargon , and not national health systems .
The Council 's fears in respect of the ban on harmonization of Member States ' health services , contained in Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty , miss the point entirely .
What we are doing here is harmonizing scientific terminology ; no one wishes to intervene or interfere in any way in the health arrangements of the Member States .
The second point relates to a suitable budgetary allocation , as opposed to that proposed by the Council , which is totally inadequate and unacceptable .
Parliament 's Amendment No 8 reinstates a minimum of ECU 20 million as the appropriation needed to implement this five-year programme . It should not be forgotten that this figure was already the result of a compromise , bearing in mind the ECU 35 m originally thought necessary by the Commission services responsible , and the ECU 13.8 m then written into the proposal for a decision by those same services in response to budgetary dictates .
As for the Council , it has - if I may say so - exhibited ludicrous tight-fistedness in reducing the ECU 13.8 m by ECU 800 000 , to leave ECU 13 m .
The Commission 's proposal to delete 800 000 from the ECU 13 800 000 , when its own officials had envisaged 35 m , is clearly incomprehensible .
The third point is the proposed European Health Observatory , and in particular the call for feasibility studies to be carried out for the setting-up of this permanent body , to be responsible for monitoring and evaluating health data and indicators in the Community area .
The Council has ignored this request , deeming it inappropriate to make provision for any such body under this programme .
Lastly , but by no means least importantly , there is the question of the committee intended to assist the Commission in the operational phase and which , in Amendment No 10 , we advocate should be advisory only and composed of one representative per Member State , rather than two as at present .
The changes requested , the fruit of experience gained with the other three health programmes in what is mainly a technical area , would undoubtedly make the implementation of this programme less bureaucratic and costly .
These basically are our requests , and once again we take issue with the Council , whose short-sighted attitude demonstrates a clear political wish to render Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty meaningless .
Indeed , such a programme , albeit seemingly technical , is of major long-term strategic importance and would , if it functioned optimally , not only satisfy the call for guarantees and quality for Europe 's citizens in the field of health , but also meet the major budgetary concerns now shared by all the Member States in respect of health spending which has become unsustainable .
This explains the major political significance of this kind of programme of Community action on health monitoring , which makes it possible , on the basis of comparable data , to define the priorities of health policy and improve its productivity and thus its effectiveness .
We would ask for the Commission 's views on these clear and simple concepts , in the hope that they will be borne in mind at the next Health Council , for the express benefit of the citizens of the Union .
Mr President , may I first thank Mr Poggiolini for his work .
I congratulate him because in my opinion and , I feel sure , in the opinion of all our colleagues , his work has been meticulous , aware of the importance of the subject , and receptive in that he has incorporated virtually all the amendments , as has been mentioned from these benches , and all were passed unanimously .
So from the very start , right up to this recommendation for second reading , all the political groups in Parliament have felt fully included in Mr Poggiolini 's positions .
I would add to what he has said , that this body of legislation augurs well because , perhaps for the first time since the Maastricht Treaty , we are not looking at a health programme which is the sum of measures in the various Member States , but at Member States joining together to adopt an integrated measure .
For the first time we have experienced Europe , Europe at its most fruitful , improving national health systems , because obviously data collection is the starting point for better information enabling Member States to improve their respective health systems , something which seems to have caused offence to certain members of the Council .
I congratulated the Commission because the measure is very encouraging but , without withdrawing my congratulations , which it still deserves , I also have to express some disappointment .
This is basically because of two amendments not accepted in the common position .
For one thing , the programme cannot develop in five years with ECU 13 million and , for another , it excludes the existence of a stable structure , a European Health Observatory which would consolidate the data and make it productive and permanent .
So both shortage of funds and lack of a stable structure will tend to work against consolidation of the measures to be introduced .
For that reason , although all the amendments are important , I think Amendment No 8 and Amendment No 17 are fundamental if the project is to continue to have the outstanding significance we gave it at first reading .
I cannot understand the Council 's fears , given that there is the most minimal impact on national sovereignty .
It implies that the principle of subsidiarity has been converted into a nationalist barrier which has skilfully destroyed the climate of hope of five years ago , the climate of the Maastricht Treaty .
And with all due respect to Mr Santer , I have to say that what we in Parliament call the Delors spirit has been extinguished little by little , and now instead we have a faceless Europe .
And a Europe where we do not know who to blame , because of course the Commissioner will express fellow-feeling and claim this is all we can get out of the Council .
And no doubt each member of the Council will claim it was the other States that did not want it .
So there it is , a faceless Europe , but the truth is those fears are astonishing .
Data collection is extremely welcome , but it must be based on reliable information .
Health statistics can make rich pickings for demagoguery , so Member States must guarantee to provide reliable and objective data .
Mr President , the programmes we are debating in the field of health policy have always had the support of this Parliament , and we must congratulate Commissioner Flynn on his effective work , which gives content to the provisions of the Treaty of Maastricht .
But we must be more united in opposing the Council .
We know we are in a period of financial stringency , but the needs of the citizens and the need for a Europe with a human face are imperative .
Perhaps the message that goes out to the citizens tonight should stress the importance of this epidemic monitoring network because unfortunately there is a vacuum here and a need to fill it that we face today and every day .
Unfortunately , we are experiencing the whole area of animal diseases , with bovine spongiform encephalopathy , and at the same time we are facing outbreaks of legionnaire 's disease in Spain , issues requiring international cooperation for an immediate response .
There are centres operating in this area already , like the centre in London or the network set up to monitor AIDS .
The need for such measures and their importance and effectiveness is being demonstrated in Paris , and all we have to do is strengthen them .
But a call to individual responsibility should also go out .
Sometimes we forget that the key to epidemics and to prevention lies in the individual behaviour of each and every citizen and , of course , in the local , basic and fundamental structures .
And in this respect we need to remind governments - which are stingy enough at the moment in their support for these Community programmes - that they also devote very little money to preventive medicine at the national level , the regional level and the local level .
And that is what we ought to condemn here and now , because only between 2 % and 4 % of European health budgets is devoted to preventive medicine , clearly inadequate figures which undermine the overall effectiveness of the system .
It leads to escalating costs in other sectors : saving here means much higher expenditure elsewhere .
Another fundamental requirement is establishing coordination at local , regional , national and Community levels and we must draw up a common external health convention linked to the single frontier convention .
I believe all these things are closely linked and that is another challenge .
We await a proposal from the European Commission shortly .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to congratulate Mr Poggiolini on this report , which the Liberal Group entirely supports in principle .
There is a considerable demand for comparable health statistics at European level which will continue beyond the end of the action programme , and this is why a permanent system of health monitoring has been proposed .
The question remains , however , as to how we can achieve this as quickly , efficiently and cheaply as possible .
The idea of a European observatory is a valid one but would be a fairly major undertaking , and we need to look at the systems already in operation in the Member States .
This is why I think it is a good idea to carry out a feasibility study first .
We need to find out if any of the Member States already has a successful health monitoring system in operation and , if so , it should be used as the basis for the European system .
Later on there are various options open to us .
Either we can ask the Member States to adopt the best practice methods we have identified , or we can set up a new European centre to develop them further .
In any event we feel , like the rapporteur and various other speakers , that the ECU 20 million requested is an absolute minimum if we are to achieve any real results .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Poggiolini report is full of good intentions , something which , on the face of it , ought to make it a good report .
Who would not be in favour of improving people 's health and reducing costs ?
In actual fact , we do not need an observatory to tell us that expenditure on health and social security , which are inextricably interlinked , is reaching astronomic proportions .
And nor do we need an observatory to tell us that the reasons for this have more to do with bad policy and inadequate , if not dubious , management than the need for coordination at European level .
So what have they proposed ?
Yet another supranational body .
I cannot help feeling that this observatory is just like all those other instruments that Europe is trying to foist on us , such as the federal-type body which is being set up on the pretext of combating fraud in the Community budget .
I cannot help wondering whether good intentions do not tend to put a gloss on certain political initiatives which actually have little to do with the causes they are supposed to be defending .
When the Maastricht Treaty was signed , we were promised that European integration would mean an end to all our problems .
There would be no more unemployment and great prosperity .
Now we can see where it has got us .
The lessons of Maastricht have not been learnt and we are still heading down the same road .
But federalism is not the answer to anything .
I would like to inform my honourable friend that if he wishes to combat increases in health spending , he should tackle the real causes .
The age pyramid in the Member States is a disaster .
We need to pursue a consistent and pro-active birthrate policy so that there can be real solidarity between generations .
Immigration is an exacerbating factor when it comes to health spending , and France practises the most scandalous discrimination here .
In a country where monogamy is the cultural and legal norm , it allows foreigners to practise polygamy and provides social protection for the many wives of those who choose not to follow our traditions and laws on our own soil .
One of the main reasons why health spending is increasing so much is because of the decentralization and public administration of health care .
Local authorities build hospitals to boost their own prestige , regardless of whether the decision is really justified .
It is not unusual to find the same extremely expensive equipment , such as scanners , in two districts only ten miles apart .
Often , such equipment is underused or else simply not needed .
Sometimes hospitals are built not because they are needed to provide health care , but in order to create jobs .
But in the end it simply leads to job losses , in that it enables the State to satisfy its bulimic appetite for controlling the economy .
So you end up in a terminal decline , which is the reason why spending on public health is increasing : because what you are really doing is funding a socialist policy to combat unemployment .
Medicine is to be given the socialist treatment .
Do I really need to remind you of what happened in the Soviet Union ?
The Soviet healthcare disaster was matched by equal incompetence on the economic front .
Do you really want to repeat their mistakes ?
If we wish to tackle health problems seriously , we must be brave enough to tackle the causes I have just described head-on .
Yet all your hopes seem to be pinned on this rather woolly idea of an observatory .
It marks further progress by the federalist ideology , which comes as no surprise , but we must denounce it for the mistake it is .
In his explanatory statement , Mr Poggiolini justifies the setting-up of this observatory by the fact that it will enable the Member States , on the basis of comparable health data , to establish health policy priorities and to make health policy more cost-effective and hence more efficient .
This is incorrect on two counts .
It is not up to the public authorities to manage health policy .
Putting civil servants in charge of research is tantamount to killing it off , or at the very least making it much less effective than if laboratories , driven by competition and the enthusiasm of their researchers , throw themselves into developing new products .
The observatory is the exact opposite .
It is a federalist initiative which will become a supranational body designed to impact on other , lower-ranking public administrations in the Member States .
They will be reduced merely to implementing a policy which has no legitimacy whatsoever .
First of all , I should like to thank Mr Poggiolini and the Members of the House who have contributed to the debate as well as the members of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection who helped prepare the report .
I am particularly grateful to them for dealing with the matter with such great speed .
The general aim of the programme is to contribute to the establishment of a high-quality , policy-oriented monitoring system in order to ensure a high level of health protection .
This is required of us by Article 129 of the Treaty .
It is very pleasing for me to hear so many people in support of our intentions here .
You will recall , I am quite sure , that this system is to consist of three components : firstly , a set of health indicators with comparable data from all the Member States in the European Community ; secondly , an electronic network to exchange that data ; thirdly , analysis of the data , for example , for our annual health status report .
You first saw this particular proposal in April of this year when you gave it its first reading .
At that time , you adopted 44 amendments of which 28 were accepted , either fully or partially , in the Commission 's subsequent amended proposal .
But , since then , the Council has adopted this common position on the programme which accepted fully only a very small number of the amendments from first reading .
I can very easily understand , therefore , your desire to reintroduce many of the amendments which were there at the first reading .
Before I deal with them I should just like to say that , of the 19 amendments that are currently in front of us , I can inform you that the Commission is in a position to accept 10 of them and we are going to do that either wholly or in part .
We accept fully Amendments Nos 7 , 9 and 10 - that is , parts 2 and 4 - and 13 , 17 and 19 .
We accept partially Amendments Nos 2 , 6 and 10 - part 1 - and 16 and 18 .
The partial acceptance of these amendments is due to a number of reasons .
One of the amendments is too restrictive and that one is Amendment No 2 .
Amendment No 6 might give rise to misinterpretation and some confusion .
The first paragraph of Amendment No 10 is not in keeping with the structure of the committee already adopted for the other public health programmes .
Amendment No 16 requires the Commission to undertake an activity which may better be carried out by technical experts with the support or at the instigation of , the Commission .
Finally , Amendment No 18 is partly outside the scope of the programme .
Regarding our position on Amendment No 10 , I think that particular amendment deserves a little clarification for the House .
It concerns the committee associated with the programme .
This was raised during the debate .
While we agree that this committee should be of an advisory nature , it is important for the structure of the committee that should be similar to those associated with the other public health programmes .
In the case of the health monitoring programme , we feel that it is particularly important to have two representatives per Member State for a very specific reason : because the producers - typically , the national institutes of statistics - and the users of health data - typically , the national health administrations - are likely to have very different perspectives on the programme , both of which should be heard .
It is for that basic reason that we think there should be two representatives from each Member State .
As for the amendments that we cannot accept , I would like to state our reasons .
There are three amendments that are not acceptable for legal reasons , i.e. Amendments Nos 1 , 5 and 11 .
Of these , the latter two are rejected because they are not in keeping with the wording of Article 129 .
Two amendments are rejected because they fall outside the scope of the programme : Amendments Nos 3 and 15 .
Three amendments are rejected because they are unacceptably limiting : Amendments Nos 4 , 12 and 14 .
The remaining amendment - Amendment No 8 - concerns the size of the budget and that also causes some difficulty .
At this point , I should like to elaborate a little on the reason for refusing some of these amendments .
It is important that everybody understand why we are doing so .
First regarding Amendment No 1 , which concerns the consideration of a European health observatory .
That matter was raised very strongly by many of those who contributed .
I would like to emphasize that we are not opposed to undertaking the feasibility study for such a structure .
Rather our opposition is based on the need for recitals to refer to legal texts rather than to meetings and that kind of thing .
Thus , I can reassure you and the House that I have not forgotten about the promise that I made at the conciliation meeting : the idea of a European health observatory will be studied .
I am very pleased that Mrs Kestelijn-Sierens asked that this study be undertaken specifically .
It shall be so .
With respect to Amendments Nos 3 and 15 , we cannot accept supporting improvements of data bases in Member States because , pursuant to the principle of subsidiarity , this is a matter for the Member States themselves .
As regards Amendments Nos 5 and 11 , I would like to say that we do not agree that cooperation should be fostered and developed with all the relevant parties , but rather that we must use a text that is more consistent with the wording of Article 129 .
The question of the budget has been raised by virtually all the speakers who contributed this evening .
It is only natural that I would wish to see the financial resources for this programme increased , but as the House very well knows the margin available for additional expenditure under rubric 3 of the budget is very tight indeed .
Against this background you will recall that in the case of the first three health programmes the budgetary allocations were only finally decided at the conciliation procedure .
I expect that we are going to go to conciliation in this particular case as well .
At that point , I suggest , in the legislative process the budgetary authority will have a better appreciation of the final content of the programme and the resources that will be thought appropriate and necessary .
I suggest that we should leave it to the conciliation process finally to decide this matter .
Before closing , let me add that I know we are all very concerned about the stated objectives of the programme .
We agree with you that it is important to seek comparable and progressively harmonized data .
This point was very strongly made by Mr Poggiolini .
But we must be careful , I suggest , in the activities we support to achieve that particular objective .
I would like to recall that we are not in a position under Article 129 to oblige Member States to harmonize national data which is what is implied in Amendment No 14 .
It is for this reason that we oppose this amendment while accepting Amendment No 13 .
Finally , I would like to express my hope that Parliament will try and understand the reasoning behind the nonacceptance of the amendments that I have just discussed with you .
I also hope that , demonstrating the very general concern about health monitoring , Parliament will give a favourable opinion to this particular programme .
It is a hugely important matter and does satisfy the two important points made by Mr Aparicio Sanchez and Mr Valverde López that we need to have a European face .
This would go a long way to achieving that .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Water policy
The next item is the report ( A4-0290 / 96 ) by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the communication from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on European Community water policy ( COM ( 96 ) 0059 - C4-0144 / 96 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the Commission communication on European Community water policy , I should like to give you a brief analysis of the proposals which are before you .
First of all , we welcome the fact that many of the recitals , such as C , Q and V , and many of the paragraphs in the motion for a resolution , in particular paragraphs 4 , 5 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 21 , 23 and 24 , are entirely in line with the views of our committee .
However , we feel that the Commission proposal does not go far enough in the area of simplification , and we are calling on it to develop a framework directive which incorporates all the existing directives and any proposals that are in the pipeline in this area , including those relating to monitoring and information requirements .
Our opinion clearly indicates the course to follow : rearrange , simplify , harmonize and clarify the existing legislation , but naturally without reducing the level of protection currently provided .
This would serve a dual purpose .
First , it would make the Community policy easy to apply and monitor , making it easier for the Member States to apply national or transnational measures .
How can they be expected to transpose over 50 directives on water protection into national law , especially when these overlap , duplicate or even sometimes contradict each other ?
Secondly , it would make European Union policy easier for the general public to grasp .
The obligations of all water users , both public and private , should be set out in one single text so that they can see that water has a wide range of uses and therefore cannot be regulated using a sectoral approach .
The European Union would thus have a single major piece of legislation to protect one of its essential natural resources .
However , the motion for a resolution does not appear to in line with our opinion as regards the principle of subsidiarity , and even appears to contain some contradictions .
Although we support the analysis given in paragraph 16 on the need for an integrated European approach for the management of cross-border river basins , there are a number of other paragraphs which we cannot support .
Paragraph 1 states that the priority objectives and measures of a Community water policy can be better attained at Community rather than Member State level , yet paragraph 9 expressly acknowledges that they cannot be implemented in the same way everywhere .
The resolution nevertheless proposes as the absolute minimum the establishment of strict and uniform emission standards , whereas the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development had proposed that the framework directive should simply set out guidelines for achieving the common objectives fixed by the European Union .
Mr President , the fact that my group is only proposing four amendments to the Florenz report is a measure of how much we appreciate not only the work of the rapporteur , but the work of the other shadow rapporteurs , both in the Liberal Group and the Green Group and also all those who have contributed to what I think has been a very successful conclusion to a long programme which started several months ago .
Certainly it is felt on this side of the House that the hearing of 20 June , which Parliament established and which is referred to in the preamble to the Florenz report , was a very good beginning .
As I see it , the Commission said to us basically , what do you want to do ?
We , as the elected representatives , came forward with some proposals during the course of that hearing , and rightly so .
The Commission and Parliament can therefore be said to have worked very carefully and constructively in coming forward to a conclusion , not only of that hearing , but also with some excellent work put in by Mr Florenz over the summer break before the communication materialized in the autumn .
That was a very good way forward , but we felt on this side of the House that may be an action programme , and that was the word we were talking about and which was the subject of amendments in committee , would have given Parliament the power that we have under codecision .
Therefore , if we are going to accept , and we will , as a reflection of the agreement reached based on a letter from Mrs Bjerregaard to Mr Florenz , dated 14 October 1996 , then that is the basis upon which we have agreed .
Therefore , we will accept the principle of a framework directive and we will also accept the diminution in our powers under Article 130s . Yes , we are playing constitutional games , of course , and we are glad that the Commission has agreed to go along with some of those manoeuvrings .
It was right that we should have done this .
Can I ask the Commissioner , when she responds to the debate , please to give us some indication on timescale .
Part of the gameplan is that we accepted the principle of a framework directive rather than an action programme on the basis that we wanted something to be able to deliver to an electorate and that seems to me to make sense .
Can I also ask the Commissioner to tell us what she has in mind with regard to the other water directives . As others have pointed out , these are currently in hand , and it would therefore be useful to know the Commission 's thinking in terms of the timescale on those other directives .
I thank the Commission once again for the constructive approach which it has taken to the Florenz report and I congratulate Mr Florenz again for the excellent work which he and the Christian-Democrats have done .
Mr President , as colleagues have just mentioned , water has a determinant influence on other very important policy areas , such as agriculture , tourism , urban consumption and industry .
That is why we fully support the proposal made by the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , to begin to approach these issues globally by way of a framework directive .
We also support the focus on prioritizing emission standards and drawing up quality criteria as a supplementary convergence instrument .
That is essential too .
Likewise , I think we can entirely support the proposal made by the Committee on Agriculture through its rapporteur Mr des Places , on the need to codify and simplify the proposals .
And I think we , as a Parliament , should take swift action to make all the citizens of Europe and all those in positions of responsibility aware that in the near future things cannot continue in this area as they have done up to now .
Water is a scarce commodity .
Everyone knows that and no-one is entitled to pollute it .
So there must be a strategy to prevent any pollution , and emissions must be the exception , not the rule .
Every citizen must be reminded that water has a price , and that price will go on rising for economic , social and environmental reasons , and we also have a duty to make a reality of the Maastricht Treaty requirement to incorporate all the costs into the price of water .
We all have a duty to point out that not only are there problems of quality , there are also problems of quantity in many regions .
So regional solidarity must apply across national frontiers .
This policy also includes a requirement of proper use .
The problem also arises in terms of land management , re-use of waste water , and taking advantage of all the available resources , including the opportunities for Mediterranean coastal areas of installing desalination plant , and such initiatives cannot be left until drought problems are serious .
Great commitment is also needed from all those involved - large consumers like agriculture , industry , tourism and cities - and local authorities have major responsibilities here too because town and country planning must take this limiting factor very much into account .
And finally , I do not think there is any room for simple answers in this area . There is no place for simple privatization of water management .
The issue is much more complex , it has to be viewed in global terms and the European Union must draw up these guidelines and then leave it to the regions and the countries to implement the options appropriately .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our Group is supporting the Florenz report , in particular to defend the need to adopt a framework directive on the sustainable protection of water resources , condensing and simplifying the very many directives in existence on this matter .
We also support the main objective of fighting for good quality water from an ecological point of view .
It is important to protect Europe 's water resources at all costs given the increasing use that man makes of water . It is equally urgent for all Member States to avoid further deterioration in water quality and promote the proper treatment of waste water .
Community funding to protect water should be concentrated more and more on peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions , where a lot remains to be done .
Of greater interest is the Commissions 's reference to water catchment areas which not only , in many cases , call for a cooperation and understanding policy between the Member States interested but also call for attention and intervention to be by the European Union .
Nowadays we must tackle water questions in a different way , without fighting over water in the way that we used to .
But this does not mean that Member States should stop fighting to defend their own rights and the interests of their own populations nor that the Union should have greater powers to arbitrate ; it should control and guide , within fair and proper criteria , based on the principle of subsidiarity .
Water policy has to be linked to all of the other policies related to integrated development projects , concerning the environment and regional planning , transport , energy , industry , agriculture and forestry .
As for the latter field , apart from the interest of preserving indigenous forests , it should also be pointed out how important it can be to boost water resources by means of a global EU strategy in forests , which in practice means significantly and urgently increasing forested areas in all of the Member States and all of their regions , but in particular the southern regions , where the governments have not always been very careful and have not always made genuine efforts to pursue proper long-term policies .
Mr President , Commissioner Bjerregaard , let us be fair about this .
The revision of our entire water policy is largely thanks to the European Parliament , which felt it necessary in view of the plethora of barely compatible directives which had sprung up in this field .
Our hearing , which Mr Florenz also mentioned , made a significant contribution to this revision .
I must admit that my group did not have , and still does not have , a great deal of confidence in the Commission to review water policy properly .
I feel that the Commission 's activities in this field have cast it in a rather poor light up to now , and this communication has done nothing to improve my opinion .
It is a very shallow document , and I think the rapporteur was entirely right to threaten to demand an action programme .
You will know , and Mr Florenz is also aware , that my group was not in favour of calling for an action programme instead of this communication because we thought it would mean a considerable delay .
Yet we are still having to wait for the Commission to come up with a proposal for a framework directive which should give us what we feel is missing from this communication : concerted action on quality objectives and emission standards - both quality and quantity objectives , and top priority for the ecological quality of water .
I am quite happy with the letter which the Commissioner sent in reply to the demands by Mr Florenz .
Once again , it is thanks to Parliament that we now have details in black and white of what the forthcoming framework directive is to contain .
As we have seen , Parliament has had to go to a great deal of trouble to ensure that we have an acceptable new European water policy , and Mr Florenz must take much of the credit for this .
I warmly congratulate him on his report .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , according to the Environmental Agency , between 10 and 20 per cent of water in Europe is not of adequate quality .
And since 1973 a legislative framework of contradictory directives has developed .
So we are in complete agreement with Mr Florenz on the need for a framework directive which integrates and simplifies current legislation , above all if account is taken of the fact that non-compliance with Community law on environmental issues is habitual .
We believe that prevention , protection of resources and halting the deterioration in the quality of water , as well as repairing the damage , are priority issues for the European Union 's water policies .
And we think all these directives need to be integrated to create clear and comprehensible legislation for the Member States , without lowering the level achieved .
We think the objectives and priorities must be set at Community level - if there are no Community standards it is difficult for the States to fulfil them - leaving responsibility for adaptation and implementation to the States .
Agriculture , industry and transport must also take account of the water and environmental policy of the European Union , otherwise it will be very difficult for us to achieve the planned objectives .
In my country several marshes which are a valuable European resource are threatened .
I believe some of their names are known worldwide like the Ruidera lagoons , the Daimiel Tablas , the Valencia Albufera , Doñana , and so on .
We still have time to take steps to prevent resources as precious to human life as water being lost forever in the world and in this case in the European Union .
So we must take those steps , and we entirely agree with the Florenz report .
Mr President , we have perfect harmony in the Committee on the Environment , since our group too wholeheartedly supports the report by Mr Florenz , on which we congratulate him .
The approach he has adopted is entirely consistent with our concerns .
We need a framework directive on water policy , based on the four principles of environment policy in the usual order , starting with the principle of precaution and ending with the principle that the polluter pays ; it should be pointed out that all these principles are being virtually disregarded at present .
There are a number of points which I should like to make .
First of all , on the question of choosing between quality objectives and limit values , the rapporteur 's view is entirely correct : they are not mutually incompatible .
It is obvious that if we wish to reach certain quality objectives , we need first to set limit values based not on sectoral interests , but on how much the ecosystems can absorb .
This has not always been done , with the result that we now have a situation which the Commission itself acknowledges is in rapid decline , with water quality deteriorating more and more , and groundwater and rivers widely polluted with nitrates , organochlorines and pesticides .
This brings us round to the policies that are to blame for it all .
Which are the three policies that I feel are most to blame ?
Firstly , agricultural policy .
It is obvious that unless we change the CAP , we shall not be able to sort out the problem of water quality .
There is widespread pollution from pesticides and nitrates which seriously affect water quality , and what is needed is a radical shift towards more extensive , organic farming .
It will take time , but it is has to be done .
Next , industrial policy .
It is clear that there are a whole range of industrial processes that need to be changed . We need to make recycling and the closed-circuit use of industrial water more widespread , and we must prevent overexploitation by modifying a number of techniques which have now become obsolete .
This too will cost money .
Finally , energy policy .
An energy policy based on centralized production generating major thermal pollution is certainly not going to do anything to help maintain water quality .
This is another area where we need to take action .
We need more decentralization , and we need to improve our energy efficiency and develop renewable sources of energy .
In conclusion , I do not think that we will solve our water quality problems by opting for quality objectives and limit values without providing for the economic instruments to achieve them .
As the European Environment Agency has recommended , we need to use economic devices such as ecotaxes and introduce the notion of third-party liability for industries , otherwise we shall never succeed in finding a solution to our problems .
Mr President , the very fact that the European Environment Agency estimates that only 10 to 20 % of the waters in the European Union now meet the good water quality requirements should in itself make every sensible person sit up and think .
It is high time that we did something about it .
As Mr Florenz makes abundantly clear , the Commission has unfortunately failed to achieve its main objective of producing a coherent global approach for water policy .
I should have welcomed an action programme , which was what the rapporteur originally wished to see .
A country like Austria , which has for some time regarded water protection as one of its top priorities , would certainly be 100 % behind this report , and a pan-European preventive policy on water protection is something so important that not even the subsidiarity principle can be used as an excuse to get round it - and I say this as someone who is a great defender of that principle .

The priority objectives and measures are to be established at Community level , whereas the way they are implemented is , of course , a matter for the Member States to decide .
Basic prevention and the reduction of environmental damage can only be achieved through a combination of emission standards and quality objectives , though account also needs to be taken of the implications for the environment and for competition of the fact that strict emission standards are easier to implement and enforce than pollution-related quality objectives .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission 's document and support Mr Florenz 's report .
I particularly welcome a statement in the Commission 's document which reads : ' Community water policy must be sufficiently flexible to avoid the imposition of inappropriate or unnecessarily strict requirements simply for the sake of harmonization ' .
In the context of the British debate about Europe and the amount of money that the United Kingdom has spent - some would say unnecessarily , although I do not agree with that - in cleaning up our water over the last 20 years or so , I welcome that statement .
I think it is a very important thing to have on the record .
The other text that I wish to raise with the Commission is this : it is in paragraph 5.9 of the document which reads : ' the Treaty requires that both the costs and benefits of action or inaction are taken into consideration ' .
One of the things that tends to underpin this kind of debate is people 's hope that if only we went for more harmonization and stricter limits we would have cleaner water .
I do not think that is the problem .
One of the main problems in our Member States in relation to water quality is the fact that we cannot afford the very high standards that we would like to set ourselves .
One of the reasons we get into difficulties with these water directives is that the Commission is not sufficiently explicit about the exact costs that would be entailed in complying with the directives which it brings forward .
It is absolutely shameful that the drinking water directive which is currently before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection contains a cost impact statement which is simply not worth the paper that it is written on .
The result of all that is revealed in the report on the monitoring of the application of Community law in 1995 .
That shows under the heading ' water ' that : ' Several Member States are in serious difficulties with the proper application of the objectives established by Community rules . '
Those who call for stricter harmonization might like to note that one of the Member States most frequently mentioned in this package is Germany .
Mr President , I too support the Florenz report .
Water , after all , is our most fundamental natural resource .
It is the very stuff of life .
Therefore it is all the more disturbing to note the continuing deterioration in European water supplies .
The nitrate content of more than 66 % of rivers and lakes in Europe has risen .
The European standards for total pesticides in drinking water have been exceeded in 75 % of the European Union 's agricultural regions .
In Ireland too we have our problems .
Indeed we have fish killed in our rivers and lakes and this is an annual occurrence .
We have a particularly striking case at the moment in Ireland in a town called Nenagh which has found that its water resource is contaminated .
On two occasions it has been contaminated recently .
It is very difficult for the local community .
Indeed in my own county of Meath we have problems with the quality of water there .
Clearly Europe has a role to play in laying down and enforcing strict norms on water quality .
The European Union approach must be governed by three key principles : ensuring safe water supplies , arresting the decline of water quality and the restoration of polluted waters .
However , the institutions of the Union have yet to grasp the importance of this task .
The haphazard approach must cease and the Commission must now spearhead a strong Union water policy .
We should not have to wait for a major environmental disaster for this to happen .
We cannot put this issue on the long finger any longer .
I urge the Commission to face up to its responsibilities without delay and before the old phrase , ' water , water everywhere and not a drop to drink ' becomes a reality .
Mr President , having had experience with many of my constituents of the various water directives currently in force in the European Union , one of the clear things that emerges is how difficult they are to understand and how difficult it is for normal citizens that are concerned about their estuary or the condition of the water in their rivers to point to the area in which the European Union 's directive should be able to help them .
I warmly welcome , therefore , the call for a much broader and better framework than there is at the moment .
That is certainly essential .
There are two areas that I also want to bring into the debate at this point , one of which has not been mentioned so far , but it is in the Florenz report and has to do with the common agricultural policy .
It is most important to realize that unless we secure a very substantial reform and change in the way that we run agriculture in Europe , there is no chance of reaching the levels of water quality that we would wish to see and , without the two going ahead together , that aim - the water quality we want - will be a difficult one to achieve .
I also find it difficult in terms of subsidiarity actually to say that drinking water quality should be something that we consider here .
That is a function of the rest of our water quality : if we get that right , then drinking water will also be correct .
To agree with Mrs Jackson , I find that one of the areas missing here is the cost to the citizen of these policies : we need to ensure that Member States tackle this problem in parallel to getting quality right .
I would like to ask the Commissioner how she intends to put pressure on Member States to make sure that water is not the expensive luxury that no-one can afford .
Mr President , as Mr Florenz points out , the Commission communication on European Community water policy is not an adequate response to the clear and precise calls that were made last year by the Committee on the Environment and by the Council for a European water protection strategy .
The solution here is surely not to call for an action programme .
The latest report by the European Environment Agency shows as clearly as one could wish that there are so many problems with our water that the time for action is now , which means legislation in the form of a framework directive , as soon as the drinking water directive has been dealt with .
The framework directive will be delayed for years if an action programme first has to be worked out .
I therefore welcome the fact that Mrs Bjerregaard has promised , in a letter to the rapporteur , that she will bring forward such a framework directive on the basis of the guidelines set out by the rapporteur , focusing on emission standards as the most appropriate instrument , combined with the principles of prevention , precaution and action at source .
I also look forward to the Environment Commissioner ensuring both that the many mutually contradictory water directives are made compatible with each other , and that water policy is incorporated into other policy areas such as agriculture , industry and transport , where these are subject to the consideration of a sustainable environment .
If paragraph 22 of the motion for a resolution is rejected , we can fully endorse the report as a very relevant critique of the communication from the Commission and a practical indication of how the future framework directive should be drawn up .
I should therefore like to hear from Mrs Bjerregaard when she intends to submit the proposal for a directive , and whether it has been correctly understood from her letter that the Commission has now committed itself to following the guidelines contained in this report when it brings forward the framework directive .
Water is life .
The European Parliament has given its unceasing attention to this vital issue which affects all our futures .
And water knows no frontiers .
I would congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , on his combined approach of emission standards and quality objectives , and I am delighted that the Environment Commissioner , Mrs Bjerregaard , has given us her written assurance that she intends to pursue this approach .
I should like to make it clear that neither the Commission nor Parliament intends to interfere in matters of water ownership , and no one in the House wishes to see the compulsory diversion of Austria 's water reserves .
Our only aim is to tackle pollution at source , and to introduce measures to prevent pollution before it happens .
Mr President , let me begin by thanking the committee and , in particular , the rapporteur for the large amount of work which has been done in connection with the report which is before the House today .
As several speakers have pointed out , Parliament 's Committee on the Environment held a hearing in July last year on the EU 's water policy , to which it was kind enough to invite me .
The hearing made it quite clear that something had to be done to clarify the Community 's water policy and establish a coherent overall strategy to protect the water resources of the Community .
Following on from everything that was said and discussed at the hearing , the Commission published its communication on European Community water policy in February this year .
This communication was an analysis of all the current EU legislation which has a bearing on water resources , and it contains proposals for improving policy in this area .
The central proposal in the communication was the drawing-up of a framework directive on water .
This would replace much of the older legislation , something which is necessary , as many speakers here today have also indicated .
In addition , it would fill some of the gaps which have been observed , another request which has been made today .
And , finally , it would ensure what everyone has certainly mentioned , namely the coherence and overall coordination of legislation in this sector .
I should like to take this opportunity to stress that the idea is not to change the more recent water legislation , and let me mention some of the directives which I have in mind here , such as the nitrates directive , IPPC , the urban waste-water treatment directive and the directive on pesticides .
That is not the intention .
On the contrary , the framework directive is intended to introduce measures which supplement the recent environmental legislation on water , thereby greatly increasing the general level of protection of the Community 's water environment .
Several of the speakers , including Mr White , asked when we could expect to proceed with such an initiative .
We naturally waited for the debate we were to have with Parliament today , but we have also done our preparatory work and we hope to be able to bring forward a new proposal in the course of January .
I have been very satisfied with the reception given to the communication .
We received many written comments on our proposals , and we organized a conference in May to discuss various aspects of the proposal for a framework directive .
There was considerable support for the idea of a framework directive , and an overwhelming majority in favour of the broad lines of the directive , as set out in the communication .
Of course , there was also criticism of some aspects of the directive , and we received a number of useful suggestions as to how it could be improved .
On the whole , we think that we have struck a reasonable overall balance .
We have also had support from the other institutions - the Council , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions .
I have been very pleased to see the great interest which Parliament has shown in this subject , and I share the opinion of the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , and also Mr White , that constructive cooperation has taken place .
I am sure that we can find solutions to the criticisms which emerge from the motion for a resolution .
I have examined the text in some detail , and the Commission 's proposal for a framework directive will follow closely the ideas which have been expressed here today , and which are also clear from the report .
This means that , with regard to the proposals contained in the text , I can endorse the aims and principles which they describe .
I also agree with the points raised by Mr Lannoye , which several other speakers mentioned , namely the connection with agriculture policy - and we shall in particular have another opportunity of discussing this in connection with the groundwater action plan - as well as the need for financial incentives , and Parliament will be aware that we are working on this .
I have been in touch with both the rapporteur and chairman of the Committee on the Environment , and I am sure that we in the Commission now have a good understanding of the background to Parliament 's concerns .
Several speakers here today have also referred to the letter which I sent to the rapporteur and the chairman of the Committee on the Environment , and I naturally stand by the text of that letter .
I therefore also hope that we can now draw up a proposal for a framework directive that will obtain Parliament 's support , and I am very pleased that the rapporteur is able to give his backing to an amendment to the motion for a resolution which deletes the reference to an action programme and makes it possible for us to bring forward a proposal for a directive very quickly .
I think it was Mr White who asked about the other initiatives in this sector , but the situation is that the drinking water directive , which I understand will soon be dealt with , is currently before Parliament .
This has also had to wait a little .
The same applies to a proposal for a bathing water directive , which has also been pending for quite a long time and which we shall likewise soon have on the agenda , and finally there is the groundwater action plan which I referred to earlier .
I have asked my colleagues to cooperate closely with Parliament at all stages of the legislative process , and I very much hope that together we shall be able to see this new directive adopted during the current parliamentary term .
To sum up : we are in agreement that our common aim is to ensure that there is an ambitious and comprehensive policy for the protection of the Community 's water resources and the natural habitats which they support .
I therefore look forward to cooperating closely on this issue , and I hope that in years to come , we shall look back with satisfaction at this joint venture , which can lay the foundations for the EU 's water policy for the next century .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , before I close the debate , Mr Florenz , the rapporteur , has asked for the floor .
I think it would be interesting to hear his views .
So you have the floor again , Mr Florenz .
Mr President , I should like to raise a matter of some concern with you and the Commissioner . Over the last few months , one of our new Member States has been shocked by reports that you , Commissioner , are planning to regulate water resources in Europe and to divert water from the Alps to the southern areas of the Union .
I assume that our Austrian colleague was so delighted at the results of his elections that he forgot to mention this today .
I would be extremely interested to know what is happening here .
I also have a point to make about the idea of a cost-benefit analysis . I am a very keen businessman and like dealing with such matters , but we surely do not need to embark on yet another discussion about quality objectives .
What we need is to produce a cost-benefit analysis which is cautious but accurate .
Mr President , I have also been following the debate in Austria , where I understand it has been claimed that we want to steal water from Austria and transfer it to Member States where it is less plentiful .
Of course , that is not the case .
Commissioner Fischler has raised the same question , and I have made it clear to him several times that this is not part of the proposal .
On the other hand , it did in a sense emerge from the debate here today that some southern European countries have very serious problems with water resources , and they are naturally interested in this issue being included in the discussion of the proposals on water , in one way or another .
But this does not mean that we shall be transferring any water from Austria .
With regard to cost-benefit analyses , I would say that to a large extent we shall be considering the prospects and implications when we deal with the proposals which the Commission has put forward in the motor oils programme .
This is another of the programmes in which we have consistently worked with cost-benefit analyses and drawn conclusions from them in terms of environment policy which will not necessarily please everyone , because the costs differ widely for the individual countries .
They are also very different for the individual inhabitants , and so it is very hard to generalize on the subject .
I have noted the comments made by Mrs Jackson during the debate , and it is quite clear that some of the proposals on water which we have put forward are very costly for some countries compared with others .
This has exercised the Council a great deal , and I think I can say there was a reasonable degree of understanding that we must provide scope for assisting those countries which have to bear heavy costs because of the environmental requirements that we are introducing in the proposals on water .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
Mr Eisma would like to raise a point of order .
I take it that it is a point of order because I was just about to close this debate . So you have one minute to raise your point of order .
I just have a question which I should like to put to you , Mr President .
If you are sitting here , there is no monitor on which you can follow the debate , so you cannot see when it is your turn .
I asked last month whether we could have an extra monitor over here , but it seems this is not possible .
If it is too expensive for Parliament to afford , I will bring one and install it myself next time .
Can you promise me that we shall have an extra monitor for the next part-session , so that those of us over here can also see when it is our turn ?
Mr Eisma , I cannot promise that the equipment will be here for the next session .
What I can promise is that I will pass on the suggestion you have made and especially the very important point that you could contribute to the cost of installing this equipment from your own pocket , which I find extremely interesting given the period of budgetary austerity we are going through .
So you can be sure that I will pass on your proposal to the Bureau .
But I absolutely cannot promise that it will be here because that does not depend on my personal volition .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Food additives other than colours and sweeteners
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0312 / 96 ) by Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position established by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive amending Directive 95 / 2 / EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners ( C4-473-95 / 0114 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , the point at issue here is the approval of a new seaweed-based additive called PES .
The matter is really quite simple .
This new additive , like all the others , is to have an E number and will be included on the EU 's list of approved colourings and additives .
A product with similar characteristics has already been approved for the European market .
This is called carrageenan , and is numbered E 407 .
The Commission has proposed that the new product should be registered under the E number 407a .
At first reading , both the Committee on the Environment and Parliament were firmly opposed to the Commission 's proposal .
They do not believe that the two additives can be treated on a par with each other , as the Commission is doing .
In our view , we are dealing with two distinct products , for which reason they should naturally have two distinct E numbers .
The system of E numbers is unique to Europe , and was intended precisely as a means of guaranteeing clear and transparent information for consumers on what their food contains .
With its proposal , the Commission is well on the way to undermining the whole point of the E number system .
The situation is this .
The issue is a technically complicated one , but I shall try here to explain the differences between the two products .
Carrageenan differs from PES in the way it is produced .
And indeed , PES is used as a raw material for producing carrageenan .
Taking PES as the base product , there is a careful process of extraction and refinement .
Some of you have perhaps already been fortunate enough to have seen the product , but I have both of them here with me now .
( The speaker showed the House the two products ) Carrageenan - and I hope the Commissioner can see what I am pointing to - is a clear , transparent jelly .
PES is cloudy , and has a really bad smell .
So these are two distinct products - one bright and clear , the other unpleasant , cloudy and smelly .
The crux of the matter is that , thanks to effective and controlled refining , carrageenan stands out as a pure product , with no residues or heavy metals .
The Committee on the Environment is therefore proposing that PES should be marketed under a different E number , namely E 408 , so that the consumer is clearly and distinctly informed that these are two products with different degrees of purity .
Commissioner Bangemann reached the same conclusion some years ago , in a written answer to a Member .
Referring to this very question of the degree of purity , Mr Bangemann made it clear that two distinct products were involved .
Unfortunately , he has since changed his position , not least because PES has been approved in the United States .
Firstly , I would remind the House that the USA does not have a system of E numbers , so PES does not have an E number in the USA .
And , secondly , the American health authorities simply approved PES , without requiring any tests on its toxicity .
I am quite convinced that the approval of PES for the American market was part of some political agreement , and the whole affair was clearly not a matter of concern to the Americans , who were engaged just then in negotiating the renewal of their military bases in the Philippines .
In the EU , we have a very reliable and transparent system of E numbers .
We wish to keep that - I myself in particular - because having a reliable and transparent system of E numbers is a precondition for the internal market functioning satisfactorily for all parties .
In our debates , attention has also been drawn to the economic importance of PES for the Philippines .
But let me make it clear : we do not wish to ban the sale of PES in the European Union .
What we are talking about here is not creating new barriers to trade , or implementing development policy .
Nor are we out to force the Philippine seaweed farmers into economic distress and unemployment .
No - this is a question of consumer policy and consumer protection .
If there is anyone here in the Chamber who really supports the principles of free trade , it is indeed myself and the Liberal Group .
In addition , I would point out that this is not a case of the EU lining up against the Philippines .
Europe produces both PES and carrageenan , as does the Philippines .
And we must also bear in mind that half the production of PES in the Philippines is exported as a raw material to European producers of carrageenan .
On behalf of the Committee on the Environment , I would therefore call on Parliament to support a change in the E number for PES , as it did at first reading .
Two different names , two different E numbers .
And the point of having two different E numbers is that consumers , with the help of labelling , can be given clear and distinct information .
Freedom of choice for consumers is at stake here , and we can all support that , as I hope the Commission will as well .
Mr President , this is the other half of the story because I am going to speak in favour of leaving it at 407a .
The reason why I do this is as follows : it is a very closely balanced argument as to what you name this and what number you give this product .
But those who argue in favour of 407a with the name ' Processed Eucheuma seaweed ' do so because this is not a different product .
I think Mrs Riis-Jørgensen said , and in her report it certainly states , that it is basically a different product .
I believe it is true to say that the Codex Alimentarius has accepted that this is basically the same product but a different process .
That is the key to why we give it 407a and not a different number .
It is a different refining process but it is not a different product .
Cheese is cheese whether it is cheddar cheese or one of those fierce little Belgian cheeses that arises from the table in the restaurant and practically bites your ankle .
It is still cheese , and this is still seaweed .
The processing system is different .
Mrs Riis-Jørgensen makes the point in support of giving it a different number that consumers are going to be confused .
Well , consumers must be a very strange breed if they are going around the supermarkets looking to see if this is 407 or 408 .
I have never yet met a consumer who is consumed with anxiety about carrageenan .
The people who might perhaps be confused - although I very much doubt it - would be the manufacturers .
But since , in fact , this system of numbering for this kind of product is primarily addressed to manufacturers - of course , they will have to state the type of product they use on the list of ingredients - I think that there is no danger that manufacturers will be confused into using one product rather than another .
As we have seen , given a demonstration today , they are very different products to look at , but I do not think that consumers will be confused .
Consumers need protection and the mechanism that is there to protect them is the Scientific Committee for Food .
When the Commissioner replies to the debate , she might like to give us some idea of what the Scientific Committee for Food said .
Presumably they were asked their opinion by the Council of Ministers before the Council agreed the common position .
I agree that we must be very careful about any potential health risks , although if there are health risks then this product should not be on the market at all in the Community .
That is why we have to rely on the Scientific Committee for Food .
There is one further point . It was raised with me earlier today that there might be the possibility that certain governments , unnamed , had it in mind to sell certain products - here battleships were named - to the Filipinos in return for seaweed .
I think this is extremely unlikely .
I have no battleships about my person .
I have absolutely no idea of what the British Government 's view is on this issue .
I think that this is something which we should really regard with ridicule .
Mr President , the Commission has put forward a proposal to authorize the use of a thickening and gelling agent similar to carrageenan , which is already produced and authorized in the EU ; it derives from the same raw material but is produced in a different way , as was also pointed out in the debate .
The Commission asked the Scientific Committee for Food for an assessment of its possible effects on public health .
That is what Mrs Jackson 's question referred to .
This inquiry took several years , and the assessment was based on a complete set of data .
The committee found that the substance was entirely acceptable , and proposed that purity standards should be established .
A directive on purity standards will be agreed shortly by the Commission and the Standing Committee for Foodstuffs , under procedure IIIa . The Commission adopts this directive immediately after the substance has been approved for use .
The Commission and the Council approved Parliament 's amendments concerning the descriptions of these substances .
However , we cannot accept the amendment which has been retabled concerning the E number , and this is what the debate has centred on here tonight .
In allocating E numbers , the Commission follows the rules laid down in the directive on food additives adopted by the European Parliament and the Council , whereby food additives which contain the same active substance are given related E numbers .
The adoption of the amendment would lead to a significant departure from the rules laid down by the Codex Alimentarius in its capacity as an international standardizing body under the WTO Agreement .
We therefore recommend the House not to adopt this amendment , since it conflicts with our obligations under the WTO Agreement .
Madam Commissioner , I should like to make it clear to my colleagues that the Commission is in fact isolated here from consumer organizations at both national and European level , and from the Economic and Social Committee and the industry in Europe .
In the Council of Ministers too , several Member States will be listening with great interest to what we decide here in Parliament tomorrow .
I think it is important that we , who are elected by the people to represent both consumers and industry here in Parliament , should also listen to what they say and ensure that we take a clear decision which safeguards their interests .
I think it is important that we who are elected by the people should take this task upon ourselves and not let others influence our attitude , whether it is President Ramos , the United States or anyone else , as Mrs Jackson pointed out .
On behalf of the Committee on the Environment , I recommend that we vote in favour of the committee 's amendment tomorrow , and I would point out that if we abstain , that is the same as voting against .
But I very much hope that we shall have a clear decision tomorrow .
I think that is in everyone 's interest , not least in terms of preserving the E number system and thus respect for the single market .
I would just make one comment on the isolated stance which the Commission is said to hold .
According to my information , there was agreement in the Council on the common position , which means unanimous support .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
Mrs Riis-Jørgensen , we cannot get into a debate , the debate has already taken place .
However as you are the rapporteur and you want to react to the Commissioner 's brief remarks I will give you the floor as long as you do not open up the debate again . Please keep it short and allow me to close the debate immediately afterwards .
Very briefly , Mr President , my country - amongst others - stated in the minutes that it was interested in making an amendment and following Parliament 's position , so it is not right that there was total unanimity .
The minutes say that Denmark wishes to follow Parliament 's position and will work for an amendment .
I have been told by the Irish presidency that it will reopen the debate in the Council of Ministers when we come back with the Environment Committee 's proposal to the Council .
Thank you very much , Mrs Riis-Jørgensen .
After your remarks the Commissioner naturally wants to say something else , so you have the floor , Madam Commissioner , and you will close this debate .
You have the floor .
I am bound to inform the House that Denmark voted in favour of the proposal .
While I was indeed not present at the Council meeting in question , that is what I have been told .
Thank you very much , Madam Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , the issues between you can be resolved in the lobby .
We have heard your opinion and that of the Commissioner .
So the decision will now depend on the vote .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Burma
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-0974 / 96 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and Mr Moorhouse , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0975 / 96 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0976 / 96 by Mrs Kinnock and Mrs Jensen , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the European Union response to the situation in Burma ; -B4-0978 / 96 by Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on Burma ; -B4-0982 / 96 by Mrs Baldi and others , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , on the situation in Burma ; -B4-0984 / 96 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on relations between the European Union and Burma .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank Parliament 's Bureau for putting this oral question on the agenda this week .
The deteriorating situation in Burma calls for urgent discussion , and since our resolution in July , things have only got worse .
Let me give you some of the facts .
The winner of the most recent elections is still under house arrest .
When Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi 's party organized an eighth anniversary celebration on 26 September at her house , at which she was also to give a speech , almost 600 people were arrested , including many sitting members of parliament , that is to say members who were elected but have not been allowed to take their seats in parliament . Some of them have still not been released .
In May of this year , over 100 elected members of parliament were imprisoned and twelve are still in detention - people whose only crime was to be elected to a perfectly normal parliament which the SLORC does not accept .
The SLORC , the governing regime , then announced that it would be stepping up its internal security measures on 15 October in order , so it claimed , to promote internal stability , but many people believe it is simply in order to cause further chaos in Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi 's party .
The blockade on Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi 's house was lifted on 8 October , but reinstated on 11 October .
Yesterday , it was lifted again but is expected to be reimposed by the end of the week , for no other reason than to stop the opposition leader from talking .
In the United States , following a motion in Congress on an amendment from Mr Cohen and Mr Feinstein , steps have now been taken to introduce economic sanctions .
More than 15 major multinational firms have already pulled out of Burma , as we know , and there is of course a risk that European firms which are not covered by these sanctions will take over the businesses and operations left behind .
This is simply not acceptable , and it is therefore a matter of some urgency that the European Union should also consider imposing sanctions .
As was already mooted in June , the ASEAN countries suggested last month that they might give Burma a different , more positive status , but since three ASEAN countries last week refused to let Burma join the organization , it would seem that here too , protests are growing against the regime .
Our question is a simple one .
We want the European Union to act as quickly as possible , and the time is more than ripe .
The situation in Burma is similar to those in Chile and South Africa in the 1980s , and in my view the opposition leader in Burma is the Mandela of the 1990s .
We must do something to help her , we want to lend her our support and we call on the Commission to take action .
Mr President , it is clearly important for the European Parliament that we have this debate .
We believe that it is about time that the European Union took a strong political and moral stand against that iniquitous regime , the SLORC in Rangoon .
I know that Mrs Jensen , my colleague , will talk about James Nicholls and the fact that Mr Spring , the Foreign Minister from Ireland , has still failed to have any decent reply from the Burmese about exactly what happened in connection with James Nicholls ' death in prison in Rangoon .
I would like to ask the Commissioner responsible tonight what we will do if the SLORC continue to deny Aung Sang Suu Kyi 's latest request for a dialogue with the SLORC .
What will the Commission do if they should harm her or rearrest Aung Sang Suu Kyi ?
What will the Commission do ?
What will the European Union do when it is too late for us to act on these matters ?
How many times , Commissioner , do we have to listen to Aung Sang Suu Kyi , the democratic leader of Burma , ask the international community and tell the international community that only isolation and only sanctions will affect the SLORC .
They deserve the same odium , the same treatment as many of us demanded against apartheid South Africa .
It is unacceptable and disingenuous to claim that dialogue or engagement is appropriate with any ruthless regime like the SLORC .
They are intent on subjugating and repressing the people of Burma .
The United States , as Mrs Maij-Weggen has said , has had the Cohen / Feinstein amendment which says that the United States is prepared to take strong measures in relation to sanctions and , indeed , visa restrictions against Burma .
We have no such action or statement from the European Union .
We cannot do business , we cannot appease , we cannot reach any consensus with a government which uses children as slaves , a government which represses democracy and refuses to discuss any kind of political settlement of ethnic groups .
80 , 000 people from the Shan states and from the Karenni states have now been forcibly displaced , they have been abused and they feel abandoned by the whole world .
We talk about the actions of oil companies , Unical and Total are involved in Burma and we understand that they are responsible for violations of human rights and for the fact that people have been forcibly removed from their land in Burma .
It is my understanding , Commissioner , that current proposals , which have been made by the EU in relation to Burma are quite frankly very unlikely to have any impact whatsoever on that regime .
These restrictions will not make the slightest different to the SLORC .
I do not exactly see SLORC members queueing up for entry into the European Union .
It will make absolutely no difference to them at all .
I see no reason why , on the clear evidence that the Commission has heard , GSP should not now be withdrawn as quickly as possible .
Last time I questioned Commissioner Marin in this Parliament .
He gave me the categorical assurance that the GSP access would be withdrawn in November .
He told me categorically .
Is this still the Commission 's view ?
Is Commissioner Marin still prepared to say this ?
I would like to ask , will Commissioner Marin use the influence he clearly has to pressurize the ASEAN countries to play a more constructive role ?
Will the Commission be prepared to send envoys to the ASEAN countries and to Japan to discuss the options which we face ?
But in order to do that , in order to discuss the options it is essential for the Commission to go there with the threat of impending sanctions against the regime .
We have to learn from the mistakes the United States Government made .
We must not go there making demands , we must go there in order to try to have some results .
We need to know at what cost it was to South Africa that the developed world ignored the pleas of Nelson Mandela and the people of South Africa .
Let us remember that all that is required for the triumph of evil is that the good men and women do nothing .
We should act to do something before it is too late .
I have to ask , is the European Community ready to act swiftly before things deteriorate in Burma ?
Mr President , political life in Burma is like its natural vegetation : it is a jungle , a jungle of power and corruption in which the same people have been pulling the strings since 1962 .
A popular uprising , Nobel and Sakharov prizes and the elections held six years ago have brought about no change , and even the neighbouring ASEAN countries have been unable to force the military leaders to take a different line .
Major investors have withdrawn under pressure from public opinion , and the EU representation in the region needs to investigate whether the gap left in the market by EU firms such as Heineken and Carlsberg has been filled by Asian and in particular Chinese investors .
If this has happened , then none of these measures we have made so much fuss about will actually have put an ounce of pressure on the regime .
Over the last six months , Parliament has regularly called for democracy in Burma , yet tourists continue to visit the country , maintaining the illusion that the situation there is normal .
All friendly appeals for change have fallen on deaf ears , and it is now time for the European Union to take more practical steps .
Stopping trade advantages and aid is the ultimate option available to us .
If the military leadership refuses to enter into constructive dialogue with the opposition , then we shall have no choice but to take that decision .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Parliament for taking the initiative of holding this debate .
I agree , as does the Commission , that it is an important debate , and that the developments are very disturbing , as the three speakers have made quite clear here tonight .
We too are well aware of the recent worsening of the situation in Burma , and are especially concerned that the leader of the National League for Democracy and Nobel Prize winner , Aung San Suu Kyi , has been detained for the fourth consecutive weekend in an attempt to prevent weekend meetings of thousands of people in front of her house .
The Commission therefore very much welcomes the fact that it was decided at the last meeting of the Political Committee on 17 and 18 October to present a draft common position on Burma to the Foreign Ministers at their meeting on Monday and Tuesday , i.e. 28 and 29 October , and the Commission has played an active part in bringing this about .
Besides confirming the current sanctions , the draft common position includes a ban on visas for members of the SLORC and high-ranking officers , together with a suspension of visits to Burma by senior national officials under bilateral arrangements .
Furthermore , there is an expression of the EU 's displeasure at the SLORC 's unwillingness to engage in a meaningful dialogue with the EU , as well as a call for the opening of a constructive dialogue with the pro-democracy groups in the country , with a view to national reconciliation .
There is nothing specific in the draft on economic sanctions .
However , it does reserve the possibility of the Council adopting further measures , so this means - as Mrs Kinnock was asking - that there is some scope for taking action , and the stage is set for this to be used , although there would of course be great interest in persuading the countries near Burma to join in such a policy of economic sanctions .
The Commission 's services have also studied the documentation which has been presented to the Commission , and we have heard complaints and witnesses as part of an investigation into the use of forced labour in Burma , following a complaint from the European Trade Union Confederation and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions .
After the last hearings , which took place on 3 October , the summary report containing the written and oral contributions which had been collected was finalized on 21 October and presented to my colleague Mr Marín , who will very shortly be submitting a proposal to the Commission on how this investigation can be followed up .
It should be pointed out that it is the Council itself which has to take the decision on the withdrawal of preferences , if the Commission should decide to submit a proposal to that effect .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bjerregaard .
Mrs Maij-Weggen , if you are asking for the floor on a point relating to the Rules of Procedure , you can have the floor immediately .
If it relates to the debate , I you can have it at the end of the debate because there are still speakers before you .
So let me first call Mrs Kirsten Jensen on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , for two minutes .
I will call you at the end , Mrs Maij-Weggen .
Three minutes . You are in charge here , not I.
European diplomacy has failed as regards Burma .
How can one think that anything at all can be achieved through diplomacy with a military regime which allows diplomats to die in gaol and imprisons hundreds of politicians elected by the people ?
The EU 's vague response to the repeated violations of human rights by the Burmese military junta is disastrous , short-sighted , and at odds with the experience we should have gained now from the past .
We have had a case before of a united opposition calling for economic sanctions in a situation where democracy was being trampled on .
I am thinking of South Africa here , like Mrs Kinnock .
Today , everyone agrees that Nelson Mandela is a wonderful person , but if the truth be told , a good many people were slow to meet his requests for sanctions against the apartheid regime in South Africa .
And today , all those who dragged their feet are pleased to support democracy there , but why did it have to take so long ?
In the case of Burma , there is an opportunity for everyone to join in from the start .
We have the same conditions .
The undisputed leader of the democratic opposition and recipient of the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize , Aung San Suu Kyi , is asking us to take economic sanctions against Burma .
So there is no reason to hesitate .
It is just a question of getting started .
When the report on forced labour is finally available , the customs agreement should be scrapped .
The customs agreement provides some 10 % of Burma 's GNP .
We cannot tacitly accept that .
It is even worse that foreign investment is being made possible by slavery or forced labour .
How can the directors in the boardrooms of these firms actually tolerate this ?
With Burma , we in the EU have the chance to let honesty prevail .
If we hesitate now , we are saying that human rights have no place in international politics .
Respect for human rights is the sound principle which should form the basis for a common European foreign policy .
We therefore expect the Union 's Foreign Ministers to do more than simply raise a warning finger at Burma 's military junta .
If anyone disagrees with this , I look forward to hearing their idea of what Europe should actually be working for together .
Mr President , I fully share the deep concern of Mrs Maij-Weggen and colleagues about the continuing deterioration of the situation in Burma .
In the words of the presidency of the European Union : ' We deplore the practice of torture .
We deplore summary and arbitrary executions .
We deplore forced labour .
We deplore abuse of women .
We deplore political arrests .
We deplore forced displacement of the population and we deplore the restriction of the fundamental rights of freedom of speech , of movement and of assembly . '
This is indeed a telling indictment of the regime in Burma , though alas not without parallel in the world .
Added to that , as we have heard , there is the personal danger which Sang Suu Kyi has been placed in together with her personal supporters to whom , on account of the Sakharov prize , we must feel very committed .
Allow me merely to put a number of questions to the Commission and the Council to which , if they cannot be answered today , I would like to receive a reply .
I am still incidentally waiting for a reply to the questions I put to the other Commissioner who came here , was it one or two months ago ?
I have had no reply yet .
One , will the UN special working group on arbitrary detention and imprisonment be visiting Burma ?
I wish to be informed .
Secondly , will the UN special rapporteur on Burma and the EU investigate the circumstances of the death of Mr Nicholls to which previous reference has been made not only today , but you , Madam Commissioner , know all too well the circumstances , as I do .
Three , what action is the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and the EU taking on Burma ? We have had some indication .
One would be glad of further clarification .
Four , when will the Commission complete its inquiries into the possible future suspension of the GSP trade preference benefits for Burma ?
Well , we gather the study is going on , but for God 's sake , get on with it !
Five , what was the reaction of the Japanese Prime Minister in Tokyo when the presidency raised the question of Burma with him ?
Are we likely to get any support at all from Japan on this issue and may we know in due course , if the answer is not available today ?
Sixth , is the Commission compiling a list of companies doing business with Burma ?
I have some lists , but they must be very short compared to what business is being done .
What view does it take of the operations of Total and its natural gas pipeline investment project in Burma ?
Mr President , Commissioner , the Liberal Group wholeheartedly supports the message behind the questions put by my colleagues .
To say that the situation in Burma gives us great cause for concern is an understatement , and a clear and effective signal is needed from us once again .
On 26 September , the winner of the last elections was again placed under house arrest , and 109 MPs from the National League for Democracy were imprisoned .
The reason for this was that the NLD had organized a party congress .
There could not have been a clearer demonstration of the regime 's anti-democratic values and hatred of democracy .
The SLORC has once again proved that it is a dictatorship , and it is up to us to try to oppose it , though we have had little success up to now .
In the course of the many hearings which the Commission has organized , it has been shown that since 1992 , two million people have been forced into slave labour in Burma .
Since 40 % of the economy is in the hands of one state company , the role of the junta in all this is perfectly plain .
The measures taken by the Union so far have had no effect , and more pressure is needed .
The most effective way of applying this is by declaring that the Generalized System of Preferences no longer applies to Burma .
We need to do this quickly , although of course we must also follow the correct procedures .
The Union should also call on all its businesses to stop investing in Burma , and ASEAN should be encouraged not to convert the observer status just granted to Burma into full membership .
That could , potentially , have an adverse effect on cooperation between the EU and ASEAN .
We very much welcome the statements made by the General Affairs Council on 1 October , and the comments made by the President-in-Office in the Irish Parliament .
I would urge him and many others to pursue this line and , above all , to try to put their words into action .
We must all keep our fingers firmly crossed .
Mr President , I think I was probably one of the last Members of this Parliament to have the opportunity to visit Burma .
I went in December 1994 in an attempt to visit Aung San Suu Kyi who was then under house arrest .
The SLORC regime , despite representations from the ambassadors of Member States present in Rangoon , refused me permission to visit her despite the fact that I was carrying a letter from the President of the European Parliament informing her officially of the award of the Sakharov Prize .
I did , however , have the opportunity to meet members of the National League for Democracy and others opposing the authoritarian military regime of the so onomatopoeically aptly named SLORC .
I saw the occupying army sat on the streets of Rangoon and I saw and met with members of the opposition .
I saw how the SLORC has managed to reduce Burma to one of the ten poorest countries in the world .
After that there was a very slight glimmer of hope that emerged with the release from house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi .
But unfortunately it was only one step forward and two steps back .
Within weeks of this happening this hope was extinguished .
The question today is what do the Commission and the Council propose to do ?
We have been asked by someone who is not the Nelson Mandela of this period because she is very different .
Nelson Mandela actually created some tension .
There are people for him and people against him .
I do not know who in the democratic world is opposed to Aung San Suu Kyi , who has any doubts about her belief in democracy , her belief in peace and her belief in non-violence .
She has asked for sanctions and we , I thought , were going to respond .
I thought the question this evening was going to be when .
But apparently , from the disappointing reply from the Commissioner , it is still a question of ' if ' .
I have to say that I think the Commission is not listening to this House .
Across the political spectrum here , from left to right , across the Member States of the Union from Denmark , the Netherlands , the United Kingdom and elsewhere , we are all saying to the Commission that we want you to listen to Aung San Suu Kyi , we want you to implement sanctions and we want you to do it now .
Mr President , I should like to make two comments and ask one question .
First of all , everything we have discussed here tonight makes it quite clear that Parliament has reached the end of the line .
Human rights in Burma are being violated on a daily basis .
The SLORC , the State Law and Order Restoration Council , is evidently so afraid of losing its iron grip on the situation that it regards even the most peaceful meeting and the most minor demonstration by Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi 's National League for Democracy as a threat .
The blockade on her house is supposed to have been lifted on 30 September , but the press cannot get through to her and she is not allowed to make her weekly speeches .
Hundreds of people from her party have either disappeared or been imprisoned .
Secondly , it may be discouraging that Parliament 's resolutions have had no effect on the behaviour of the SLORC , but they have influenced the extent to which businesses are prepared to invest in Burma .
Various major firms such as Heineken have pulled out , and it is clear that a general boycott is sure to follow .
Thirdly , I have a question on behalf of my group : what will be the outcome of the discussions which the Commission is to have on this subject at the end of October ?
As far as we are concerned , the Commission is clearly going to have to persuade the Council to impose economic sanctions .
They are long overdue .
Mr President , our concern is for action against a very brutal regime , one that is faced by a remarkable and courageous opposition .
That opposition has specifically appealed to the European Union , to the European Parliament for action urgently to bring about change by the isolation of Burma .
We also have a very specific mandate from the people of the European Union .
The network of support groups in the towns and villages across Europe is asking us to do everything in our power and to act urgently .
We have the facts , we know about the deaths , we know about the disappearances , the detentions , the suffering of so many people and we are entitled to demand more than we have heard tonight from the Commission .
We want it to follow up the very important hearing on forced labour that took place in Brussels with action on the GSP .
We want the Council under this presidency later this month to take a whole range of initiatives to isolate Burma .
We also appeal to the countries in the immediate region of Burma , our respective partners , to cooperate with us .
I know they often remind us that they , unlike many parts of the world , are reluctant to interfere in the internal affairs of neighbouring states .
But this brutality is a responsibility of theirs as it is ours and the reason that we are in the European Parliament is that the European Union , Parliament came into being because of concern with democracy and human rights .
Could I finally say that there will be change in Burma .
The brutal regime will be toppled .
Democracy will be set up and established in Burma , but after all the suffering and all the sacrifice , let us make sure that that is soon .
Mr President , it is crystal clear that everyone in the Chamber wants to see more action from the Commission and wants to see it making more dynamic proposals to the Council .
We basically feel that it is time for an economic boycott such as has been proposed in the United States .
What I would like to ask is this : if the House adopts a resolution calling for economic sanctions , which the opposition leader in Burma herself has also called for , will the Commission be prepared to adapt its proposals so that the Council is able to approve the necessary decisions at its next meeting ?
Thank you very much , Mrs Bjerregaard .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Kinnock wishes to speak again .
Please be patient a moment longer .
Mrs Kinnock , you have the floor .
Mr President , I am heartened to hear what the Commissioner has said but it is still very clear that the Commission and the Council have turned their face against the kind of serious action that we are calling for .
These restrictions , the kind of things we have heard about from the Commission , will simply have no effect on the SLORC whatsoever .
We have had no categorical assurance that the Commission is going to listen to what Aung San Suu Kyi is saying .
That is what we are asking for , Commissioner .
I know it is not in your hands but I wish that it would be possible for the Commission and the Council to listen attentively to what the Burmese people are saying , not just Aung San Suu Kyi .
The Burmese people are pleading with us to act .
Thank you very much , Mrs Kinnock .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think Parliament has expressed itself very clearly tonight .
But I must also remind you that I have received six motions for resolutions to close this debate .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your company .
( The sitting was closed at 12 midnight )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , could I object to yesterday 's Minutes .
You will see in item 7 that I have been named as Mr rather than Mrs McNally .
I can assure you , Mrs McNally , that our Minutes will reflect the true situation !
Mr President , I rise on the endearing ritual recorded in yesterday 's minutes as item 16 , page 17 , Questions to the Commission .
Can I ask you to correct an inaccuracy there : it says that Question No 51 by my colleague , Mr Bowe , fell as he was absent .
He was far from absent , of course , because he was sitting in front of me waiting for an answer .
That question fell because of lack of time to ask it , as was the case with 105 out of 120 questions tabled by Members so far this month .
But if you count the supplementaries asked by other Members in the Chamber you will see that there were nine additional questions .
Some were relevant , others arguably less so .
Those 120 questions often represent the genuine concerns of the public , rather than the politicians , such as my shrimp fishing communities in Norfolk .
They need to be addressed concisely and quickly .
There are other mechanisms for obtaining lengthy answers on complex policy issues from Commissioners .
So will you please ask the Bureau to review the operation of Question Time because some simple reforms on the number of supplementaries and the length of the answers from Commissioners would go a long way to help this place seem a lot less remote to a lot more people .
Mr President , I just want to place on record my thanks to my colleague for defending my honour and also thank the Commission .
I promptly received a written reply at the end of that Question Time .
So that clears up that matter , too .
We will come to the comments in due course .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Mr President , on the Minutes : I notice that Mrs Bonino , Commissioner , was there to answer a number of questions on fisheries and consumer affairs , but what concerns me greatly is that we have three important reports on fisheries and one oral question on Friday and yet I understand that the Commissioner is not going to be present .
That is highly regrettable and I would ask the President to ask her to attend that session so that she can hear the views and opinions of this Parliament .
Mr Teverson , I have already said that we will be looking into this !
Meeting of 5 October 1996 in Dublin
The next item is the report by the European Council and the statement by the Commission following the meeting of 5 October 1996 in Dublin .
I am very glad to welcome the President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , the Irish Foreign Minister Dick Spring . Welcome , Mr Spring .
Mr President-in-Office , you have the floor .
Mr President , it is certainly an honour for me to have this opportunity to report to this House on the special meeting of the European Council held in Dublin on 5 October .
The decision to hold a special meeting was taken at the Florence European Council last June .
The European Council decided that a special meeting would be useful in order to discuss a range of issues facing the Union in the period and in order to keep up the momentum in the Intergovernmental Conference negotiations .
The Dublin meeting on 5 October allowed the members of the European Council to have a general exchange of views on a range of issues .
They did this without being required to focus on specific texts or conclusions - that task will be for the second European Council in Dublin on 13 and 14 December .
I am happy to be able to report that on 5 October we reaffirmed the timetable set by the Florence European Council for completion of the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Conference shall complete its work by the middle of next year - that is by the Amsterdam European Council in June 1997 .
We also confirmed the need to maintain the level of ambition of the Conference .
We must ensure that the outcome is adequate to equip and strengthen the Union to meet the internal and external challenges which it faces and will face at the beginning of the new century .
External relations issues were also discussed at the Dublin meeting .
There was a particular focus on the Middle East peace process , and immediately following the meeting I visited the Middle East for discussions on the need to accelerate this process .
I propose to report to you in some detail today on the two main issues discussed in Dublin : the Intergovernmental Conference and the Middle East peace process .
Since the beginning of Ireland 's presidency of the Council , work in the Intergovernmental Conference has focused on presidency papers .
These papers largely set out draft Treaty texts covering all the major issues under consideration at the Conference .
This process of negotiating on the basis of specific texts has helped to clarify delegations ' positions and has enabled the presidency to refine its initial drafts into a suggested approach on most of the main areas of work .
The approach is one of what might be called the successive approximation of texts .
In short , we are progressing steadily towards our aim of producing , as requested by the Florence European Council , a general outline for a draft revision of the Treaties for the second Dublin meeting in December .
Our meeting on 5 October was very useful in advancing this process .
It was , of course , a special meeting .
As I mentioned , there were no written conclusions and no decisions were taken on the specific substantive issues under consideration at the IGC - that was not the purpose of the Dublin meeting .
Despite the informal nature of the meeting , the presidency was determined to ensure that Parliament continued to make valuable input to the process under way at ministerial and at preparatory level through your own contributions and those of Elisabeth Guigou and Elmar Brok .
Your remarks to us , when we discussed the Intergovernmental Conference in Dublin , were against the background which the Taoiseach had set out in his letter to colleagues in advance of the meeting .
We emphasize first that the structures of the Union must be adapted in a balanced way so that the Union continues to work effectively and is firmly anchored in public acceptance and , second , that the Union must be prepared for future enlargement and the many other challenges which it will face in the years ahead .
Dublin I gave the European Council the opportunity to engage in a useful and open exchange of views on the main issues , which will , of course , have to be taken further at the European Council meeting in December and into the Dutch presidency .
It enabled me , as chairman of the Intergovernmental Conference , to make an oral report on progress at the Conference .
In confirming that the timetable is on track and that the political will exists among all Member States to meet the deadline of concluding the IGC by the time of the European Council in Amsterdam in June next year , the European Council responded to the growing sense of urgency felt by all the institutions that the process must not be delayed .
In particular , in this context it sends a clear message to the applicant countries waiting for the Conference to end so that they can start the accession negotiating process .
I would take this opportunity to underline the priority which the Irish presidency attaches to enlargement .
It is my firm belief that one of the major contributions which we can make to the accession process is to ensure that substantial progress is made in the Intergovernmental Conference by the end of this year .
Dublin I also reaffirmed a general willingness of Member States to pursue ambitious objectives in terms of the content of the Treaty .
From the perspective of the Irish presidency the meeting was helpful in advancing the substantial work of the IGC .
There was a wide measure of agreement among Heads of State or Government that a primary objective of the reform of the Union under consideration at the Conference is to provide concrete responses to direct concerns and expectations of our citizens .
There was strong emphasis , for example , on the part of many of the participants on the need to demonstrate that we can strengthen the Treaty provisions on employment at the level of the Union .
Furthermore , there was wide agreement on the need to demonstrate that we can , at the level of the Union , play an important role in combating the problems of international crime and drug-trafficking more effectively .
There is growing recognition that the IGC should make the necessary changes to ensure that the Union is able to ensure greater coherence of its international action in the political and economic fields and to exercise a constructive international political influence especially in terms of helping to resolve conflict and promote peaceful resolution of disputes .
Moreover , there is emerging agreement that the institutional adaptations must be made to the Union structure and decision-making processes so that the Union can be made more efficient , effective , visibly democratic and firmly rooted in public acceptability so that the Union can cope with further enlargement .
Clearly , following the pattern of all intergovernmental conferences in the past , some of the more sensitive institutional issues are likely to be settled at the end of the negotiations .
The issue of flexibility will be a major concern .
In this regard I should mention the very interesting contribution made by my colleagues in the Council , Klaus Kinkel and Hervé de Charette , to this debate .
Dublin I has played a constructive part in advancing the work of the IGC .
The Irish presidency remains on target to fill our mandate to produce an outline of a draft revision of the Treaty for consideration at the European Council in December .
As you are all aware , a special meeting of the European Council took place at a time of heightened tension in the Middle East following the outbreak of violence in the region .
As a result the European Council devoted a large part of its deliberations to examining the means by which the Union can contribute to the revitalization of the Middle East peace process .
The Union responded quickly and clearly to the escalation of tensions which culminated in violent clashes in Jerusalem and throughout the West Bank at the end of September .
We have undertaken a number of actions to try to restore momentum to the peace process .
On 1 and 2 October the General Affairs Council adopted a declaration on the Middle East peace process which set out the position of the Union at this critical juncture .
At a time of deepening crisis we called upon both parties to avoid resorting to disproportionate force and to exercise restraint .
It also set out clearly those areas where it believed that progress is crucial to the peace process .
In particular it stressed the importance of early and full implementation of existing agreements and the need for negotiations to proceed on the basis of the principles of the 1991 Madrid Conference establishing the Middle East peace process and the terms of the 1993 declaration of principles on Palestinian self rule .
A special meeting of the European Council decided that I should visit the region immediately to convey a message to Prime Minister Netanyahu and President Arafat , to outline the Union 's position and to discuss how progress might be made in restoring the climate of confidence that is needed to get the peace process back on track .
The message from the European Council welcomed the resumption of negotiations on 6 October following the Washington Summit , reiterated the Union 's conviction that only full implementation of the terms of existing agreements can ensure the security of both Israelis and Palestinians and offered the full support of the Union for efforts to revitalize the peace process .
A copy of this message was conveyed to President Clinton , recording the EU 's appreciation of the US efforts to ease tension and get the process back on track and assuring the US of the Union 's continuing engagement in common efforts in support of this objective .
In my meetings with leaders in the region I stressed the importance attached by the European Union to the urgent revitalization of the peace process .
I also emphasized the EU 's intention to make an enhanced commitment to the search for progress in the Middle East commensurate with the Union 's economic contribution and involvement in the peace process so far .
My meetings with Prime Minister Netanyahu and Foreign Minister Levi were friendly and constructive and the Prime Minister clearly indicated his appreciation of the efforts of the Union in support of the peace process .
Our continuing contacts with the leaders of the Israeli Government , which reflect the Union 's close and long-standing relationship with Israel , have enabled me to convey clearly the EU 's concerns on the need to restore momentum to the peace process .
I met President Arafat in Gaza on 6 October , our second meeting within a week .
We held a wide-ranging discussion on the situation in the region and on the key issues under discussion in the current Israeli / Palestinian negotiations .
President Arafat welcomed the Union 's continuing economic assistance for the Palestinian people as well as its continuing support for the peace process .
At the request of the Egyptian Government I travelled to Cairo on 7 October for meetings with President Mubarak and Foreign Minister Amr Moussa .
Both of them stressed that the Union is well placed to play a positive role in influencing both sides and supporting the peace process .
These meetings emphasize the shared concern of both Egypt and the Union at recent events in the region as well as our shared commitment to the advancement of the peace process through the implementation of existing agreements .
The meetings were held in a very friendly atmosphere , reflecting the continued excellent quality of the Union 's relations with Egypt .
In addition to these extensive contacts with regional leaders , I met the US Foreign Secretary of State Warren Christopher .
Following this meeting the Union has continued to maintain its existing close contact and cooperation with the United States in support of the ongoing peace negotiations .
Following my visit to the region , I remain convinced that the Union has an important and positive role to play in support of the Middle East peace process .
We will continue to keep in close contact with all the regional parties in pursuit of our common objective of a just , comprehensive and lasting peace .
The special European Council also requested the General Affairs Council to consider a mandate for the position of a European Union envoy to the Middle East .
The idea of appointing an EU envoy to the Middle East reflects a strong willingness on the Union 's part to become more actively involved in efforts to assist in the revitalization of the Middle East peace process on the basis of its major contribution to the process so far and its already wide engagement with the region .
Preparatory work on the mandate for the post of envoy is under way and the matter will be considered by the Council at our next meeting on 28 and 29 October .
At our meeting in Dublin on 5 October Foreign Ministers also discussed the situation in former Yugoslavia against the background of the recent elections in Bosnia .
The Union focus is now on contributing to the efforts of the international community to support the peace consolidation process .
In this context we heard a preliminary presentation from Commissioner van den Broek on the Commission 's proposals for the EU 's regional approach to the countries of the area .
This proposal will be considered in detail at the General Affairs Council next week .
The Heads of State and Government had an exchange of views on developments in EU / Russia relations .
This was the first opportunity they had had to discuss the matters since the successful conclusion in July of the Russian presidential election which was a historic milestone in the consolidation of democracy in Russia and a clear signal from the Russian people themselves that they wish Russia to continue on the path of reform .
The need for the EU to deepen its relations with Russia was stressed , as was the need for continued support for the reform process .
The importance of early completion by all Member States of the ratification procedures for the partnership and cooperation agreement was emphasized .
Developments in relation to Chechnya were also discussed .
The European Council also discussed ways of strengthening the EU 's relationship with the Ukraine and of assisting the reform process in that country .
Ministers for Foreign Affairs discussed the current situation in Belarus with regard to the proposed referendum on constitutional change and expressed concern at the divisions between President Lukashenko and the parliament .
They agreed that any referendum , if its results are to be respected in and outside Belarus , must be conducted only after full and open debate in which all sides can take part and with free reporting by press and media based on open access to all sides .
Ministers decided that these concerns should be conveyed to the Belarus authorities .
The Irish presidency is only half way through its term of office .
Six months is both a long time and a very short time .
There are many issues on the agenda of the European Union and progress in these issues is a central requirement of any presidency .
This special meeting afforded us a very useful opportunity to move forward the Union 's agenda and to prepare the ground for an ambitious but realistic European Council in Dublin in December .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the purpose of the special European Council in Dublin was not to take decisions , but to inject some momentum into the Intergovernmental Conference negotiations .
This objective was achieved , thanks to a determined and effective Irish presidency .
It was important that the Heads of State and Government should be able to have open and frank discussions without , at that stage , having to negotiate specific conclusions .
From the very constructive exchanges we had , I shall keep in mind a three-fold message .
Firstly , there was a very clear confirmation of the envisaged timetable .
The Intergovernmental Conference must complete its work by the time of the Amsterdam European Council in June 1997 . This is extremely important with enlargement in prospect .
As I said yesterday before this Parliament , 1997 will thus be a turning point , with the conclusion of the work on the reform of the Treaty and the launching of discussions on the Agenda for 2000 .
If the Union wishes to control rather than merely accept the commitments made for the year 2000 , it must stick to a coherent and logical timetable .
And in order to meet the completion date of June 1997 , the Dublin European Council must have a global draft Treaty which will form the basis of later negotiations .
All the Heads of State and Government share this view .
The second message coming from the Dublin Council concerns the very clear intention of the Heads of State and Government to concentrate on essentials and I believe this to be a major source of encouragement for the rest of the work .
But what are the essentials ?
The first is a response to the real concerns of our citizens : internal security and employment .
On these two crucial themes , I must say that I am more optimistic today than I was a few weeks ago .
Then there is the definition of a genuine foreign policy .
I took advantage of the Dublin meeting to emphasize once more the need both to strengthen the instruments at our disposal , whether Community or Intergovernmental , and to integrate them into a global and coherent vision of external relations .
I have the impression that the Commission 's point of view is beginning to be better understood , particularly as regards the strengthening of the common trade policy .
There is , lastly , the implementation of genuine institutional reform , especially with enlargement in prospect .
This is undoubtedly the subject on which most progress has still to be made and the reactions of delegations are still very much behind what is necessary .
Here also , however , there is a growing awareness of what is at stake although , as is not unusual at this stage of the work , the players are not yet really showing their cards .
The third message is related to the second .
By emphasizing their determination to concentrate on essentials , the Heads of State and Government have sent a clear signal about the levels of ambition to be achieved .
They do not want a rag-bag of an Intergovernmental Conference , concealing what is really at stake behind a multitude of little reforms , not to say gimmicks .
I find that encouraging , even though I am well aware of the divergence of views , sometimes considerable , that still exists .
For its part , the Commission will continue to recommend an approach which is as ambitious as possible while remaining realistic .
To end this brief intervention , I may say that I came back from Dublin rather reassured .
The chosen formula for open exchanges without conclusions was a good one even though , I know , it may be frustrating in many respects because no specific decisions were taken .
The fact that members of the European Council were involved immediately confers on the work a more political character .
I would also add in this connection that your intervention , Mr President , at the beginning of the meeting was outstanding and introduced a much-needed visionary touch .
We have excellent technicians in Europe whose role is of course vital but this role must be exercised within the context of a clear political vision and this vision should be defined at the highest level .
Meanwhile , the technicians have gone back to work with , I hope , renewed enthusiasm and I note that they are progressing quite well at this moment .
The Irish presidency is fortunate in having outstanding experts under the direction of Noel Dorr and in having politicians like John Bruton and Dick Spring who provide enlightened leadership .
With such a happy mixture , it will fulfil the mandate conferred on it with distinction and , with the help of its partners and of the European Parliament and the Commission , it will advance our common cause .
Thank you very much , Mr President-in-Office .
We now come to the debate .
I call Mrs Green to open the debate on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
I want to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for coming here today and making a statement on the informal summit and I congratulate the Irish presidency for actually insisting that meeting took place in the face of opposition from at least one Member State .
I must say that , in my group , we shall judge the IGC by its emphasis on the issues which we consider important for the citizens of Europe .
My group is ambitious for Europe .
We have expectations of Europe .
Europe really must move forward to prepare itself for enlargement - the President-in-Office made this plain .
We in this group are firmly wedded to the principle of enlargement but the Council must understand that our constituency , here in this Parliament , is the electorate of the European Union and our first allegiance is to them .
Enlargement which is illplanned , which destabilizes the security of the existing Union or which paralyses the Union even more than can happen now is simply not acceptable .
Mr President-in-Office , the people of the Union want peace in Europe .
Europe 's role in conflict resolution is something which I know has particular resonance in Ireland and to which I know you are deeply committed .
Can I make it plain in your presence , Mr Spring , that my group was the instigator of the concept of European support for peace and reconciliation in Northern Ireland .
We are utterly committed to it and , despite the barrage of press coverage in Ireland in recent days , I give you my word that we will do nothing to damage it .
The people of the Union also want to see a real political priority being given to securing their future .
Please ensure , Mr President-in-Office , that the leaders of our countries make real progress on generating jobs inside the Union .
We applaud the growing support for the employment section in the Treaty and urge you to ensure that it has real bite and does not just contain pious entreaties .
Perhaps one of the most depressing features of recent months has been the attack by the Council or by individual Member States , on that part of the Union 's activities relating to the socially excluded .
In what is simply a meanminded attack on the most vulnerable , we have seen action at the Court to stop the Commission spending a comparatively paltry sum of money on the elderly , the disabled , the socially excluded .
It is this type of activity which , in my group 's view , does more than anything to demonstrate to Europe 's people that the governments , when they come together , are only concerned with a headlong rush to outperform each other and prove their macho credentials .
We need the IGC to find an answer to the problem of the legal base for spending on the socially excluded .
We need a clear signal that Europe understands that it is the role of national governments to lead the fight against poverty and exclusion in each of our Member States but that the European Union can add value to that fight by its own legitimate and concerted action .
Europe 's citizens do not know or greatly care about the intricate details of our work here but they do now understand the signals about the sort of Europe we are developing .
They are using the democratic system to signal to us their concern and , by refusing to understand or respond to these signals , we are encouraging the development of those who would see the break-up of European integration .
My group restates its belief in the closer integration of Europe and we want to see the IGC move rapidly to prepare for enlargement in an environment of calm , peace , prosperity and hope for the future .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , first and foremost I should like to congratulate the Irish presidency .
I believe that once again it has been proved that a smaller European Union country can also play a very creative role when exercising the presidency .
This is not the first time this has happened and it stands in sharp contrast to the presidency of some of the larger countries .
Speaking in the House on behalf of the PPE Group in September I called for the IGC to finally rouse itself .
I asked two questions at this time .
The first was whether the timetable would be respected .
I believe that the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council has cleared up that question and we can take it that the IGC will complete its work in June of next year .
My second question was whether the Council had reconciled itself to limiting its objectives to a minimum and postponing fundamental reforms .
In this case too I believe we have a positive reply .
The Irish presidency will be submitting a draft Treaty text to the December summit in Dublin .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I believe that we must now conclude that the European Union is facing what the President of the Commission yesterday described as three major deadlines : on Union enlargement , on resolving a number of societal questions in the European Union about which our citizens are very concerned , namely regarding their future and security , and on the common foreign policy .
Enlargement of the European Union is undoubtedly a major geopolitical project for peace and civilization .
Its aim is to bring together all of Europe 's democratic nations within the European Union .
But the point must also be made that a European Union which grows from 15 to 25 or 30 Member States will not be able to function with the institutions in their present form and we have no other alternative - however much the attention of our citizens may be focused on the problems they encounter in their day-to-day lives - but to draw attention to this fact and to continue to insist that the IGC must take decisions which allow the Council still to take majority decisions and for Parliament to be the democratic counter-balance to decisions taken by the Council in the framework of the codecision procedure .
There is no avoiding the fact that this matter must be resolved .
If not the European Union will inevitably unravel and be diluted into an association of countries in which there remains scarcely any intergovernmental role at all . This would be fatal for European integration .
But there is a second important task .
We wanted the internal market .
We wanted economic and monetary union .
We realise that this is the necessary economic basis in order to create employment .
But this internal market and Union enlargement from 15 to 20 or 25 Member States raises major questions for society .
Even if the individual Member States continue to play a major role , it is unacceptable for the European Union not to provide a response in the framework of employment policy , or even to take the initiative .
It is just not possible at this point in time for the Member States to bear sole responsibility for internal security , for the security of our fellow citizens .
Our fellow citizens feel insecure .
I put the question to you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council : Has not the time come for the governments and government leaders of the Member States who constantly raise objections and impede the development and negotiations of the IGC to now take a look at essentials .
And for the governments to join with the Commission and European Parliament and say to our fellow citizens that a number of crucial issues such as employment , such as security and the protection of our fellow citizens , are not going to be solved if every country continues to act alone when a joint approach is necessary .
My country 's prime minister said in Madrid last Monday that a number of countries are busy blocking progress .
When are we going to turn our attention to the essentials ?
I ask you to also convey this message to your colleagues in the creative manner in which Ireland exercised the presidency and that finally they will be prepared to get together in tackling the major fundamental issues facing European society .
Mr President , ba mhaith liomsa i dtosac céad míle fáilte a chuir roimh Aire Gnóthai Eachtracha na hEireann chuig Parlaimint na hEorpa i maidin .
Mr President , I very much welcome the President-in-Office of the Council and Ireland 's Foreign Minister to the European Parliament this morning and I thank him very much indeed for his report on the recent summit held in Dublin .
While the summit did not result in any significant decisions , it certainly provided a valuable opportunity for the heads of state or government to discuss the state of progress of the negotiations in the Intergovernmental Conference .
In my view the draft Treaty , which is to be presented to the December summit in Dublin , must give priority to issues of widespread concern , such as employment policy and the fight against crime .
I was disappointed to note that certain Member States continue to oppose the inclusion of a chapter on employment policy in the new Treaty .
I do not agree with the British Prime Minister 's view that this problem should be tackled at national level .
Over the last decade national governments in many Member States have devoted much of their energy to creating new job opportunities , in most cases without any significant degree of success .
The time has surely come for European governments to work together to try to solve this huge social , economic and political problem .
The fight against crime also demands strong cooperation between Member States if the activities of drug smugglers , money launderers and organized crime syndicates - all of whom operate on the international stage - can be effectively and comprehensively tackled by the forces of law and order in our individual countries .
Countries on the periphery , such as Ireland , with extensive sea coasts must be supported at EU level in their efforts to track and intercept drug-smuggling .
I welcome the ongoing efforts to reform the institutional structures of the Union , which I hope will simplify the decision-making and administrative systems of the Union before enlargement to the East .
However , it is my strong belief that it is more important to assess the impact of enlargement on existing European policies and , if necessary , to reform the actual policies rather than concentrate on administrative and institutional reform .
The addition of ten or more net beneficiary countries will have a major impact on the budget .
The arrival of new Member States with a high level of dependency on agriculture will , naturally , have major implications for the common agricultural policy .
The clear need of these countries to upgrade their industry , transport networks and environmental protection systems , will all have a major impact on the existing structural funds ' policy .
I was genuinely disappointed that these issues were not addressed during the Dublin Summit .
The future of the common agricultural policy and structural funds , together with the obvious need for a bigger budget in an enlarged Union , are all difficult political issues which should be tackled in parallel with the Intergovernmental Conference .
Agreement on the final contents of a new revised Treaty must be accompanied by an agreement on the future direction of the major common policies and on the framework for enlargement negotiations .
All these issues are closely interlinked , particularly in the case of existing net beneficiary countries , such as Spain , Portugal , Greece and Ireland , and those countries with significant agricultural sectors , such as France .
Following the Dublin Summit there seems to be a consensus in favour of agreeing on a revised Treaty at the Amsterdam meeting of June next year .
This is an ambitious target .
However , it is not essential for the IGC to conclude in the first half of next year : it is of far greater importance that the Member States use the IGC to confront the issues which are of general concern to our electorates and to lay the foundations for a successful enlargement of the Union to the East , even if this requires an additional six or twelve months .
In at least some Member States the electorates will be called upon to pass judgement on the results of the IGC and their verdict will depend on the extent to which the new Treaty addresses their concerns , which are much broader than mere institutional reform .
Mr President , as far as our group is concerned , unemployment in Western Europe is the most important problem to be solved .
We fear that the proposals which are currently being submitted at the Intergovernmental Conference are inadequate . , this is because they are not directly linked to economic and monetary union policies .
Principally the Economic Union & # x02BC ; s current policy gives rise to high unemployment , reduced economic demand and to a dramatic deterioration in social welfare levels in Member States .
For this reason , the European Union policy must be discussed at the Intergovernmental Conference and it must be reviewed .
In the proposal for a parliamentary resolution there is mention of a joint defence policy .
We believe that this is irrelevant in the current political situation in Western Europe .
It is the remains of an out of date way of thinking .
What we need now is an all European and global structure to prevent conflicts and to handle crises .
The Union must also acknowledge the fact that some Member States are non aligned .
We were , therefore , very surprised when we read in the document from the Dorr Group , dated 8th October , that such states were exneutral , in other words , previously neutral .
I would like to point out that the neutral policy in these Member States has significant popular support .
There are many points on the Intergovernmental Conference and its results which are unclear , but we can already see that there is strong resistance to some important points .
We can see that there is strong resistance to the view that meetings of the Council of Ministers should be open .
It is our view that all legislation within the Union , in the Council of Ministers , should take place openly and we have the right to demand this as one result of the Intergovernmental Conference .
With regard to the environment , there is strong resistance to a tightening of Article 100a ( 4 ) which would give Member States the true right to have tougher environmental legislation in some areas .
We would take an extremely negative view if this demand for environmental improvement is refused .
It is important that the results of the Intergovernmental Conference are in line with the thinking of individual citizens .
For this reason , our group advocates national referenda once the Intergovernmental Conference is over .
Personally , I am convinced that such referenda would show that there is no support in many Member States for greatly increased central power within the European Union .
Mr President , let me remind the House that this summit was intended to kick-start the floundering Intergovernmental Conference .
But , of course , you can rely on the Council to stick by its usual slogan : business as usual .
The way in which the summit was handled , too , followed a well-beaten path : if a summit seems likely to fail , or if nothing - absolutely nothing at all - emerges from it , there are two ways of glossing over this failure .
One is to set up a new Working Group to continue negotiations and celebrate that as a step forward , and the other is to make a lot of noise about things that everyone knew anyway .
Quite clearly , the second alternative has been selected in the case of Dublin .
But can the grimly determined confirmation of the timetable for Maastricht II really , seriously , be a success in view of all the speculation about Maastricht III ?
Hans Christian Andersen wrote wonderful fairy tales , and I can 't help but remember one of them as I listen to and look at Mr Santer and Mr Spring - ' The Emperor 's New Clothes ' .
The Emperor surrounds himself with admirers and flatterers until a child pipes up with the simple truth : ' He hasn 't got anything on ! '
That 's the way things are today , that 's the way the Council is : it 's got nothing on .
It isn 't working on any genuine initiatives for a consistent employment policy , for the desperately needed democratization of the European Union , for the foundations of a civil law system , for the development of Europe as a whole , for the process of conversion to social ecology .
Just how much does have to go wrong before the Council eventually grasps where its ignorance of public opinion is leading ?
Aren 't the results of the elections in Austria and Finland a sufficiently clear message ?
The unconditional clinging to rigid , unrealistic criteria , the speculation with models of a centralized Europe , the attempt to dictate the shape of Europe from above instead of letting it grow from below - all this carries within it the real explosive of integration policy and generates Euro-scepticism instead of acceptance .
Anyone who fails to listen to the critics of the EU will give more power to the arm of Europe 's opponents , will make them strong .
But who is going to give that message to the Council ?
I believe that the Intergovernmental Conference should , first and foremost , be a major project to counter European absolutism , which brings me back once again to Hans Christian Andersen .
Let me just add a few personal words to Mr Spring as a Minister of the Irish government .
I should like to reaffirm this : I should like to say that our group is completely behind the peace process in Northern Ireland .
This has no direct connection with the so-called Dublin summit , but I wanted to say it anyway .
Mrs Roth , I must reject your assertion that the President-in-Office has nothing on as speculative sexism !
Mr President , our fifteen Heads of State or Government were lucky that the Dublin European Council was only informal .
If that had not been the case , what in fact could they have put on paper except for some progress in the field of internal affairs and justice ?
This is all the more true in that , if progress was made , it was only between thirteen or at most fourteen Member States , whereas ratification of changes to the Treaty requires unanimity .
However , let us be positive .
The date of June 1997 was confirmed for the conclusion of the negotiations and the Irish presidency was given a mandate to present at Dublin in December a first draft of the modified Treaty .
That is good .
However , let us remain vigilant so that keeping to the timetable is not dissociated from the conclusion of an ambitious reform of the Treaty and so that the Irish presidency 's draft deals with the important issues at stake and is not limited to reporting negotiations and to presenting options in the most sensitive areas .
In order to achieve that , we must have a little more self-confidence and even courage .
It is regrettable that making a political judgement about the Dublin Summit could ever have been considered pointless and unnecessary in this Parliament , when it is more than ever necessary to speed up the negotiations .
Is this not the time to say clearly that enlargement will not be possible without a wide-ranging institutional reform of the Union , that we could not accept any postponement of the real issues at stake for the Intergovernmental Conference to a later reform , and that monetary union needs to be complemented by major progress along the path to political Union ?
And besides , how in the future can we face the clear risk of paralysis , particularly if considerable progress is not made in extending majority voting ?
We consider that mechanisms for stronger cooperation are necessary , in the context of the Treaty , enabling those who wish it to advance along the path to political Union while guaranteeing that this cooperation is permanently open to all Member States .
In conclusion , how can we not be worried at the sad spectacle that Europe is presenting on the international stage ?
Let us not be fooled . If the Intergovernmental Conference cannot set up institutional machinery capable of producing a genuine external and common defence policy , we shall perpetuate the lamentable image the Union is presenting to the Middle East .
Hence my question to the Irish President-in-Office : what will you really do , in the Middle East crisis , since what has been said so far is rather conventional ?
These are some of the political considerations I wished to express before this Assembly , on behalf of my group .
Mr President , the informal Dublin Summit produced no specific conclusions other than an official confirmation : that the Intergovernmental Conference must finish its work next June at the Amsterdam Council .
Ultimately , this deadline does not leave the Conference much time to complete the huge reform needed to adapt European institutions to enlargement , reform that we are all waiting for but one that , despite eighteen months of varied discussions , does not yet appear to be really taking shape .
This is what President Santer was saying in moderate terms just now when he emphasized that this is a subject , and I quote , ' on which most progress has still to be made ' .
Admittedly , following close on the Dublin Summit , the French and German governments published a joint letter about stronger cooperation , but there is no evidence in this of the flexibility we would need for enlargement .
Rather , we need clauses for looser cooperation with the East .
However , this essential path appears to be blocked by the dogma that what the Community has established so far is inviolable . One day , we shall undoubtedly have to break down this bolted door .
On this same question of adapting the institutions to enlargement , President Santer gave a hint yesterday by emphasizing that keeping unanimity did not appear to him to be possible with 27 members .
We think , on the contrary , that it is majority voting that would be impossible , because national interests and realities would be so divergent in a Europe of 27 members .
Only a variable geometry would be capable of reconciling these two positions , but it must be truly variable , without pre-established federalist objectives , without obligatory respect for what has been established so far and with the recognition that members have a right to withdraw !
Mr President , I would today remind the House that 40 years ago the Hungarian people rebelled against the Soviet communist regime - an uprising prompted by a longing for freedom that claimed more than 200 , 000 victims .
Meeting in Dublin , on 5 October last , the heads of state and government confirmed that , in compliance with the time-limits decided on in Florence , they will be presenting a complete draft revision of the Maastricht Treaty at the December summit .
You will understand that we remain sceptical because yet again , this time in Dublin , the summit was conspicuous by its lack of any real substance .
As is now the usual story , the priorities were identified as job creation , the fight against crime and the - now desperate - need to adopt institutional reforms to deal with the pressing demands of enlargement .
Lots of talk and little action .
Job creation , for instance : unemployment has reached unacceptably high levels and this will be made worse by the painful effort needed to adjust to the criteria established under Maastricht .
But despite the cost that has daily to be paid under the European Union 's monetary policies which require the application of high interest rates to prevent capital flowing out of the Union , employment continues to be held up as a priority .
In an effort to limit interest rate increases , governments are in fact forced to apply a policy to control and stabilize public finances that is ill-suited to job creation .
The likelihood is that the effect of currency fluctuations will be , along with industrial disintegration , job losses .
A specific example of this is the transfer within multinationals of entire areas of production to those countries which have devalued their currencies .
The redistribution of production between undertakings and partners is inimical to general prosperity and causes jobs to be lost .
A recent study in 1995 revealed that , for the countries of the European Union as a whole , the global cost of currency fluctuations was a two per cent fall in growth and the loss of 1.5 million jobs .
Then we have the fight against crime , a priority that will be worthless if pursued in isolation and unless a genuine common internal policy is put into effect .
That is immediately clear if you consider how impossible it is for the courts to prosecute criminals who move to another Member State ; in such cases they are able to act only by means of letters of request - a lengthy and impracticable process which leaves the person under investigation plenty of time to regularize his situation .
Finally , institutional reform : the main task of the IGC , the conclusion of which will be reconfirmed in June 1997 , will be to make the adjustments necessary for enlargement - enlargement which might be summarized as : ' Europe whatever the cost ! ' .
This is madness !
We say that it is necessary to start not from the head but from the base if we are to construct a united Europe acceptable to citizens .
Mr President , it is difficult to express a view on an informal summit without a conclusion .
We are therefore awaiting the results ; developments in the Intergovernmental Conference will show whether there has been a political impetus and whether a draft treaty has been drawn up .
The European Parliament is , however , seriously concerned because we can see that there is a stalemate : the Intergovernmental Conference seems in fact to be paralysed by conflicting views .
It even appears doubtful whether the negotiations have actually begun .
It is claimed that the results will be clear in the end , but nothing so far seems to point in that direction even though the subject of the Intergovernmental Conference is deepening the Union with a view to future enlargement .
What is behind this sense of stalemate ?
I think it realistic to believe that there are those who think of an Intergovernmental Conference as of little relevance in institutional terms - basically a technical affair that just appears to produce some small results .
Those who have taken that view actually believe that it should be Monetary Union that deepens and redesigns the institutions .
Those countries that participate in Monetary Union from the outset will be the ones that set under way the kind of Europe that counts , with the exclusive focus on spurring on Monetary Union .
Thereafter , perhaps , we shall have a third Intergovernmental Conference on the institutions , as some have already hinted .
Were that to happen , the very construction of the Union would be called into question .
Were that to happen , it would in fact be Monetary Union that created its own institutions , pushing political union into the background .
Differentiated integration could shatter the unity of the institutional system and the acquis communautaire .
Some people have already talked in terms of a European Parliament with variable geometry ; others have called into question the role of the Commission as an initiator .
All of this will clearly be a crisis point in the construction of Europe .
Although I am concerned , I at any rate hope to see other alternatives .
I would alert the House of the need identify the risk and counter it with a policy .
The Intergovernmental Conference therefore becomes hugely important ; there has to be a clear parallel with Monetary Union ; we need to place the political element centre-stage again and shift the balance towards political union ; that is possible only if we set the institutional reforms under way against the backdrop of a united approach to the construction of Europe .
I shall end here , Mr President .
Unless there are major changes in that direction , unless we have renewed democracy , transparency , efficiency and decision-taking capacity , the threat to the construction of Europe may lie just around the corner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Irish presidency for the way it has approached the IGC so far , and as far as an evaluation of Dublin I is concerned , my view is that Dublin I and Dublin II must be viewed jointly .
I believe , also , that Dublin I achieved its objectives of confirming the timetable and generating political momentum .
That political momentum needs to be generated in order to ensure that the negotiations do not become the preserve of the technocrats . Happily , the Irish presidency has made it clear , with its questionnaire on majority decisions , that technocratization is not the right approach .
The case-by-case procedure and majority decision process show that this cannot be a solution - that matters must be decided politically , in order to achieve the necessary advances and ensure the European Union 's ability to act .
There are many examples of this , in foreign trade for instance .
Unless we succeed , when granting mandates , for example in the services sector , in arriving at the majority decision process then , because of the package solution that will take place when mandates are next granted , we shall have a less strong European Union : the Commission , too , will have less authority at the negotiating table than it did during the Uruguay Round .
This is just one example to illustrate that we should not be talking about progress so much as endeavouring to preserve the status quo ; but the status quo can only be preserved if we do make progress in certain institutional matters .
I would , however , also like to utter a word of warning about the deparliamentarization taking place in some areas .
This applies to ideas associated with the third pillar : some things which play a part in foreign relations indicate that deparliamentarization may result from the initiatives by specialized ministries in various national capitals .
Unless we are on our guard at this Intergovernmental Conference , this will happen to the detriment of the European Parliament and to the detriment of the national Parliaments .
That must not be allowed to happen .
Nor do the proposals regarding the introduction of a new pillar 1a in the area of the third pillar make the Treaty any clearer or more comprehensible for the citizen .
As regards questions relating to the first pillar , the need is to strengthen the existing institutions of the first pillar , including the Commission and Parliament ; in no circumstances must we follow the Council 's desire to create special conditions for its national institutions .
And that includes safeguarding the Commission 's exclusive right of initiative , in all respects .
Strengthening the institutions in the area where we are successful - that should be our approach .
We should certainly not tamper with the chapter on monetary union and make amendments to it .
But we do hope to gain recognition for an employment chapter which is not merely social policy ; for that reason , the employment chapter must not be integrated into the social policy sector but belongs between economic and monetary union on the one hand and social policy on the other .
This , I think , might be a middle road to lead us all further forward .
I was very pleased to hear the upbeat assessment of the informal summit by both the President of the Commission and the President-in-Office of the Council .
But I have to say both as a citizen and as a parliamentarian that the discussions so far have seemed to me turgid , unfocused and to show a lack of political will and motivation .
That is a great tragedy potentially for the future of our continent .
I want to ask the President-in-Office two questions .
First of all , it has been widely reported in the British press that one of the ways forward now will be core Member States , leaving others behind , so that European integration can happen where it is required , without being held up by others .
Is that true ?
Secondly , is there likely to be a second IGC - which would be absolutely wrong ?
But what I would now like to do is make an appeal as a citizen .
We have at the moment a situation unparalleled perhaps in our continent over the past 200 years where we can stabilize the security and democracy of Central and Eastern Europe .
I have two daughters , one five and one nine years old .
To me their future security and the security of their children hinges upon reaching a suitable settlement so that we can expand the European Union to those Central and European states .
If we fail in that this and next year , then we shall have lost a chance that may not ever come back in our lifetimes and will threaten their security and their children 's security well into the future .
That is the challenge that we have here and I ask the President-in-Office to continue his good work to make sure that the Dublin Summit delivers an agenda that can be accepted by the other Member States so that we have a successful conclusion in Amsterdam .
The importance is no less than that .
Mr President , I have just listened to what the President-in-Office of the Council had to say on the situation in the Middle East . I feel that it was rather half-hearted .
It would be tragic if the European Union still maintained a passive attitude when faced with a situation as critical as this .
We have all seen the pictures of the highly significant incident marking the visit of Jacques Chirac to East Jerusalem .
If a French President is treated like this , we can imagine the kind of treatment reserved by the Netanyahu government for the average Palestinian . This cannot go on any longer .
For my part , I have just returned from a visit to Jerusalem , Ramallah and Gaza .
In Israel , I met the ' Peace Now ' movement and representatives of all the left-wing parliamentary groups and of Likud .
I was able to take part in the first and very moving meeting between Israeli and Palestinian parliamentarians in the Knesset .
In Palestine , I was able to have a long meeting with President Arafat , after a fascinating visit to the Orient House in East Jerusalem .
What I saw and heard on these occasions leaves no doubt in my mind .
Those wishing to preserve the peace process must assume their responsibilities now .
The European Union can do so .
It is rejected from the negotiating table by Tel Aviv and by Washington , but nobody can prevent it taking strong political action by suspending the application of the interim Europe-Israel trade agreement as long as the Netanyahu government does not respect signed agreements and does not open up genuine negotiations with the Palestinian authority .
The Council is meeting this Monday on this matter . Its decision will be eagerly anticipated .
Three weeks ago , it issued a very clear statement with particular emphasis on the link between the Europe-Israel agreement and the peace process .
Since then , nothing has moved on Israeli government side .
There is a total blockage .
In my view , the time has therefore come to pass from words to actions .
The same call may be made to Member States ' national parliaments : do not ratify this agreement until the peace process is put back on the rails .
Peace is in danger . Mr President , let us not lose the chance to help preserve it .
Mr President , I am very concerned over the sudden passivity which currently characterises the Union & # x02BC ; s action on the Middle East .
Until now , the EU has played quite a positive role both through support for the Palestinians and through tough statements .
Not so long ago we , in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , received a visit from the Irish presidency which then held forth with much tougher speeches than is currently the case .
For just this reason , it is important that Parliament adopts a powerful resolution now .
I hope that the rumours in the corridors are totally wrong , that a resolution would not be supported because it is necessary to wait for a report on the subject which will be available at the next session .
Internal Parliamentary deliberation cannot play any part if Parliament is to take a stance on current political issues .
In addition , we in the Green Party have continuously emphasised that , while we justifiably criticise the Israeli government fiercely , we must also remind our Palestinian friends that maintaining democracy and freedom of speech in the Palestinian areas is a fundamental requirement of a successful peace process .
Mr President , at the Dublin summit , the stage was set for a number of majority votes in which the national parliaments can be voted down .
But why should the EU 's laws and standards be absolutely the same in all parts of the Union ?
Why can we not let a country have stricter rules on additives in foods which are transported straight from the factory to the consumer , and then allow artificial preservatives in those areas of the EU which actually ask for permission , for example to put medicines into cheese and sausages ?
How does Mr Santer explain the fact that we in Denmark will have to allow natamycin and mycin in cheese and sausages ?
Natamycin can be obtained from pharmacies as a remedy for such things as inflammation of the eyes or of the internal female sexual organs .
Why should we be treated for inflammation of the internal female sexual organs through bread and cheese ?
Why must we no longer ban colourings which can produce allergies ?
Why can we not make our own laws to control our everyday food ?
Why should all the rules be the same everywhere ?
There is only one logical reason for this uniform legislation : the wish to create a single state without internal frontiers .
It is this obsession with a United States of Europe from which frontiers have been removed which is now effectively also leading people to dislike useful international cooperation .
Because the fact is that it makes no sense to have common rules on the curvature of a cucumber or the size of strawberries .
What makes no sense is to turn standards into binding legislation , instead of just an option for those who wish to trade across frontiers .
We would once again call on the Commission to check the 21 000 EU rules for excessive centralism , and to create more freedom for the Member States .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Dublin Intergovernmental Conference was mainly concerned , it seems , with the fight against crime , with employment and with the Palestinian question .
As regards the fight against crime , the calls from the European Parliament and the Summit for a real internal security area barely conceal the real aim , which is Community-controlled cooperation in matters relating to the police , to justice and to several other policies , with top priority for immigration policy .
It is as well always to remember that international or transnational crime , whatever form it takes - terrorism , drugs - is in reality a direct consequence of the abolition of internal border controls in the Union and the inability of States or the unwillingness of some of them like the Netherlands to provide proper controls at the external frontiers .
The existence and the current functioning of the Union are the source of very serious problems that are then , paradoxically , argued as grounds for new Community powers .
As regards unemployment , Mr President , at no time were the two main European causes of this scourge tackled : namely , the single currency and the deflationary policies it involves on the one hand and free trade on the other .
In fact , from a simple instrument enabling the single market to function more efficiently , economic and monetary union has become an inviolable dogma , a basic European myth that can under no circumstances be called into question .
Many Member States will undoubtedly meet the Maastricht criteria in 1998 , the year during which the elect who will take part in the third phase will be chosen .
But this will be at the price not only of some cooking of the books , but of the sacrifice of social security systems and of budgetary rigour which , at best , according to some countries , will have brought the deficits below the required levels and at worst will at least have demonstrated the willingness of States to comply with the criteria : all to the detriment of general prosperity .
As for the Palestinian question , the French President did his best to secure a political position on the matter .
Germany , still frightened of being suspected of ulterior motives whatever opinion it expresses , did not want questions of interest to Israel to be discussed .
In reality , there is nothing other than vague desires to escape from the American yoke , against which intense diplomatic activity was directed .
The Israeli representation to the Communities are reported to have asked European Members of Parliament not to support Union policy .
In other words , if you have not done everything for Israel , you have done nothing for it .
Mr President-in-Office , President Santer , in recent years the European Union has done a great deal in the Middle East : there has been huge economic aid to the Palestinians , bilateral agreements with the countries of the region , vital assistance for the elections in Palestine , the Barcelona Conference and support for the peace process .
None of that has been given political recognition .
There is no question that the peace process is currently in the throes of a serious crisis .
The European Union has adopted a stance that we welcome , the position of the Council which seems to us to be sufficiently clear , and I have to say that I also appreciate the work done by the President-in-Office in the region during recent weeks .
The issue that has not been resolved concerns the political role of the Union .
The Council is thinking in terms of a special envoy , but it seems to me that that envoy will have to be one of the foremost political and governmental leaders we have available to us - no-one else will do .
We have already made the mistake of giving an official responsibility for the conduct of the Palestinian elections .
But we have above all to gain acceptance for the Union 's political role , and that is not the case as far as Israel is concerned .
Mr Levy has declared that role unthinkable in the peace negotiations , but we need to secure a seat for the European Union at the negotiating table alongside the United States envoy .
Up to now that demand has been made discreetly - but not any more .
We have now made it publicly .
This was done by Dick Spring on behalf of the Council ; it was done in Damascus by Jacques Chirac who was , incidentally , shabbily treated in Israel .
Italy 's Prime Minister , Renato Prodi did the same in Cairo .
Now that we have made the demand publicly , we should seek to obtain satisfaction .
So far it has met with rejection .
How are we to make progress ?
This is a fundamental political issue for the Union at this time , and we need to know whether the Council is devising a strategy to achieve that outcome .
In the resolution on the Dublin summit both the Socialists and the PPE are , I believe , asking the Council and the Commission to draw up a detailed and committed report on the Middle East for the month of November , and that is why we do not consider a European Parliament resolution that is hasty and partial to be appropriate at this juncture .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard that the Dublin summit has created the political impetus the Intergovernmental Conference so badly needs .
We applaud that and we look forward to a first draft of the treaty filled with demanding content through the good offices of the Irish presidency .
The timetable is important , the content much more so .
The European Parliament , legitimate representative of the citizens of the Union , has made clear what that content should be .
I am not going to go over well-known resolutions , just some essential points .
First , the Union must be given the instruments and procedures necessary for this area without frontiers to be an area for work , business , tourism and culture , but not an area for terrorism , drug-trafficking , slave trade and abuse of women and children , immigration and clandestine labour mafias , and all the other forms of organized crime .
Secondly , it is essential to organize cooperation between the Member States to combat unemployment and marginalization , without endangering the economic and monetary stability that is being so painfully achieved , and establish the route to successful economies , without ruining the European social model which our group is committed to maintaining .
Tying the hands of the Union in the fight against poverty and social marginalization would be intolerable , particularly in this World Year for the Eradication of Poverty .
Thirdly , we must transform our ineffective and stumbling CFSP into a credible and effective foreign and security policy .
You yourself , and the President of the Commission , have already said all there is to say on the matter , and I do not think I need insist further .
Mr President , none of this will be achieved without reforming our institutions to give them greater transparency , greater efficiency and greater democracy , which means strengthening Parliament 's triple legislative , budgetary and control role .
Democracy and transparency cannot develop without developing the parliamentary system .
For two centuries they have been inseparable on our continent .
There is no real democracy without a parliament with the powers and independence necessary to fulfil this triple function .
It seems unbelievable that this truism has to be restated in 1996 .
Mr President , at a time when our citizens are apprehensive about the future , it is our duty to remember always that peace and prosperity in our Union require a daily search for the greatest common advantage , and that will not be achieved without a strong , democratic and respected Parliament .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , the Irish presidency and the Dublin Council have been dealing with Union issues at a crucial moment in the life of the Community .
For one thing , the great issues are being identified .
For another , a certain disaffection is spreading within the Community which is sometimes demonstrated in a spectacular way , as in the European elections in Austria and Finland .
It would really be very difficult , almost suicidal , to maintain a Panglossian vision of the Union , but a tragic vision of the tensions that await us would be exaggerated .
I think the Irish presidency has shown a capacity for meaningful action on the issue of the Middle East and I want to state , like the colleague who preceded me , that the frontier of European dignity does not run just through Bosnia , but also through the relaunch of the peace process in the Middle East .
And with elections coming up in America , only Europe can do whatever is possible as an external factor to keep the peace process going .
Here , Mr President , may I congratulate the members of the French delegation and the various parties on the very dignified and unequivocal attitude maintained by the French President , Mr Chirac , in Israel and Jerusalem yesterday .
In addition to vision in foreign policy , I believe the Irish presidency has been successful in stressing the essential theme of the European model of society and prioritizing employment .
A society without employment - a society which ' kills ' employment , a society which has no hope of employment - is a weak society and at this moment our material comfort may really be under great threat .
It has also set the timetable for the Intergovernmental Conference .
The timetable is something , but the content is more important .
And that content really involves a widening of Community powers , the Community taking over the third pillar , and certain processes on which we cannot yet be very optimistic .
There are certain tendencies : we do not see sufficient progress , as much progress as we would like , in the move to qualified majority voting or in the co-decision processes essential to revitalize this Parliament - to give it purpose , so that it does not simply duplicate legislation passed elsewhere .
All in all , we remain hopeful , we congratulate the Irish presidency , and we trust that in the months that remain the Irish presidency will provide further impetus leading up to the text to be presented in December at the next Dublin Council .
Mr President , to the extent that the Dublin Summit dealt with the areas of the third pillar - combating organized crime and drug trafficking - it has become clear that this is a case where the gap between what the public expect and what has actually been achieved is growing wider and wider .
So far , if I may say so , our respective Council members have advanced with the utmost caution and suspicion in this area , pausing to pick the occasional daisy but with no sign of any willingness to press forward resolutely .
The explanation , so we hear , is that no real progress can be made until after the British elections .
That explanation is an illusion .
What is preventing any progress in the combating of organized crime in Europe is not the British elections but the lack of will to find a joint solution to such problems - a lack of will not just in the United Kingdom but in other countries , too .
And we hear it said that a joint solution would be a breach of national sovereignty .
That is a fetish from the nineteenth century , which a few governments carry around with them like some pagan image .
The real meaning of sovereignty is the expression of national independence .
It ensures the fulfilment of national interests .
Today , national sovereignty is abused as a pretext for preventing the joint solving of important problems .
That was never the point of national sovereignty .
This misinterpretation of national sovereignty is directed against the public interest rather than fighting for it .
Organized crime , the control of immigration and population increase in Europe - these are problems which , today , can only be solved by a joint approach .
It is not true that the elimination of the internal borders made cross-border organized crime in Europe possible in the first place .
The truth is that the disappearance of those borders is a consequence of present-day mobility , because the stagecoach has given way to the jet aircraft .
Modern policy has to come up with answers to this .
And they can only be European , Europe-wide answers .
The Council must finally make up its mind to find answers to these problems .
Mr President , I did not personally expect much from this special Dublin Summit .
Unlike those who had great hopes for it , I am not therefore disappointed by its results .
Ultimately , this Summit simply reflected the work of personal representatives , each of whom knows that they are marking time , which is hardly surprising as there is no political impetus , either from Foreign Ministers or from Heads of State and Government .
My concern therefore remains as deep as it was after the Florence European Council and it is necessary , I believe , to alert all Europeans to this .
However , despite its low profile , the first European Council in Dublin will not have been pointless .
Heads of State and Government themselves in the end became involved in the Intergovernmental Conference .
They declared their intention to make concrete progress at Dublin II .
Let us hope that that will come to pass .
It is essential if the European Council wishes to keep to the timetable it has set itself : to finish by June 1997 in Amsterdam .
However , keeping to the timetable must not be achieved to the detriment of the contents of the Treaty .
It would be better to allow an extra few weeks or months and to ensure that the result matches the target , which I remind you is to allow the Union to get closer to its citizens and to face up to enlargement .
I should like here to pay tribute to the Irish presidency , which spared no effort in trying to maintain the level of the conference .
I urge it to preserve this spirit in preparing the text which will serve as the basis for discussions at Dublin II , since the ambitions of this conference must be reaffirmed .
I hope that the Irish presidency will incorporate in its proposals all the elements we know to be indispensable in order to face future commitments .
Beyond the question of the institutions , of the reform of the second and third pillars , which are very important , it is the model of European society which is at stake .
I hope I am not mistaken .
I have some hope regarding the ' employment ' chapter that Parliament called for , since I note that today , quite apart from the proposal from the European Parliament , five countries including the holder of the presidency have tabled a text and that a majority of Member States has agreed to incorporate the ' employment ' chapter in the work of the IGC .
Can we in fact claim to be close to a Europe of citizens if we fail to deal with this problem and if we also fail to deal with the tragic question of social exclusion ?
Similarly , we must win the trust of the people over the reform of institutions and must formulate for the single market rules and common policies functioning with a qualified majority and introducing balanced competition in the interests of everyone .
This conference must not become a dead-end .
It would be naive to think that the single currency could on its own induce political reform .
On the other hand , failure or a limited outcome from this conference would lead Europe to rush in the wrong direction , with the single currency being introduced under the worst psychological conditions and completely at odds with the expectations of its citizens .
I therefore believe that it must be a very ambitious conference and that only ambitious reform could be accepted by this Parliament , even if it means that the conclusion is postponed until after the Amsterdam Summit .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate the Irish presidency , all the more so since , along with Belgium , it has shown that it is not necessary to be a big country , either in population or in area , to play an important role at European level .
However , I say to myself that in your place I should ask what play are we acting here , what theatre are we in , what part are we playing ?
I heard Mr Martens , leader of the European People 's Party say , rightly , that Europe should be democratized , that it should be concerned with its citizens , that the problem of jobs should be solved .
I have no doubt at all of his sincerity , I rate it very highly , but the British Conservatives are , after all , in his group !
They could persuade Mr Major that he must give qualified majority voting to Council and democratize Europe !
As for the problem of jobs , it was Helmut Kohl himself who said that employment was not a European question and that it should be the individual countries that created jobs !
For myself , I am fully aware that in my country , where there will be a strike next week , we can do nothing on our own .
Mr Kohl must be persuaded to act in order to create jobs !
It has been said that we should be concerned about our citizens .
But the citizens themselves also wonder why they should be driven to distraction like that !
The Heads of State or Government decide to fund largescale work and then Mr Theodor Waigel is the first to say : no , we do not want to fund it !
But , good heavens , he must be persuaded that the European Parliament wants to fund it !
I am now going to speak very briefly on a matter of common concern : we - it is you I am getting at once again - have to discuss the budget and we see that the Council presents us with an unacceptable one .
Instead of , dare I say , hand-to-hand fighting against the budget by using our power , what do we do ?
We hesitate , saying that we must be afraid of the Germans , that we must be careful , that we should try to be calm and negotiate nicely .
And what will be the result of all this ?
We , in this Assembly , are European Members of Parliament who do not want to fight : you do not want to fight , and I really believe that instead of indulging in fine words we should perhaps from time to time have a little nerve , a little willingness to act , a little punch .
We have had a demonstration in Belgium and I ask you : what have the people shown us ?
That we should stop lying to them , that we should not let them think that we can solve everything when we are not given the resources to do so !
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , may I briefly present the position of the Group of the European People 's Party on the situation in the Middle East .
In the first place , I want to express our satisfaction at Mr Spring 's visit and the meetings he held - thanks to that visit , the European Union was where it ought to be - and to express the hope that they will continue on behalf of the Union , and that the President-in-Office of the Council will be kind enough to come and see us again with a general report on the situation as it will no doubt evolve .
Perhaps it would also be appropriate , Mr President-in-Office , to consider a permanent working party linking Council , Commission and Parliament services , thus anticipating , on an occasion like this , the creation of the crisis detection unit on which Parliament has already given its own verdict .
We should maintain permanent contact with each other to ensure that there is real European action - European action something akin to what was achieved recently in such a resonant way by the President of France , whom we must congratulate on the manner in which he conducted himself in difficult circumstances .
At the same time , we must also point out that there was a certain ambivalence in that visit , because it was made in his capacity of French Head of State , with all the weight that carries , but certainly not as the united voice of the European Community .
We have seen important action , but it was clearly national .
Mr President , we do not believe the Union is just a coffer to take resources out of . It needs to have a united political presence .
That has not been the case , unfortunately : we have been much more of a coffer than a political voice , despite Mr Bildt 's admirable work on Bosnia .
And we believe there must be further development of the Oslo agreements , which include an important aspect : the security of the peoples concerned and , naturally , the security of the people of Israel .
But we cannot be satisfied with deadlock , like the apparent situation in Hebron .
It is not possible - it is simply not possible - that , in such a climate of tension , there should be an artificial influx of 400 settlers creating difficulties for 150 , 000 Palestinians .
Peace must return to the region on the basis of the various agreements we have signed - the Madrid Conference , the Oslo agreements , the agreement between the European Union and Israel .
And I end , Mr President , by saying that it is important that our meetings , like the one in Barcelona , relate to the whole region and we hope the whole region will be taken into account at the coming meetings , where , no doubt , the Presidentin-Office will honour us with his presence .
Mr President , I should first like to congratulate the Irish presidency on its approach to the IGC .
This was a good approach .
It was a constructive approach and also , in my opinion , a rather successful one - especially as the Irish presidency intends to submit a draft Treaty text in December .
I find this important .
It also means that the Netherlands can start on real negotiations and make a real attempt to conclude matters by June and that we will not have to start from the beginning again .
I therefore thank the Irish presidency for its dynamic approach .
As Parliament 's rapporteur on the IGC I would , however , like to once again stress the important points .
First of all it is to make the European Union more transparent .
This is also exceptionally important in the Council .
Their discussions and votes should be made public .
It is also to make the Union more democratic , also in regard to the role of Parliament , and it is to break with the veto in the decision-making .
I believe this to be absolutely essential .
In the area of policy , I believe that something must be done on the subject of employment .
This must be laid down more clearly in the Treaty .
Action must also be taken in the area of internal security , the fight against international crime and in the area of foreign policy .
In my opinion these are the six points to which the IGC must provide a positive response .
Let me turn to foreign policy .
It is a good thing that the decision was taken to send Mr Spring to the Middle East .
But I must also say that the image at present being created by the Union 's activities is rather blurred .
Mr Spring went to the Middle East on behalf of the Union , but now Mr Chirac is visiting the region .
He himself suggests that he is also there on behalf of the European Union .
And then there is Mr Prodi in Cairo who has also made a number of statements which are credited to the European Union .
All of this points to the urgent need for the Union to speak with a single voice and to coordinate its actions .
Because a poor image is being created .
One final comment .
Yesterday evening there was a debate on Burma .
In the debate Parliament once again expressed the general view that some kind of action must be taken against this country .
An economic boycott is favoured .
May I call on the Irish presidency to follow the United States and to get to grips with this problem .
This is absolutely necessary .
It is true to say that Burma is in the same situation as Chile and South Africa were in the 1980s .
Let us not wait until the situation deteriorates there .
I have received two motions for resolutions on the European Council meeting in Dublin and four motions for resolutions on the peace process in the Middle East , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I thank the Members of the European Parliament for the remarks which they have made here and for the welcome they have given me and for the general tenor of their remarks .
I find this to be a very useful exercise .
It is a very important link between the Council and Parliament to have the opportunity of coming before you to address the House in relation to the Dublin I summit with the President of the Commission and then to hear your views .
This is what the art of politics is all about .
I have had the opportunity of listening very carefully to 25 contributions from various parties and their leaders and from the various groups .
This is a very important exercise , because we want to strengthen the working and institutional relationship between Parliament and the Council .
Let me say , as Irish Foreign Minister , that I also welcome the reiteration of support from the European Parliament for the Northern Ireland peace process .
That is extremely important and it certainly is very important for us , at what is a difficult time in the peace process , that we have a very strong message of support from the European Parliament for the process where I know we all want to see our negotiations brought to a successful conclusion .
The special meeting of the European Council in Dublin reaffirmed the timetable of Florence , i.e. the IGC would be completed by the meeting in Amsterdam in June 1997 .
It also confirmed the need to maintain the level of ambition of the Conference ; the internal and external challenges to the Union are such that we must ensure that the Union is adequately equipped and strengthened .
That was a very common theme through many of the contributions here this morning .
The one message I want to get across to Parliament today in relation to the IGC is that we will be ambitious and we will complete the work on time in accordance with the mandate we received from Florence .
The meeting in Dublin was a special meeting of the European Union , it was not an informal summit .
The meeting in Dublin was a European Council , all the members of the European Council were present and , as is the practice at meetings of the European Council , the President of the European Parliament addressed the members of the European Council on matters of concern to the European Parliament .
At the same time , it was a special meeting of the European Council and it was characterized by the fact that it did not produce formal written conclusions .
That was made very clear from the outset and there was never an expectation that there would be formal conclusions .
The contributions made here today focused on the main areas of concern to Parliament , the Council and the Commission : the references made to employment and social exclusion which remain at the top of the European Union agenda ; also , the question of drugs and our efforts to combat drugs .
Whereas three to four years ago people talked about drugs and expressed concern , we are now seriously addressing the question of drugs and international crime for the first time in many years .
There are a number of measures being brought forward and hopefully joint actions will be brought forward before the end of our presidency to make sure we address what is a very serious issue , this scourge of drugs , for all of us as politicians and indeed as parents .
We have to work together .
No single country in Europe , no single country in the world is going to address the drugs question on its own .
That has become very apparent and we need cooperation at international level .
We are doing everything we can in that respect .
The question of the enlargement of the European Union comes in whether it is in terms of political stability or questions of security .
We must prepare for enlargement .
It is high on the agenda and we will do everything we can during the Irish presidency to make sure it receives the attention which it warrants .
We are committed to enlargement .
Six months after the conclusions of the Intergovernmental Conference negotiations are going to open and , as one Member said , there is a great deal of preparation to be done .
That work is ongoing by the Commission in relation to the challenges of enlargement .
There are many challenges facing the Union in the context of enlargement , but there are also many opportunities .
We have to keep both in mind when discussing the question of enlargement .
In relation to economic and monetary union , work is going ahead at technical level and a full report on the various issues will be presented to the Dublin summit in December .
In external relations many questions were raised here this morning and , for the foreseeable future , the priorities will remain the Middle East peace process , former Yugoslavia , our relations with Russia and EU / US relations .
We also had the summit with Japan a number of weeks ago .
In relation to the Middle East peace process , which many Members have commented on here this morning , I , in my report on the special European Council , made a detailed statement on our approach and the activity in support of the Middle East peace process .
We set out very clearly the measures in the European Council that we believe are necessary to restore momentum to the peace process .
We will continue actively to use our influence with the regional parties with a view to promoting progress on the basis of the existing agreements .
The Union will continue to monitor the talks between Israel and the Palestinians , which are at a very complex and delicate stage , as we have seen over the last 24 to 48 hours .
My recent visit to the region underlined the Union 's full support for the efforts to revitalize the peace process and other visits to the region by European leaders , such as that of President Chirac , are further concrete expressions of European interest and engagement in the Middle East and of our common concern to promote the objective of a just , comprehensive and lasting peace .
Inquiries were made and questions were asked whether or not we would be taking further action and we are at the moment putting together plans for a troika visit to the region before the end of the Irish presidency .
To reply to Mr Teverson who asked two questions : flexibility is on the agenda and it will have to be debated .
France and Germany have made a contribution to the debate , but the outcome will have to be acceptable to all Member States given the nature of the Intergovernmental Conference , and I do not see that process as aiming to isolate any one Member State .
Will there be another Intergovernmental Conference ?
As chairman of the Intergovernmental Conference , I certainly hope not .
This is the opportunity for Europe to get on and make the decisions .
Certainly , at Dublin , the focus was on making decisions and getting our business done by Amsterdam in June 1997 .
That , I believe , is in the interest of all Member States and certainly is in the interest of Europe for what we want to do for the future .
I welcome the opportunity of having this exchange with you .
I welcome the contributions made by you and the focus that you have put on the issues as they are before us for the Council .
I will certainly benefit from this discussion as we have our General Affairs Council meeting on 28 and 29 October .
It is my intention for the remainder of the Irish presidency to work very closely with Parliament and to share with you the ambitions of the presidency and the energies and efforts which we are going to put into the presidency to make sure that we address the issues .
There are many of them to be addressed by us on a day-to-day basis and I certainly look forward to working with you in the future .
I would just point out to Mrs Roth , who made some references to the President of the Commission and myself in some Hans Christian Andersen expression , that I would welcome an opportunity of explaining to her many of the issues on the agenda by the Irish presidency .
I am sure I could convince her that not only are we well clothed , but we are fully briefed as well !
( Laughter and applause )
That concludes the debate .
The vote will be taken at midday .
Elimination of poverty
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on events to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Poverty .
It is a great pleasure for me to have the opportunity to speak to Parliament to mark World Poverty Day .
Globally there are various definitions of poverty and varying estimates of the number of people living in extreme poverty .
The United Nations estimates that there are 1.3 billion people , mainly women , children , the elderly , the disabled and indigenous people , migrants and refugees who subsist on less than the equivalent of one dollar a day and are excluded from full participation in the life of their society and the benefits of citizenship .
In one form or another , poverty and social exclusion are to be found in every country , every city and every town on the face of this planet .
Poverty and exclusion are profoundly disturbing phenomena .
We in this relatively advantaged part of the world must ask ourselves why one group of countries has succeeded in eliminating absolute poverty while others have not ; why technological and economic progress has succeeded in bettering only the privileged few , not the world as a whole ; why , when tentative steps towards broadly-based economic growth happened in the 1960s , they petered out leaving many countries with only the crippling burden of debt ; and the most challenging question of all : does the very pattern of wealth accumulation ensure that in the world at large and within individual countries the enrichment of one person entails the impoverishment of another ?
The World Poverty summit in Copenhagen last year set us all the ambitious aim of eliminating absolute poverty world-wide .
It also set us a second important objective : the substantial reduction of overall poverty and inequalities within countries .
In my capacity as Social Welfare Minister in Ireland and as president of the Social Affairs Council in Europe , it is in regard to this area of relative poverty and inequalities within the Union that I wish to address the main body of my speech today .
The very clear message I took from Copenhagen was that the onus for action in countries such as Ireland rested with ourselves and so I came home resolved to launch a serious assault on poverty .
I found that there were , of course , immediate practical steps to be taken which had at least a partial impact on poverty .
Over the last two years we , in Ireland , have accordingly increased the universal child benefit by almost 50 % .
It is a good , targeted anti-poverty measure and it was an important first step .
But beyond immediately practical measures to tackle poverty I felt that we needed something more : a substantial change in mind-sets and in administrative practices , a change in the process of decision-making .
Based on my proposal , the Irish Government has made a commitment to a national anti-poverty strategy which has the aim of placing the needs of the poor and the socially excluded at the heart of the government policy development process .
This is a mammoth task but we are making progress in stages , in full consultation with the voluntary and non-governmental organizational sector in Ireland .
The key policy areas identified for action are : educational disadvantage , unemployment - particularly long-term unemployment - income adequacy , regenerating disadvantaged areas with concentrations of poverty and tackling poverty in rural areas .
The next stage of the proposals for action in each of the five key policy areas will be brought to government for decision .
As the strategy develops I hope we will be able to share our experience with other Member States in whatever forum may be appropriate and useful .
I am very hopeful that the entire exercise will stimulate positive change .
Consider educational disadvantage , for example .
Research suggests that a country increases its GDP by 9 % for every extra year of primary education it gives its people .
Education also reduces inequality .
The World Bank says that just a 1 % rise in the proportion of the labour force which receives secondary education increases the share of income received by the poorest half of the population by between 6 and 15 % .
It adds that countries that give priority to basic human capabilities in schooling , health and nutrition not only directly enhance wellbeing but are also more likely to see improving income distributions and higher average incomes over the long-term .
While some people might argue that this holds true only for the developing world , the OECD states that it is also true for the industrialized world .
It says that if countries do not have enough educated workers , skill shortages and inflationary bottlenecks build up , people with good qualifications are in high demand and their wages go up , but the rest are left behind .
Thus an expansion of basic education provision can be both a targeted anti-poverty measure and an investment for general economic growth .
Everybody wins from such an assault on poverty .
As the resolution before you today states , it is estimated that more than 52 million people live in poverty in the European Union .
These figures include 17 million people unemployed and three million who are homeless .
Poverty is now acknowledged as a serious problem by the European institutions and a challenge to the way Europe should develop in the next century .
The current European consensus on tackling poverty could be summarized to the effect that social and economic progress must go hand-in-hand : high levels of unemployment , poverty and social exclusion undermine the European Union 's commonly agreed objectives of high standards in employment , social protection and equal opportunities for women .
The role of the European Union has been to encourage Member States to adopt minimum standards of social protection to ensure that social entitlements gained in one state may be transferred to another , to monitor progress towards higher standards of social protection and to fund a number of initiatives and programmes against poverty .
All this is eminently worthwhile but the question is : is it enough ?
I think all of us who are committed to European integration will admit to a lack of certainty at the moment .
We are busy with the big projects , such as EMU , and at the same time we are worried that Europe is failing to address the real needs of so many of our citizens .
Nor , for the most part , do we have a clear vision of how the European Union can be made to do this effectively in the near future .
There are valid criticisms to made of the Maastricht Treaty 's imbalance between the economic and social dimensions but the question now is : how do we modify Maastricht to reflect best such an equilibrium ?
Let us consider the social dimension .
The inter-governmental conference which opened in Turin last March and which continues under the Irish presidency , offers us an opportunity to redress the shortcomings of Maastricht and to begin to establish a framework in which social policy considerations and the market are in balance .
A major aim of the Irish presidency is to advance the work of the IGC in this direction .
The Florence European Council set a challenging mandate for the IGC in providing that the Irish presidency should aim to bring forward to the Dublin Council in December a general outline for a draft revision of the Treaties with a view to the IGC being able to complete work as envisaged by mid-1997 .
The overriding objective of the Irish presidency is that the IGC should contribute to the development of the European Union in a way that corresponds to the aspirations of the people of Europe , is relevant to their everyday concerns and responsive to their needs .
This means that we must confront squarely the current situation whereby in the European Union there is a serious lack of balance between the strong legal and financial instruments available for economic policy and those dealing with poverty , inequality , unemployment and the labour market .
In purely economic terms the integrated market of 350 million people will be highly inefficient if 52 million people are too poor to consume the goods and services offered in that market .
Equally , the onus on public expenditure to support a large number of elderly , unemployed and poor people generally could be a heavy burden on the Union whose working-age labour force of 133 million is already less than half the total population .
Again , if we can develop strategies which will lessen the burden on welfare systems and equip those 52 million people to contribute and to consume on a par with the rest of society , then everybody wins .
I have sought to use my time as chairman of the Social Affairs Council to encourage a reflection on how social protection systems might contribute to such a spiral of positive social gain .
The starting-point must be a recognition that the economic and labour market context in which these systems operate has changed dramatically within our lifetime .
Imbalances between the supply and demand for labour have given rise to an unprecedented , persistent and high level of unemployment .
This can reach very high concentrations in certain regions , in urban ghettos and among groups such as young people and those who are poorly educated and unskilled .
This is precisely the type of poverty and inequality which presents us with the principal challenge at European level if we are to meet our Copenhagen commitment .
In the past the main aim of European social protection was to provide an adequate replacement income to people experiencing unemployment or illness .
Happily , Europe can record a great deal of success in regard to this objective .
However , it is necessary for us to re-examine critically whether these original objectives are sufficient in the current climate and to review whether there may not be aspects of our social protection policies which of themselves can impact on the incidence of unemployment and therefore on poverty and inequality .
To that end I hosted an informal Council in Dublin last July .
In essence the Council agreed there that the challenge facing social protection systems is to take on new objectives concerning the prevention of unemployment and the reintegration of the unemployed .
In view of our discussions in July I would propose a resolution for agreement at the Social Affairs Council in December which sets out how the Union and individual Member States might implement this role in a complementary way .
It is vital , given the unprecedented degree of focus on the unemployment issue generally within the Union , via the Essen process and the Santer pact , that social protection ministries should increasingly engage with , and contribute to , these processes rather than see their role in terms of passively dealing with the consequences of unemployment .
It is , moreover , vital to the interests of the people of Europe that labour market and employment policy decisions are not taken solely on the basis of fiscal priorities .
Thus I am confident that by the end of the Irish presidency we will be able to report progress on the way Europe is tackling unemployment .
It is , however , a matter of personal regret that we are unlikely to be able to record any progress on such simple , limited but valuable proposals as the fourth exclusion programme commonly known as Poverty IV and Actions in favour of the Elderly .
Look again at how the Commission 's three earlier programmes against poverty worked .
They reached out to local groups .
They gave rise not to a big programme which was remote from citizens but to a series of small local initiatives .
Paradoxically , the supposedly remote and undemocratic bureaucracy of Brussels taught Ireland , for instance , some lessons on how to reach out to , and involve , some of our most marginalized citizens .
It seems to me a great pity that such worthwhile programmes , which did not in my view threaten national competences , should have foundered on the rocks of subsidiarity .
My primary aim in relation to Union action against social exclusion is practical .
I want to be able to re-open the route by which Ireland has learned and mainstreamed the lessons of Poverty I , II and III , not just for Ireland 's sake , of course , but for all the Union who gained similarly from the poverty programmes and , indeed , for all those who will join us in the future .
That is why Ireland has proposed a specific Treaty change in the area of social exclusion .
As a result of such a change three things would happen .
Firstly , the competence of the European Union to engage in anti-poverty programmes would be clarified so that such actions will have a clear legal basis .
Secondly , this will permit more significant European poverty initiatives in the future .
Thirdly - and perhaps most importantly - we would keep the idea that Europe has responsibilities in the fight against poverty squarely on the agenda .
Ireland already supports incorporation of the social chapter into the Treaty .
Our IGC proposal is also consistent with the view of the Commission in its IGC opinion which urged clear Treaty provisions for cooperation between states on matters of social policy such as the fight against marginalization and poverty .
The Commission has since expanded on that earlier opinion in its contribution to the IGC of 23 September where it proposes an updated and fully integrated social chapter .
In my view this proposal would complement my government 's proposal .
More broadly , I want to see the aim of fighting exclusion and one of its principal causes , unemployment , become more central to the activities of the Union .
I repeat : the current IGC offers us the opportunity to improve on Maastricht , to reconcile the claims both of competitiveness and social protection within the Union and to eliminate the potential for social dumping between Member States .
Our social protection systems , properly managed and modified as appropriate to reflect changing economic , demographic and labour force circumstances , serve us very well as a positive factor in the productivity of the Union .
We have to integrate social and economic policies , not segregate them .
The alternative is to continue to consign millions of European citizens to lives of diminished hope and opportunity .
I welcome this opportunity to reflect on the potential of social policy and in particular on the potential to develop social protection and social exclusion policies in a European context .
I should like to thank you for the opportunity of sharing my views with you as to what we can do together to respond to the needs and hopes of the people of Europe .
In turn , I look forward to your views and those of the Commission on poverty , social policy and related issues .
As a former Member of this Parliament , it is always a pleasure to return here and share in discourse with parliamentary colleagues .
( Applause )
My warmest thanks to the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr De Rossa .
Madam President , I too am pleased to have the opportunity today , speaking on behalf of the Commission , to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Poverty .
Despite the many positive changes that have taken place in the last decade , poverty is still the greatest problem facing the world .
As the President-in-Office said , some 1.2bn people live in abject poverty and more than half of them go hungry every single day .
The fight against poverty in developing countries is , of course , enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty and is one of the key objectives of the European Union 's development cooperation policy .
In December 1993 the Council of Ministers adopted a resolution on this very subject , which forms the basis for our current activities .
This resolution clearly states that the fight against poverty should be integral to the preparation and the implementation of all development policies and programmes .
It also emphasizes that the yardstick for development measures by the Community and by the Member States must be the improvement of the living conditions of the poor and investment in human resources .
Today the European Union provides about ECU 4bn per year in assistance to some 100 developing countries around the globe .
This figure does not include food aid or emergency humanitarian assistance .
The bulk of European Union assistance goes to the countries of Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific , for whom the seventh European Development Fund covering the five-year period from 1990 to 1995 amounted to some ECU 10.8bn.
The next EDF period from 1995 to the year 2000 , will in total provide some ECU 13bn of assistance and all of this will be , of course , by way of grant terms .
In the global perspective Europe is a comparatively rich region of the world and many would say that , in comparison with the developing countries , we do not have a serious poverty or social exclusion problem .
But I wish to say that any complacency within the European Union would , of course , be misplaced .
The motion for a resolution , which you will debate later , underlines Parliament 's commitment to developing an appropriate strategy in the European Union and in the Member States to combat poverty and social exclusion .
The Commission shares that commitment .
The Commission is committed to a citizens ' Europe and the people who live below the defined poverty threshold in the Member States - reckoned to be in the order of some 52m people - risk becoming the forgotten people of Europe .
Here in Europe , it is important to tackle relative poverty as well as absolute poverty , because if we do not tackle relative poverty and social exclusion we run the risk of undermining social cohesion in Europe .
And if we do not maintain social cohesion within the Member States , then we will not deliver the full potential of the European Union .
There is both a moral and an economic argument for activity and not passivity .
I recently told Parliament 's Committee on Social Affairs and Employment that we live in a very disquieting time insofar as social action is concerned here at European Union level and we must insist on the insertion into the Treaty of a proper legal base with qualified majority voting for the adoption of programmes in the social sphere .
If that outcome is not secured , the future of programmes and actions of any consequence in the social policy area at European level is in serious danger .
Much more needs to be done if all Member States are to be brought to agree on this vital point .
The active involvement of this Parliament and its individual Members and the help of all the relevant NGOs is essential .
There needs to be intensive lobbying of all to ensure that all are aware of the strength of feeling that exists on this subject .
The IGC has been mentioned .
It cannot be allowed to ignore this matter .
Nothing less than the human face of European social policy is at stake here .
Indeed , the whole concept of a people 's Europe geared towards improving the quality of life for all its people is at stake too .
I would like to make an appeal here at this part-session today .
I appeal to you , President-in-Office , Minister Proinsias De Rossa , to take this message back to the Council and to your colleagues in the presidency currently responsible for the IGC negotiations so that , together , we ensure that the Intergovernmental Conference gives us a firm basis for social action in the future .
I would also include Parliament in that appeal .
I appeal to Parliament also for its active involvement and support for a Europe-wide mobilization of all those who strive daily to address the needs of the poor , the vulnerable and the disadvantaged .
These matters should be of primary concern to us all .
Madam President , I wish to thank the Irish presidency sincerely for helping to initiate this debate to mark the International Day for the Elimination of Poverty and because the Irish presidency has made the fight against exclusion one of its highest priorities .
I also wish to thank the Commissioner for making his stand on this vital issue so clear today and two weeks ago when he came before the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
The resolution we have tabled here today is not just concerned with poverty inside the borders of the European Union but also globally - and I agree with what both the Minister and the Commissioner have said on that front .
To make it absolutely clear , in our resolution I will accept some of the amendments by Mrs Schörling , on behalf of the Green Group .
Although our resolution is not just concerned with poverty inside the European Union there has to be something badly wrong when in this wealthy part of the globe over 50m of our fellow citizens are shackled by poverty .
Article 2 of the Treaty - it is worth re-reading - promises sustainable growth , a high level of employment and social protection and the raising of the standard of living and the quality of life .
For too many millions of our fellow citizens those words are no more than empty rhetoric .
Our Finance Ministers are mostly locking themselves into the final drive towards economic and monetary union , and I support that move towards monetary union .
But let us accept today that it cannot and must not be won at the cost of the hopes , the needs and the aspirations of so many of our people .
There has to be balance .
But I wonder where the balance is when , to my shame , my own government has been instrumental in securing in the Court of Justice the suspension of payment of ECU 12m to the elderly , the poor - those pushed to the very margins of our society .
The word has to go out far and wide - the Commissioner is absolutely right on this point - to the people of Europe , the churches and the organizations working with the excluded to represent their interests .
They have to demand that their ministers - not all ministers are like Mr De Rossa - will work within the Intergovernmental Conference to deliver two things that we really need to do our job at European level .
Firstly , an employment chapter to give us the tools to begin to tackle unemployment and particularly long-term unemployment in a coordinated way across the Union .
Secondly , a solid basis in the Treaty for programmes of action to assist those excluded and most in need .
Only with the action to give reality to those promises in Article 2 will this become a Union worthy of the name .
Without that , quite frankly , the Union will not deserve to succeed .
I sincerely wish to thank Minister De Rossa personally for his commitment to the battle in this field .
Madam President , I would like to join my colleagues in welcoming the President-in-Office to the House and also to welcome Commissioner Flynn .
However , after those two platitudes , there are serious and very hard-hitting measures and issues to be discussed .
I think that when we look here today and listen to the speeches that are made , each of us will lay out our stall , we will say how we feel so badly that the most powerful economic bloc in the world , the European Union , has so many people long-term unemployed .
We will say we must do something , we must continue the fight , we must do X , Y and Z and at the end of the day we end up with a court decision and a government saying that you cannot spend money on that .
And what has the President-in-Office done here today ?
He has shown us the kind of actions that could be taken , the positive steps that could be made .
Unfortunately , the President-in-Office has not been able to convince his colleagues in the Council of the value and the benefit of those and we must push harder to ensure that we get those messages across .
In his speech the President-in-Office mentioned the national anti-poverty programme strategy which he put in place in the Irish government .
That is something that could be used as a blueprint for a European model .
Please get it on the agenda .
It is even more horrific for me as an Irish person - and I am sure Commissioner Flynn as well - that the whole idea of an anti-poverty strategy in Europe came from a former Irish Commissioner , Commissioner Hillery .
We can see the tremendous work that was done with the tiny amounts of money that were given in the previous programmes and all that was achieved ; it allowed people to feel empowered .
The point about the Paul partnership in Limerick or the Pavee Centre in Dublin , which were funded under the poverty programme , was not that they were agency-led or agency-based but they were issue-led by the people who were involved and the people who were affected most of all .
Unfortunately I do not have enough time to go on , but to conclude - and seeing as how we are in an Irish vein - I want to quote you George Bernard Shaw , who said : ' To hate our fellow man is not the ultimate sin .
To be apathetic towards him , that is the essence of inhumanity ' .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the quality of a society is to be measured in terms of how it treats its poorest members and not in terms of economic performance .
I believe that we should stress this point on the International Day for the Elimination of Poverty and at the same time stress that the European Union also has a responsibility in this area .
I should like to thank the Irish presidency for the initiative it is taking on this point . However , I must also express my concern at the fact that here in the budget debate we have to fight so hard in order to obtain , in the Council procedure which follows , the small amount of money which is available from the European budget to fund programmes concerned with combatting poverty and with the situation of elderly people in Europe .
We should be ashamed at this and I am not optimistic regarding the outcome of these negotiations with the Council .
But I do wish the Irish presidency success in this and offer it my full support .
But we must do more .
We also have the duty to look at areas where we can do something about poverty .
If I as rapporteur for example , look at the demographic data on Europe I see that progressively fewer numbers of people will be productively participating in the labour market , that we will have more elderly people , and fewer young people .
We must pursue an integrated policy in regard to social security costs .
At European level we must also have the courage to consider shifting the charges on work to other areas if in future we want to be able to increase retirement pensions for Europe 's citizens .
We must do that together , as otherwise people will always say that certain items cannot be included on the agenda due to reasons of competition .
We must also ensure that this whole problem is debated at the next WTO negotiations .
If we do so then we can look the underprivileged in the eye .
Otherwise we cannot .
Madam President , I think we should also thank the Minister and the Commissioner for their sensitivity about International Poverty Day , because the Minister is right .
According to the last report on human development from the United Nations , 1 , 300 million people are poorer than 15 years ago and 89 countries are poorer than 10 years ago .
Thirteen million children die every year from preventable disease and 200 million children are undernourished .
Meanwhile the world spends 800 , 000 million dollars on military budgets - and I do not even want to calculate the volume that represents .
The Commission has set out a grand definition of what constitutes poverty : people lacking in social , economic and cultural rights and who are excluded from the normal life of the community .
The truth is there are 52 million poor people , three million homeless people and 17 million unemployed people in Europe .
In my own country - I refer to my country and Portugal , perhaps because they are very close together - there are seven million poor people and a third of the Portuguese population is at the poverty level .
And the levels of unemployment , insecure employment , poverty affecting women and the situation of older people , increasingly numerous , are going to spread poverty in Europe , a privileged continent compared to the rest of the world but a continent with enormous problems .
It seems to us that the cuts proposed by the Council in the budgets for the coming year and the cuts proposed by the individual countries to meet the convergence criteria are producing definite social data proving that we are not going in the right direction .
The blocking of the Poverty IV programme is a disgrace .
The pilot projects in Poverty III demonstrated their effectiveness in helping people make progress .
So you are right , Commissioner , Minister . The revision of the Treaty needs to include a legal framework making it possible to advance in that direction and , of course , to take decisions by a majority to prevent the continued blocking of important programmes in this area .
Madam President , dear colleagues !
This is not just a celebration of the international day for the eradication of poverty , but also the international year and decade , 1997-2006 , for the eradication of poverty .
The initiative taken by the UN to focus on the world & # x02BC ; s poverty problems and on the fact that the differences between poor and rich and South and North are growing all the time is absolutely necessary .
We need to remind ourselves that a fifth of the world & # x02BC ; s population , in other words , the rich industrial nations , have at their disposal 85 % of the world & # x02BC ; s resources , expressed in GNP .
There are currently more people dying of poverty and starvation than as a result of war .
According to FAO statistics 800 million people suffer from hunger .
Unfortunately this year , and this day has perhaps not been observed as it ought to have been .
We politicians , of course , have a particular responsibility in this respect .
It is for this reason that I welcome the Council and Commission & # x02BC ; s speeches here to day .
I also welcome the resolution which we in the Social Committee have adopted through our President .
The resolution raises many important aspects , particularly the focus on the 52 million poor in Europe .
Of course we have a particular responsibility to fight social rejection and poverty within Europe and the EU but we must not forget the world outside .
According to the UNDP & # x02BC ; s " Human Development Index ' only four countries in Europe , those such as Azerbaijan and Armenia , fall into the lower half of the table of 174 countries .
Against this background , Madam President , it is shocking and sad that the EU is reducing its development aid to the poorest countries and to Non Governmental Organisations .
Dear colleagues , let us not only show solidarity when we vote for the resolution but also when we vote for the budget here tomorrow .
Madam President , it is undoubtedly fortunate that , once a year , we give thought to eradicating the poverty which continues to increase in a world where prosperity goes hand in hand with inequality .
It enables us at least to pay tribute to the outstanding work of the NGOs .
Nevertheless , let us not be hypocrites .
Looking only at the European Union , the fight against poverty will require a pugnacity which , it must be said , the European institutions have not always shown us .
The facts are there , however . Poverty today is spreading .
It affects nearly 55 million people over the whole Union and we know the extent to which young people , women and single-parent families are the first victims .
So what can we do ?
I listened to you , Mr President-in-Office , with considerable hope and I believe that education and the fight against unemployment are equally effective elements in this difficult struggle against exclusion .
However , the European Union will only be really effective if it can renounce the economic ultra-liberalism at its heart , if it can focus its action on the construction of a social Europe that cares for the dignity and well-being of its citizens .
Madam President , I trust you will not hold it against me if in just one minute 's speaking time I do not look for examples of poverty far from home but try to open people 's eyes to the misery and poverty suffered by so many of our own people .
In structural terms , poverty in the European Union countries is a problem which principally threatens to affect families with children .
Combatting poverty in our own countries must therefore principally take the form of offering material and moral support to families and above all families which often have to survive on one income - and very often a very modest one at that - by ensuring an in-built priority for our own people when it comes to employment and social welfare .
In my own country I see that the government is doing the very opposite and seeking to make so-called savings on child benefit while at European level you need only take a quick glance at the budget to see , without any exaggeration , that a great deal of money is being thrown out of the window .
I am therefore very critical of yet another international day against poverty , yet another day with a lot of hot air and little substance .
Madam President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , colleagues , in recommending this resolution to you I want to draw your attention to the views of the people of Europe .
The most recent 1994 Eurobarometer survey on the perception of poverty and social exclusion in Europe indicates that most Europeans believe that the levels of poverty and social exclusion have increased in the last ten years and that the gap between rich and poor is growing .
The Europeans surveyed , who were a large and representative sample , attribute the growth in poverty and inequality to the increase in long-term unemployment and the loss of solidarity within European societies .
Our citizens believe that there should be a concerted , integrated approach by the public authorities to combat poverty and social exclusion , 89 % believing that the European Union should be intervening .
Despite what has been said this morning , little is known about the action that the EU has taken , and amongst those who do know about it the majority believe that it is insufficient .
I believe that the perceptions of our European citizens are accurate .
The European Union has not taken concerted action to address the multidimensional issues , the causes and consequences of poverty .
That is why in this resolution we are calling for a Commission taskforce to be established with the common purpose to develop far more integrated strategies and to coordinate the use of Community resources to combat social exclusion in the European Union .
That is why within our resolution we are calling for solidarity and condemning the action of certain Member States , led by the United Kingdom , who have caused the suspension of the funding programmes aimed at benefiting the poor and socially excluded including the elderly .
That is why we are calling for changes in the Treaty .
It is not just a call to arms , Mr Flynn , but a call for compassion and a call for action at European level .
Madam President , the effect of poverty on an individual is more devastating than anything , save for violations of his rights and dignity .
Poverty is an assault on the family .
Only the poor know what it is to be poor .
In my report of March this year , I stated that there are 52 million people living in poverty in Europe ; although dating back to 1988 , that statistic should prevent us sleeping at night .
But how are we to defeat this scourge and provide relief to these people living in poverty ?
Well now , one solution is that all of Europe 's citizens should be educated and trained to be better at sharing poverty .
Let me make myself clear .
Citizens trained to save , to distribute resources in circumstances in which industry expands not for its own sake but to achieve a social objective ; where our energies are used for the common weal and politics achieves its highest goal of thinking first of those who have been abandoned , the misfits , those without families , the sick , the handicapped , the unemployed , those who are homeless and lack the comfort they need to survive .
Winter is approaching and a severe crisis in employment will take away any prospect of development .
An industrial revolution that we neither foresaw nor fully evaluated will affect men and women together with their children at the peak of their working life - and none of us will be able to anything in the immediate future .
When it made 30 , 000 employees redundant , IBM in America has had to take on psychiatrists to help the scientists who were on the brink of insanity and extreme poverty .
Now , my friends , let us not let World Poverty Day go by in vain !
Let us do something concrete , let us give these poor people - and give to them directly ! - a subsidy to secure the minimum for survival , not just the legislative basis : a few ECU will do the trick .
Let us set up reception centres directly linked to our institution .
We have to understand that the principle of subsidiarity does not provide adequate responses to ensure that this Europe of ours is appreciated for what it is , that is to say a supreme body which , in order to be united and to unite , needs first and foremost to secure the primary good , namely the health , dignity , development and protection of its children , Europe 's citizens .
Madam President , last Friday I went to a neighbourhood in my constituency where up to 80 % of the households are in receipt of some form of welfare payment .
They have many problems and yet in spite of these - or perhaps even because of these - there is an enormous commitment to community spirit to fight back .
Some time ago they submitted a well-researched , modest but focused proposal to the Commission for funding to systematically tackle the problem of a high drop-out rate from school at an early age .
This phenomenon , perhaps more than most , perpetuates social exclusion .
Their application so far has gone nowhere .
This is not because of its quality , nor is it because of an unwillingness on the part of the Commission to consider it .
It arises because of the mean-spirited Eurosceptically-driven case brought by the UK government against the Commission on the question of legal competence in the domain of social exclusion .
I felt ashamed , Madam President , in this neighbourhood that refused to be marginalized , that right now there is nothing I can do .
However , my political conviction is reinforced that whatever happens in the Court of Justice , which we must respect , the Intergovernmental Conference must change the rules for social policy to avoid being taken hostage by individual states .
I refuse to accept that neighbourhoods that exist on a social or economic margin should be of no concern whatsoever to Europe .
If today 's debate , Mr President-in-Office , can underline any message , the message is : take the courage and conviction from here that the rules must be changed .
Madam President , I too wish to thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for their statements .
Although we do not have analytical data on poverty at a European level , the estimates given by the Commission and the individual Member States show that it is on the increase .
It is on the increase above all because of the growth in unemployment ; the increase in the number of insecure and atypical jobs ; and , increasingly as compared with the past , it has to be recognized that it is possible to have a job and still be poor .
Above all , as well as producing poverty , the growing prevalence of insecure jobs causes other harm : it both increases inequalities and poses a threat to social welfare systems .
All governments are having to contend with budgetary problems and all governments are having to contend with the problem of being constrained to reduce public social welfare measures .
What then is to be done ?
A suggestion for the Commission : in the same way as we have economic indicators on inflation and gross domestic product that are able to gauge the performance of the economy and the effects of economic and monetary policies , we need to set in place , at a European level , poverty indicators as a means of checking on the effectiveness of the social policies that are being applied .
I wish therefore to ask the Commission to undertake effective action in that direction .
I listened with great interest to what the President-in-Office had to say .
Two things have to be done promptly .
One of them immediately : succeed in persuading all of the Member States that we have to reach agreement on the issue of the legal bases and provide for resources in the Community budget .
I think we should be ashamed of having cut resources .
The second issue concerns the Intergovernmental Conference .
I wish to put a question to myself and to honourable Members , to the Commission and the Council . If Europe does not manage to promote social justice , to affirm the right to work and the dignity of the individual , then I think it is legitimate to ask : ' what is the point of the integration process ? '
Madam President , I cannot help but be impressed that , here in the European Parliament , one of the richest places in the world , we are holding a debate on the problem of growing poverty , a fact in today 's society .
Out of respect for those suffering from it we cannot restrict ourselves to good intentions , possibly finding solutions which do not really solve the problems at the root .
Realistically we must bear in mind that poverty , like all social problems , cannot only be done away with by increasing public spending which , although undoubtedly necessary , calls for a dynamic market economy , but it is attracting private investment which in the end creates jobs .
On the other hand , it is vital to bear in mind that poverty is to a great extent the fruit of improper planning , with people flocking to the big metropolitan areas , leading to a vicious circle where increasing amounts of public spending are being wasted .
In Portugal , the area around Lisbon , despite a huge concentration of public resources , has been one of the fastest growing regions in the whole EU in recent years .
Even if this is not to their personal taste , politicians have to promote a much more balanced urban network as this is the only way of fighting effectively against this scourge which puts us all to shame - it is the only way of really helping people suffering from poverty .
Madam President , only chance dictates that we have now moved on from the debate on the reform conference to the subject of poverty , but it is highly appropriate !
All of us here are joining together to agitate for action against poverty , while at the same time the Council of Ministers is binding our hands .
The main cause of poverty is unemployment , and it is certainly no matter of chance that it is precisely the United Kingdom and Germany , who filed the suit against the poverty programme , that have also opposed the employment chapter in the new Treaty .
Those two national governments are responsible for the fact that ECU 12 million are now frozen , and many projects are likely to have to wait 20 months before a decision can be taken .
In every country , low incomes are associated with reduced educational opportunities for children , poor diet and health care and increasing homelessness .
A particularly striking statistic is that the German Society for the Protection of Children believes there are as many as 50 , 000 so-called street children .
In West Germany and the United Kingdom there has been a widening of the divide between rich and poor since the 1980s , and in fact both categories have increased in size .
Parliament and the Commission long ago offered to negotiate with the Council of Ministers to establish legal bases for various programmes .
Despite the Irish efforts , nothing has been done .
It is essential , therefore , that in future the Council of Ministers should adopt social programmes by a majority rather than unanimously .
Poverty is not a natural disaster .
To combat poverty and to integrate the poor into our society , we need a long-term strategy which effectively and continuously coordinates national and European concepts .
Mr President-in-Office , it is not just that about one-seventh of the European Union 's population is afflicted by poverty .
It is not just that the number of poor people correspond , in terms of population , to one of Europe 's large countries or to about half of the fifteen that we call small countries .
What matters is that they constitute a second , parallel world , the world of next-door .
Consequently , the fight against and the elimination of poverty should be the European Union 's prime target and first priority .
I fear that it is not .
I wish it were , and we are striving to make it so , to rid the European Union of the shame of its refusal to promote programmes to combat poverty .
There is no place here for any legalistic sterility or bureaucratic or accounting small-mindedness .
Mr De Rossa , I enjoyed your speech .
I hope that your country , and I wish the same to you too Mr Flynn , that Dublin will become the place where institutional reviews are brought in that result in the creation of a new legal base for a social policy to fight poverty .
Madam President , in order to make up for my forgetfulness , I should like to introduce gender mainstreaming into my two amendments to the resolution on poverty .
A differential analysis according to sex revealed to Mr Boutros Ghali in Copenhagen that 70 % of the very poor are women .
The proportion is the same in Europe .
Poverty has become a female condition here .
Women , who have entered the world of work in massive numbers , mostly have insecure or part-time jobs .
They suffer discrimination of all kinds .
They form 55 % of the long-term unemployed and 90 % are heads of one-parent families .
Women in Europe are therefore still the excluded among the excluded .
Despite all these obstacles , here , like everywhere else , they do two thirds of total work .
They are the main agents in promoting lasting development and in providing for the education of future generations .
I therefore stress that our committees must institute gender mainstreaming so that all the EU authorities and the governments of Member States include women in action programmes for the elimination of poverty , on a par with men in taking political , economic , social and cultural decisions .
I insist that the IGC officially recognize equality between men and women as a fundamental right .
Madam President , I appreciate being given the opportunity to respond to the debate here this morning .
It is clear from the contributions made that the view of this Parliament is similar to my own , namely that the future of Europe must be rooted in a vision of society where market values are framed in the context of human values and where market forces are marshalled in the interests of society as a whole .
At the core of this vision is the concept of social solidarity which embraces the right of the individual to benefit from the support not only of the family but also the community and the concomitant responsibility of the individual to contribute to providing those social supports .
It must be emphasized time and again that currently thirteen of the fifteen Member States support the programmes which are blocked at the moment .
One of the critical issues which is blocking the programmes is the fear that by continuing with the kind of programmes that are proposed under Article 235 subsidiarity will in some way be overtaken or set aside .
We must find ways to reassure the Member States and regional authorities that subsidiarity is not at risk from these kinds of programme .
We must also find a way of changing the Treaty establishing qualified majority voting to enable these programmes to be put in place , not only the programmes which are currently blocked but other ones which may also be necessary in the future .
I appreciate the Commissioner 's contribution and that of the chairman of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , Stephen Hughes , and indeed all the contributors who have been so supportive this morning .
I hope this will be heard by the Member States who are involved in the IGC .
I certainly will be bringing it to their attention and I hope all the Members will do likewise .
I thank the President-in-Office of the Council .
I have received a motion for a resolution pursuant Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place in a moment .
VOTES
Madam President , I think there is so much commotion in the Chamber and such different ideas of what is being put to the vote that I would be very grateful if we could vote again to check that the vote was correct .
Would that be possible ?
As was clearly stated , it was a roll-call vote .
Your vote is recorded .
If you pressed the wrong key , you can still tell us and that will appear in the minutes .
But you know very well that I cannot take the vote again .
Whilst accepting that you cannot take that vote again , if Members notify the services that they wish to change their vote and that takes us over the threshold at 313 , can you inform the House whether it will now be declared as carried in that situation ?
I am well aware that for some Members there was perhaps a problem , but quite honestly I cannot take the vote again .
Madam President , it would be wrong if our votes were determined on the basis of faulty equipment .
I tried to press the green button to vote ' Yes ' but it did not register .
It is wrong if we are making decisions in this Parliament based on faulty technical equipment .
Madam President , through no fault of yours there was nothing on the screen to indicate which report we were voting on .
There is a lot of noise in the Chamber and it is impossible to follow this vote .
There is a delay between you calling the vote and what is appearing on the screen .
It is very difficult to follow this vote .
Ladies and gentlemen , even if a moment 's daydreaming distracts your attention from our voting sheet , you still have , fortunately , our Group leaders to guide you .
I listen to you with a great deal of respect , obviously , and I am taking note of your remarks , but that is all I can do .
The Danish social democrats have voted in favour of the proposal to amend the list of extraction solvents , since the change does not affect the level of protection in Denmark .
However , it is stated in the Commission 's text , as part of the annex , that these approvals should in future be carried out by the Commission alone .
This refers to the so-called committee procedure , where it is neither possible to obtain access to the documents , nor to keep track in any way of the decisions which might be taken .
Clearly , it should be possible for the many technical decisions to be taken by Commission officials , but the Danish social democrats find it worrying that these matters should be left to the committee procedure , as long as there is no proper openness in this area .
Lehne , Ford and Linzer reportsBonde ( EDN ) , Gahrton ( V ) , Holm ( V ) , Lis Jensen ( EDN ) , Krarup ( EDN ) , Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Sandbæk ( EDN ) , Schörling ( V ) , Sjöstedt ( GUE / NGL ) and Svensson ( GUE / NGL ) , in writing .
( DA ) The three reports on freedom of movement of persons in an EU without internal frontiers are an important sign of the shift from cooperation towards the formation of a state , and even though there are some attractive proposals in the reports , the Scandinavian opponents of such a union cannot support the dismantling of the internal frontiers and the establishment of a common external wall .
In a system of free international cooperation , each country can control who enters and leaves its territory .
It is this right , one which is normally associated with a nation , that is now being established for the EU .
This is an important function of a state .
The next step is , of course , to create a common citizenship , with common rights and duties .
Also part of a state are resources such as a currency , armed forces and police , and these are now also being created for the EU , which is thereby coming to resemble a state , rather than a form of practical international cooperation between independent countries .
We as Scandinavian opponents of such a union are strongly in favour of international cooperation , and we wish to see cooperation involving all the nations of Europe .
However , this should be cooperation , not a state , and we warn those who wish to build a state that , with their excessive centralism , they are also poisoning the ground for sensible international cooperation and trade .
We are in favour of trade and cooperation , and of sustainable development through highly internationalized economies , but we are forced to reject even attractive proposals when they form part of the establishment of a new state which will crush the democracy of our countries .
Without democracy , there can be no progress .
We cannot remove the frontiers between the Member States and transfer decision-making from parliaments to market forces and committees of officials behind closed doors without this leading to rebellion or decline .
We hope that the rebellion will take place in a peaceful way when the Maastricht II Treaty is put to a referendum , since the decisions being taken here in Parliament are out of touch with the electorate outside .
Let us abandon the plans for the new state frontier .
Let us return to our citizens ' wish for practical cooperation between our countries .
The Danish social democrats do not feel that the time is ripe to remove the controls on persons at the EU 's internal frontiers .
We are therefore abstaining on the reports on this subject by Mr Lehne , Mr Ford and Mr Linzer .
Regardless of the need to implement the internal market , in our view we have to take the problems of drugs and arms smuggling very seriously .
These problems have not become any smaller because of the internal market .
Only effective controls on persons at the internal frontiers give us a reasonable chance of stamping out this form of crime , and therefore we cannot do without them until these problems have been solved .
Ford report
Madam President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament which will be supporting my report on free movement .
It is a pity that the Commission does not stay here for the explanations of vote , because it might learn something about why this Parliament adopts particular positions .
The Treaty of Rome states that there should be free movement of goods , services , capital and people .
The first three of these have had their seven-league boots on for some time , while the last has been left to hobble forward unaided by the Commission .
Even now the directive the Commission has given us is a little bit of a poisoned chalice : it is free movement ' if ' ; free movement ' if ' Spain and Britain sign the internal frontiers directive ; ' if ' Spain and Britain resolve their problems over Gibraltar ; ' if ' the Dublin Convention is ratified .
But Parliament wants progress now and the Socialist Group wants progress now so that we get free movement of Europe 's 12 to 14 million legal third-country nationals living in the European Union ; free movement for the 4 million black Europeans we have in our midst ; free movement of blind people without the nonsense of the current quarantine regulations for guide dogs which , as we know , do not work .
The Commission recently responded to a question of mine by saying that in the last five years not one single case of rabies had been detected while dogs were held in quarantine , costing us tens of millions of pounds .
Free movement of football supporters , unrestrained by over-officious policing when they have not been convicted of hooliganism or racism .
We will be watching very carefully now what the Council of Ministers does on these proposals .
Parliament will not tolerate delay .
We welcome open borders .
It is satisfying that the internal market is being created so that people can move freely across borders .
We have had a similar system in Scandinavia for a long time and it works extremely well .
But , the fact that people can move freely across the borders involves risks , however , not least of which is that drugs can be moved across borders more easily .
In order to prevent this from happening and yet still allow free movement compensatory measures are called for .
Such compensatory measures can , for example , include increased police co-operation .
If it deems it appropriate A Member State ought to be able to check a person at its national border if it suspects that that person has violated the country & # x02BC ; s laws and regulations .
To speak about removing internal border controls without linking this to additional activities is wrong .
The removal of internal border controls must be linked to additional , compensatory measures .
So far no real proposals for such additional measures have been put forward .
First , we must be clear what we mean by additional measures , because there is a risk of increased drug trafficking between Member States of the EU and because criminals will be given greater opportunities to use the lack of border controls to avoid being brought to justice .
Each Member State should be free to decide for themselves what form and level of internal border control to implement between EU Member Countries .
Free movement of people within the EU will not be put at risk by the fact that people may be checked at internal border controls .
If , for example , Sweden is to maintain its current regulations concerning the import of alcohol , we must have the opportunity to check people crossing our borders .
Linzer report
Madam President , the Commission has presented us today with three proposals for Directives seeking to remove all controls from persons at all internal frontiers of the Union .
This line of thought seems to us insane .
This is certainly not the time , when migratory pressures are increasing around Europe , to implement a reform conceived in another age , when the Berlin wall still separated us from the East and the African economy had not yet plumbed the depths it has reached today .
The Council seems to have reacted well by proposing common action which would have reinforced controls on nationals of third countries travelling inside the Union , but which was broadly at variance with the three draft Directives of the Commission .
Unfortunately , the Council seems to have retreated before the arm-waving of extremist supporters of free movement who , nevertheless , represent virtually no sector of public opinion .
We call on it for a burst of courage .
In fact , not only is the principle behind three draft proposals for a Directive a bad one , but the methods give nothing in return .
The so-called compensatory measures would compensate nothing at all and the so-called safeguarding clause is only for thirty days , a derisory period of time in face of the strength of the migratory pressures and their duration , which is reckoned in decades .
Moreover , the three proposals make absolutely no reference , not even in visas , to the permanent right of Member States to preserve the security of the public in their own territory , a right they have under Articles 36 , 48 , 100a and others in the Treaty .
This omission , which is certainly not fortuitous , speaks volumes about the Commission 's intention to abolish all the defences of States in this area .
Finally , we can get the measure of the Commission 's audacity when we see it peremptorily brush aside the general declaration of States that are signatories to the Single Act , according to which none of these provisions , and I quote , affects ' the right of Member States to take such measures as they consider necessary for the purpose of controlling immigration from third countries , and to combat terrorism , crime , the traffic in drugs and illicit trading in works of art and antiques ' .
According to the Commission , this declaration is worthless since it would render Article 7a of the Treaty ineffective but , clearly , States adopted this detailed formulation because they felt that Article 7a was ambiguously drafted and wished to clarify it . The Commission has no right to delete such texts with the stroke of a pen , except to demonstrate its outrageous claim to be above the wishes of the people !
It is obvious that citizens from other countries should have the same rights as citizens of the Union to move freely across the borders .
But this involves just the same increased risk of movement of unlawful substances such as narcotics across the borders as free movement for Union citizens does .
It is , therefore , of greatest importance that free movement is supplemented with compensatory measures .
Of course citizens from other countries who have residence and work permits for one of the EU countries should be able to move freely within the European Union in just the same way as citizens from EU countries do .
But , in our opinion , this reports places exactly the same incorrect demands as Ford & # x02BC ; s report on the removal of personal controls at internal borders .
It is wrong to speak about removing the internal border controls without replacing them with additional measures .
Removal of the internal border controls must be linked to additional , compensatory measures .
So far , no concrete proposals for such additional measures have been presented .
First , we must be clear what we mean by compensatory controls , because there is a risk of increased drug trafficking between Member States and because criminals will have greater opportunities to use the lack of controls to escape being brought to justice .
Each Member State should be free to decide for themselves what form and level of internal border controls to implement between EU Member States .
Free movement for people within the EU will not be put at risk by the fact that people may be checked at internal border controls .
If , for example , Sweden is to maintain its current regulations concerning the import of alcohol we must have the opportunity to check people who are crossing our borders .
Oomen-Ruijten recommendation
Information and education have always been the cornerstones of consumer policy .
Community measures to allow free movement of products and consumer protection must recognize the need to make it easier to evaluate quality and prices .
With comparative advertising authorized in some Member States and prohibited in others , the current situation works to the disadvantage of consumers .
It is assumed that advertising is a means of properly informing consumers so that they can make better choices .
It is therefore important for European citizens that set limits should be defined with regard to advertising so as to increase their right to the protection of their economic interests and their right to correct information as the basis for proper choice .
The aim of this directive is to harmonize the conditions for comparative advertising with a view to completing the internal market and thus facilitating the free movement of publicity services within the Union .
I will vote in favour of this important harmonization of the legislation to control comparative advertising .
Poggiolini recommendation
The Community health monitoring programme , based on Article 129 of the Treaty on European Union , is designed to protect the health of the citizens and prevent disease .
Correct operation of the Community health monitoring system will allow all the countries of the Union to set priorities in health policy based on reliable comparative data on health , and improve the viability and effectiveness of health management .
I also entirely agree that a European Health Observatory needs to be created to establish a set of health indicators , develop a data collection and distribution network for these indicators and improve analysis of them .
I end by urging the European Parliament to stand firm against the Council on the budgetary allocation for this vital programme for the Union , because the amount allocated is ridiculous and an affront to the interests of the citizens of the Union .
The Danish social democrats believe that cooperation between the EU countries in the health sector is a good thing , when we are talking about research and the exchange of statistics .
Many countries , including Denmark , may well need good ideas on how to organize their health services , and agreements can also be concluded between countries on specialized treatments .
But when , through the EU , we start to touch on the actual treatment of illness and the payment arrangements for such treatment , we are going too far .
We can appreciate that Members from countries where the health service has collapsed see a hope in the EU , but the payment of tax and thus the financing must continue to take place nationally .
It is clearly stated in Article 129 of the Maastricht Treaty that the Community - and thus the 15 Member States - shall contribute towards ensuring a high level of health protection by encouraging cooperation between the Member States and , if necessary , lending support to their action .
This proposal for a programme of Community action is entirely in keeping with the letter and the spirit of the Treaty .
It is not a question of any kind of harmonization , but of a measure whose aim - on the basis of comparable health data - is to enable the individual EU countries to establish health policy priorities and to make health policy more cost-effective and hence more efficient .
Nevertheless , in adopting its common position on the Commission 's proposal , the majority in the Council of Ministers has been unable to agree on anything but to water down what is in every respect a sensible proposal for a programme of action in the field of public health .
This applies both to its financing and the shaping of the practical framework for implementing the programme .
I therefore entirely agree with the rapporteur 's criticism of the common position , and with the recommendation from the Committee on the Environment .
Riis-Jørgensen recommendation
The Danish social democrats have voted today in favour of the European Parliament 's proposal to change the name and the E number of alternatively refined carrageenan .
The reason is that we do not wish to see the approval of an additive which may be confused with the additive carrageenan , under the same E number .
This is partly because it is a less pure substance than carrageenan , and partly because the substances are not the same .
Carrageenan , for instance , is approved for use in breast milk substitutes , despite the fact that various studies have indicated problems with stomach pains and , in some cases , gastric ulcers in infants .
If alternatively refined carrageenan is approved with this name and virtually the same E number , we believe there is a justified fear that the substance will be approved for babies .
Furthermore , we believe that we must avoid misleading consumers and , with a view to the future use of alternatively refined carrageenan , that a clear line should be taken on this new additive .
It should therefore be called PES - processed Euchema seaweed - and given the E number E 408 , instead of E 407a .
This recommendation from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection should be supported by a clear majority in Parliament .
The recommendation seeks to ensure that there is no confusion between processed Euchema seaweed - PES - and carrageenan .
In accordance with the report adopted by the House at first reading , the Committee on the Environment is recommending that the two products - PES and carrageenan - should be marketed under different E numbers .
The importance of this for consumers and their safety is clearly highlighted by the lobbying activity carried out recently in Parliament by representatives of the PES producers .
If the question of the choice of E number was unimportant , these PES producers would have taken a passive stance on the matter .
The rapporteur and the committee should be complimented on the consistency they have shown in dealing with the proposal to amend Directive 95 / 2 / EC , and Parliament should vote massively in favour of this recommendation , both for the sake of consumers and on grounds of principle .
Florenz report
We all know there is no life without water and its importance has made it the subject of numerous interpretations throughout history , from the concept of ' Numen ' in classical Greece to the cause of confrontations in the Middle East .
Water is one of the key factors in the life of human beings , so the Union needs a clear and consistent policy on this resource .
The rapporteur ably points out that water quality standards and their achievement in the Union cannot be dispersed across more than 50 directives , sometimes actually contradictory , and urges that a framework directive be submitted to Parliament , as indicated in the fifth action programme , for integrated and sustainable management of the water resources of the Union .
I conclude by recalling , once again and as always , that without strict control of both the quality and the use of our Community water , it is doubtful whether we can maintain and indeed improve water quality .
The Commission would appear to have been lacking in enthusiasm and foresight when considering this important area .
If the Commission had shown the same energy as it showed for the EMU , I would certainly have been satisfied .
Unfortunately , it appears that the Commission lacks the background , the environmental understanding , an allround perspective and proposals for concrete actions to be able to put forward a policy on the issue of water .
The area that is most lacking , in my opinion , is the all-round perspective ; other areas also affect water policies .
This includes , particularly , the agriculture policy , subsidised by the EU , by which artificial plant breeding , containing many poisons , lead to serious pollution of water .
The same applies to industrial policies where lax environmental policies affect our water , and to transport policy and energy policy etc .
The Commission must take an all-round view on the issue of our water which includes all of these points , otherwise the Commission words will just be a waste of more paper ( which will also pollute our water ) .
It is important that the EU puts forward a progressive policy in this area , but implementation shall take place at National and regional or local level .
The Commissions 's communication on water policy sets out a strategy for a coherent water policy which is intended to lay down the basic principles for managing water in the Community .
The aim is that it should lead to a framework directive on water .
Unfortunately , the Commission 's communication is not adequate to meet these goals .
Parliament 's Committee on the Environment has therefore proposed that it should be reinforced .
It is calling on the Commission to establish criteria for prevention at source , to set tougher limit values for substances in water , and to use a combination of emission standards and environmental quality objectives in water policy .
In a letter to the Committee on the Environment , Mrs Bjerregaard has promised to comply with these demands .
In the light of this letter , the PSE Group will vote in favour of Parliament 's report , since it guarantees , together with the letter from Mrs Bjerregaard , a sound water policy for the future .
Dublin European Council
Madam President , the conflict in the Middle East is extremely urgent .
It is one of the most important and most dangerous global conflicts at the moment .
The peace process has come to a halt ; not much is happening .
The European Union has a relatively good reputation in this field .
The EU has been quite active , particularly this Parliament both through its resolutions and statements and through direct contacts via delegations to encourage cooperation with the Palestinian legislating Council .
We have shown our interest and our activity through visits , overseeing elections and through acting as hosts for a Palestinian visit .
Many sections within the EU have complained that EU activity , economic assistance and strong action on the Middle East conflict has gone on relatively unseen .
Now the conflict is once again on brink .
Serious events are taking place at the site of the conflict .
It is incredible that the European Parliament , in this current situation , will not speak out at all and all because , as we all know here , the large party groups are in the middle of a pure Parliamentary deliberation on whether a statement now would compete with a report which will be placed before Parliament in a month & # x02BC ; s time or even later .
I must say that I am extremely surprised that this has been allowed to happen .
The development of events in the Middle East cannot wait for the internal Parliamentary decision making process .
The point of making a quick statement here is that we must make it while the events are current and while it can have some effect .
How will those in the Middle East perceive the fact that several party groups have put forward proposals and that they have resulted in absolutely nothing .
This can only be interpreted as a lack of interest on the part of the European Parliament or that party political deliberation must take precedence over serious action for peace .
Madam President , I am deeply disappointed .
I have enjoyed and hope to continue enjoying good cooperation with my colleagues in the large party groups on Palestine but I am deeply disappointed by their action here today .
Madam President , to close our debate on the Dublin Summit , the Europe of Nations Group , faced with the consensus motion from the socialists and centrists , tabled a motion for a resolution demanding a radical reorientation of the Intergovernmental Conference .
Of course , our proposal was rejected by the majority of this Assembly , but we were anxious to set a date . It seems to us , in fact , that the Conference is marking time today because it is stumbling along in the wrong direction .
Sadly , we see it devoting its precious time to secondary problems , like details of decision-making procedures in the European Parliament , to low priority questions , like the list of citizens ' rights to be included in the Treaty , rights which are already well protected at national level , or to palpable absurdities , like the extension of majority voting in the Council .
Furthermore , the debate on the flexibility of the Union , which is perhaps the most important debate today from the strictly institutional point of view , still drags on in total confusion .
On all these matters , it seems to us that the Council is a little too much a victim of the intellectual terrorism of the federalists .
This morning 's debate illustrated this very well .
How did a statement from the Commission come to be made after the Council 's report , when the Council was in fact alone competent to give an account of an informal meeting that was essentially intergovernmental ?
The saddest thing of all is that the intervention of the Commission showed a real political will , while that of the Council hardly showed any .
If we wish to redirect the Conference along a useful path , as described by the motion for a resolution we tabled , the Council simply must free itself from superstate dreams and agree to institute procedures appropriate to a Europe of nations .
Madam President , when the French Head of State is shouted down here in the European Parliament , we are right behind him because it is France that is abused .
When he is insulted in Jerusalem by the Israeli occupying police , it is again our country that receives the insult .
The Israeli leaders should know however that no lasting peace can be based on injustice and apartheid .
The first injustice was inflicted upon the Palestinian people driven from their land by the Israelis , who claim exclusive historic possession of their land going back to Abraham .
With this type of argument , a thousand conflicts could be triggered worldwide .
Moreover , the Palestinians , whether Christian or Muslim , also claim to be descendants of Abraham .
The second injustice was inflicted upon the Christians in Lebanon , whom Mr Kissinger wished to deport to America to make room for the Palestinians .
But peace in the Middle East can only be based on respect for the rights of all peoples to live freely on their land .
The Palestinians have a right to Palestinian land and to a Palestinian state .
Lebanon must be evacuated not only by Israel and by Syria , but also by the Palestinian and Iranian militia , while the Americans , who , incomprehensibly , support the Taliban and the pro-Iranian Kurds , should stop interfering ineptly in anything and everything .
Madam President , the Dublin meeting exemplified the futility and impossibility of carrying through a European CFSP .
For , whereas the French President , Jacques Chirac , proposed common action in the Middle East in order to prevent the Palestinians being left on their own to face the Israelis and the American arbitrator , whose sympathy was clearly one-sided , this wish for a common European approach came up against a blank refusal , particularly from the British and the Germans whose diplomacies are in fact aligned with that of America and Israel .
Moreover , the timidity of the European Parliament over Middle East affairs is also explained by the pressure exerted on Members of this Parliament by American and Israeli diplomacy .
It might also be pointed out that the attitude of the Israeli state to the European Union is particularly outrageous since basically it is ' pay but keep quiet ' .
This is clearly intolerable and shameful .
The best way to reduce the general public & # x02BC ; s mistrust of the EU is to stop putting forward proposals which build up the EU " on high ' .
Every such proposal within Foreign and Security policies , the EMU etc. serves only to increase the mistrust .
The Intergovernmental conference must be viewed from this perspective .
Poverty
Europe agreement with Slovenia
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0277 / 96 by Mrs Iivari , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision on the conclusion of the Europe Agreement between the European Communities and their Member States , of the one part , and the Republic of Slovenia , of the other part ( 10587 / 95 - COM ( 95 ) 0341 - C4-0419 / 96-95 / 0191 ( AVC ) ) ; -A4-0282 / 96 by Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the economic and trade aspects of the Europe Agreement between the European Union and Slovenia .
Mr President , the adoption of the Europe agreement with Slovenia has been delayed for an unusually long time in comparison with the procedures with other new democracies in Central Europe .
The actual negotiations went quickly .
They began on 15 March 1995 , and the agreement was initialled in July the same year .
However , it was only signed in June 1996 .
The reason for the delay in its signature lay in the complex situation which arose in the region after the Second World War .
At that time the territory , which had belonged to Italy , was incorporated into Yugoslavia and its inhabitants were evacuated to Italy .
When Yugoslavia subsequently disintegrated , Slovenia gave an undertaking to pay financial compensation for the loss of property left behind in the area .
However , Italy demanded that its nationals should have the right to recover the property they had lost .
At the same time the newly independent Slovenia adopted legislation banning foreigners from owning property in its territory .
In itself the Europe Agreement means that Slovenia undertakes to bring its legislation on ownership of real estate and land into line with EU legislation and to eliminate all discrimination against nationals of EU Member States with regard to the movement of capital .
The question was what the timetable for this should be and how the relevant legislation should be reformed .
Numerous attempts by the Slovenian Government to secure adoption of the Council 's draft failed when the required majority failed to back it in Parliament .
However , on 11 April 1996 , after laborious negotiations , the Slovenian Parliament gave the government a mandate to sign the agreement on the basis of the compromise proposed during the Spanish presidency .
Under this , Slovenia pledges to guarantee all citizens of the Union the right to acquire property from the beginning of the fourth year after the entry into force of the agreement .
In addition , citizens of the Union who have lived in Slovenia for at least three years will have the right to acquire property as soon as the agreement enters into force .
This protects the rights of Italian nationals who used to live in the former Yugoslavia , but have fled from the country , to reacquire their property .
The domestic-policy issue of the ownership of property was hotly debated , both in Slovenia and in Italy .
I am glad that it was resolved precisely during the Italian presidency .
Relations between the Italian and Slovenian Governments are now good .
The whole process is also quite interesting from the general point of view .
The development which led to the democratization of the countries of Central Europe and the independence of the Baltic States was positive .
It affords genuine opportunities to build a common Europe .
At the same time , however , it reopened historic wounds , and painful issues concerning nationhood and borders came to the fore .
The war in the former Yugoslavia is the most tragic instance of this .
Now it is important to take care together to ensure that there is no backsliding into the injustices of the past but that we set out to build the future .
Justice should be sought , but at the same time what is needed in Europe is both determination and self-restraint to enable the establishment of new cooperation to be a success .
Measured against many criteria , Slovenia 's economic and political development has been encouraging .
It is in the front rank of the countries which have concluded Europe Agreements , when it comes to the preconditions for accession .
The European Parliament , for its part , expedited the approval of the Europe Agreement with Slovenia in its resolution of 30 November 1995 .
I hope that Parliament can now take a positive decision , to enable Slovenia to catch up with the other associated countries which have stolen a march on it in their relations with the European Union .
Mr President , elections to the European Parliament were held in Finland on Sunday .
I had a good result , but not quite good enough to allow me to retain my seat .
Accordingly , I should like to thank all the colleagues with whom I have enjoyed good working relations in the European Parliament and wish you all success in building a common , peaceful Europe .
Thank you very much Mrs Iivari .
We also wish you the best of luck in your new assignments .
Mr President , the economic figures for Slovenia are excellent .
Even though some figures may perhaps have to be revised downwards at the end of the year , the macroeconomic figures are excellent .
They show that the per capita income , adjusted for purchasing power , is 9 , 000 dollars , and they also show that Slovenia has already met two of the five Maastricht criteria and hopes to meet all five by the year 2000 .
If Slovenia has taken much longer than other States of Central and Eastern Europe , which have long been associated with the EU , to reach an association agreement , the reason lies in the country 's difficult history .
That was also the reason why the Committee on External Economic Relations , in its report , had to examine the political and historical background to this association agreement .
On 26 June 1991 , I had the pleasure of being the only European Union citizen to participate in Slovenia 's independence celebrations .
I was not at that time a Member of this House , but I had the opportunity to experience , on the spot , the way in which the so-called international community had almost ostentatiously abandoned that country , delivering it up , as it were , to the tanks of Serb-dominated Communist Yugoslavia . Slovenia perceived this abandonment as an encouragement to attack , which it duly did two days later .
At that time , however , one country - Austria - which is now a Member of the European Union did play a very positive part . Most of its leading politicians , and especially most of its provincial governors , were present on that historic day .
I shall never forget how a leading Slovene said at the time , ' Today we are independent for the first time in our history .
Tomorrow we could all be dead . '
Thank God , it didn 't come to that .
But the Slovenes naturally relied heavily on the European Parliament , and they found strong support here .
Years before the events of 1991 , a Slovenian civil rights campaigner by the name of France Bucar referred here to the human rights situation in Yugoslavia .
Subsequently , he became the first President of the first freely elected Parliament in Slovenia .
A journalist called Andrej Nowak worked here on behalf of his people and later became Slovenia 's first ambassador to the European Council . He died long ago , sadly , but he too was a pioneer of this association agreement .
The Slovenes belong to Europe , they are a deeply European people .
I still remember what Mr de Michelis once said : if Slovenia becomes independent , we shall isolate it for 50 years .
Well , today , it is not Slovenia that is isolated but Mr de Michelis .
But I also remember how , at that time , when the Slovenian capital was encircled by troops , an Italian Member of this House , Marco Pannella , was the first to break through and make contact with the democratic forces of Slovenia .
I sincerely appeal , then , to all Members also to remember that this House was calling for the recognition of Slovenia at a time when no Member State was yet ready to do so .
After many vicissitudes , the problems on both sides have been solved and the association of Slovenia has finally become a possibility .
Of course we can see the problems that arise with reprivatization , just as they do with privatization .
We can see the problems with minorities , some of which have been solved in an exemplary way although others are still outstanding .
But we will oppose a suggestion that criteria should be imposed upon Slovenia that have not been imposed upon any other associated State .
There must be no ' Lex Slovenica ' , and we must give Slovenica the same opportunities within our Community as we give the Czechs , the Poles and others .
I believe that Slovenia , with its cultural tradition , its political pluralism and its 1400 years of integration into Europe , will be a valuable partner and a valuable Member of this Union .
I emphatically welcome the fact that , on 10 June , Slovenia was finally able to make its application for accession to the European Union on the same day that the association agreement was signed .
We appeal to all Member States to ratify that agreement immediately .
Mr President , the association agreement with Slovenia is the first that the European Union has entered into with one of the states to have emerged from the break-up of the former Yugoslavia and it is therefore an instrument charged with responsibilities and values which have to be looked at from a more general perspective .
There is the geo-economic aspect whereby Slovenia occupies a crucial position within the broad lines of the European Union 's expansion eastward , and it is certainly in a position to encourage such development as a result of its sound economic and financial structure .
Then we have the geopolitical aspect : this involves passing on positive values to other state units produced by the Yugoslav diaspora , something that will happen if Slovenia formally and effectively adheres to the European principles of supranational democracy , avoiding discrimination based on nationalism , upholding in short the principles of European citizenship .
Finally , there is the constitutional political aspect that has to be understood in European constitutional terms .
Slovenia wishes to enter Europe with a view to adjusting its constitution in full to the law of the European Community , including in relation to the right of establishment and property ownership .
On that last point , the laborious annex to the agreement is not the product of a bilateral dispute with Italy , as some wrongly assume , a dispute that was , moreover , resolved during the Italian presidency .
It did and does involve a major issue of European principles .
It would certainly be paradoxical were a state to seek , in agreement with the Union , to retain fifty years on in its constitutional , administrative and civil law chauvinistic institutions that can be traced back to the kind of war for whose avoidance in future the Union actually came into being .
The great prospects it holds for the future warrant voting for the agreement .
The national parliaments will then be the crucial fora for ratification and further clarification as we look to future developments in this accession process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are finally getting there : the Council granted the mandate on 6 March 1995 , the agreement was signed on 10 June 1996 after many difficulties , and tomorrow the first of 17 ratifications is to take place .
This gives me great satisfaction , as a politician and as a man !

Special thanks on this occasion are due to Mr Iivari and Mr Posselt , not forgetting the President of the European Parliament , Klaus Hänsch , whose speech in Laibach during early April helped to defuse a very difficult situation .
In addition , the European Parliament 's delegation for relations with Slovenia has endeavoured - most recently , just two weeks ago in Slovenia - to play its part in helping to solve the differences of opinion .
We have found that some such differences still exist , partly because of the forthcoming elections in Slovenia , but that the majority are firmly resolved to continue moving closer to Europe .
There have been and still are problems , make no mistake about that .
But they can be solved .
There are problems in the bilateral area , but there have been favourable developments .
I think it should also be stressed that , after initially avoiding the issue , the Dini government and the Prodi government and , in particular , Secretary of State Fassino in the new government have made massive efforts to achieve closer relations , détente and an improvement in the situation .
Slovenia is becoming an associate member .
Slovenia has submitted its request for accession .
Discussions are in progress regarding its participation in the Western European Union and its membership of NATO .
This development is tantamount to Slovenia 's return to the family of European nations , even though there are still a few problems to be solved , in a new spirit , in Slovenia 's bilateral relations with Italy , partly on the law of property and partly on historical questions .
There are still unresolved questions connected with reprivatization and the moratorium , but I have no doubt they will be solved after the elections of 10 November .
Then there will really be no further obstacles to the return of a country which was an integral part of Europe for centuries and is so European in its past development and its present attitudes .
Slovenia will then share in the negotiations , and in the decisions , as an equal partner .
Mr President , in exercising co-decision when voting for an agreement associating a third country with the European Union , this House is at the same time taking on the responsibility of the right and duty to ensure that the agreement applies , beyond all reasonable doubt , to human and minority rights also . That duty becomes absolute where , as in the case of Slovenia today , the agreement represents a necessary step on the path to accession .
It in fact seems logical that anyone wishing to accede to the European Union should comply in full with its founding principles .
I have to point out to this House , whose responsibilities extend beyond assiduously rubber-stamping the Realpolitik of governments , that the agreement we are about to vote on is not based on the conviction that Slovenia wishes to resolve its political dispute with the Italian minority and the exiles in accordance with the agreements with the European Commission , but in fact marks a generous opening of political credit for that country on the part of the European Union and Italy .
It follows that , since the European Parliament cannot be sure , before the vote , that Slovenia has the will to resolve these disputes , it is at the same time undertaking the moral and political commitment to ensure that Slovenia meets its obligations promptly after the agreement .
We should bear in mind today in the House the circumstances which resulted in these disputes , that is to say the enormous suffering , inflicted for ethnic rather than political reasons and well after the end of the Second World War , on a minority with roots going back centuries and a highly developed culture .
But that will not lead us to oppose the agreement because we believe that however sad and cruel the past , the well-being , progress and security of the European Union largely depend on our not being influenced by that and on establishing strong and new links of convergence and cooperation .
It would , however , be wrong , including in relation to this House , which should be well aware of what it is voting upon , not to point out that , contrary to the Solana agreement , Slovenia persists in not permitting the purchase of property by foreigners and is restoring property confiscated under communism to Slovene citizens only and not others , be they Italians , Germans or citizens of other countries or ethnic groups , who were forced to leave Slovenia .
Slovenia is also banning the participation in political elections of one party , the Dieta istriana , because it is in favour of the return of the exiles to their country of origin .
In the wake of the Solana compromise agreement but above all after this vote , those three issues in the dispute between Italy and Slovenia will become an integral part of the dispute with the European Union .
It will not be long before we have the Slovene elections : we have no desire to influence the outcome but we must voice the hope that Slovenia 's future parliament and government will rapidly comply with the agreements with the European Union and with Italy , aware that that is the only way in which Slovenia will be able to obtain full membership of the European Union .
The House has already recognized , in an almost unanimous vote , the great political balance shown by Italy in dealing with the Slovene question .
And today the rapprochement between Italy and Slovenia is progressing to the satisfaction of both sides , and indeed there is a growing realization of the major interests that exist .
Nor is there any doubt that a solid bilateral relationship between Italy and Slovenia is consistent with the eastward enlargement of the European Union as well as an important element in gradually stabilizing the Balkan region .
It is , however , our hope that the Slovene parliament and government will understand that this happy interlude could suddenly come to an end if it does not give a rapid and satisfactory response to the legitimate demands of the minorities and exiles .
Europe and Italy have generously done their part , it is now the turn of Slovenia .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Slovenian Government has produced a remarkable performance .
In mid-1991 Slovenia was still a victim of intervention by the so-called Yugoslavian People 's Army . Now , just 5 years later , the independent Slovenia has developed into a fully-fledged democracy with good guarantees for its minority groups - not yet good enough , but good for the time being given the circumstances .
Slovenia now also has a social market economy and probably Europe 's highest growth figures .
With the signing of the framework agreement on the dispute with Italy , the final obstacle has been removed to allowing Slovenia to take up its well-earned place in Europe .
The Europe Agreement is a good first step .
Not only the European Parliament but the national parliaments too must quickly support this agreement .
As you know , this association includes , among other things , political dialogue and the progressive creation of a free trade zone .
It offers the prospect of Union membership and Slovenia 's application should also receive every positive attention .
I believe that this former Yugoslavian republic will be ready for EMU as early as the year 2000 .
The Europe Agreement is an important first step on the road to EU membership .
It provides many instruments for more intensive cooperation which must be actively used .
We also support the proposals of both rapporteurs , Mr Iivari and Mr Posselt , whom I congratulate , to further intensify this cooperation .
Projects which come to mind are inclusion in the trans-European networks , PHARE , INTERREG , and support for Slovenia 's privatisation programme .
Of course a great deal of work remains to be done in connection with the pre-accession strategy and on a structured dialogue as with all other Central and Eastern European countries .
I will end here , Mr President .
We have every confidence that the outstanding problems will be solved in the framework of our closer relations .
EU membership would also further improve the excellent relations .
I repeat that I have every confidence that Slovenia will be among the first group of nations to join the enlarged EU .
But it is of course up to Slovenia itself , in cooperation with us , the Union , to prepare itself for entry .
This Europe Agreement is the first step in doing so .
Mr President , I wish to confirm the view of the Green Group which has already in the past lent its support to the agreement associating Slovenia with the European Union and , with an eye to the future , to Slovenia 's accession to Europe .
The reasons that delayed the agreement , namely the dispute with Italy concerning the rights of the exiles who left Slovenia and , above all , the problem of the property that was abandoned , seem now happily to be resolved and , as I have already said previously , I believe that the problem has been made easier to resolve because of the favourable stance taken to this association by the European Parliament in the past .
I believe that , even if it needs further definition and clarification , the agreement proposed during its time in office by the Spanish presidency of the European Union is helpful to good relations between Italy and Slovenia and could act as an example for future relations between the European Union and other countries which have emerged from the ashes of the former Yugoslavia .
From that point of view , I do not agree with those who consider the Spanish compromise to be inadequate , because we cannot ascribe to a new state the responsibilities of other regimes and earlier states .
I say this as the son of a family which had to abandon its own property in the former Yugoslavia , in what is now the Republic of Croatia .
In fact , I hope that it will soon be possible to conclude a similar agreement with Croatia also .
Being in favour of that agreement does not prevent me from raising a number of issues which I think have at any rate to be dealt with during the stages of association .
First and foremost , we have the problem of political transparency .
In regard to the forthcoming elections , the Greens have been concerned to note that the Dieta istriana is to be excluded ; although mainly present in Croatian territory , it has the right to be represented within the political world of Slovenia , as Istria is also in part in Slovene territory and the Dieta istriana is the expression of an inter-ethnic view embracing Croats , Italians and Slovenes .
The formal issues raised to justify excluding the Dieta may be correct in legislative terms but they are not , in my view , politically convincing .
There are also problems of financial transparency that need to be checked upon and that we have plenty of time to resolve during the association stage .
Economic cooperation between Italy and Slovenia can be further developed .
I also consider it useful , from the economic point of view , to set under way cooperation with the ports of Capodistria and Trieste .
There is also the problem of the Krsko nuclear power station .
Many parties in Slovenia consider that power station to be completely unsafe .
I think that the European Union should inspect the safety of the power station and assess the possibility of replacing it with more secure energy sources .
Finally , there is the problem of transport .
While it is true that the trans-European Transport Networks provide for an option concerning the Eastern European countries , it is also the case that there is currently an excess of road traffic travelling towards Slovenia , notwithstanding Austria 's decision to reduce TIR levels through its own territory .
We need also to reach agreement with Slovenia to shift the transit of goods increasingly to rail and away from road .
Mr President , it rarely happens in this House that the rapporteurs are not thanked for their work ; in this debate , however , I am going to do just that and not thank the rapporteurs who have endeavoured , through their reports , to poison what could have been a calm and serene debate .
I say that conscious of belonging to the radical trans-national party of Marco Pannella , cited by Mr Posselt , which was among the first to fight hard for the recognition of Slovenia .
You are wrong , Mrs Iivari , when in your explanatory statement you distort historical and political reality , saying nothing about the fact that if there has been a serious delay over the association agreement , this is solely the result of Slovenia 's refusal to meet the demands of the European Union - including those designed to resolve the bilateral dispute - formulated in the so-called ' Solana compromise ' which the new Italian government then wished to get rid of , gaining a major victory in Florence but in so doing also destroying any possibility of finally being able to resolve the very serious problems bound up with the bilateral dispute .
The fact is that , as a result of that action , the measures that need to be taken of returning the abandoned property and , in general , restoring the position and reaching agreement on the bilateral dispute have been lost for good .
It is true that major responsibility has to be assigned to the Prodi government here , but the reconstruction of events in this report by Mrs Iivari is wrong because our 18 month wait was caused by the Union taking refuge behind that document , and Slovenia , as we know , intends to retain in force its legislation on property in a manner inconsistent with the rules that apply in the rest of the European Union .
It is a very serious matter , Mr Posselt , to write what you wrote arbitrarily in the explanatory statement to your report , and I have requested and obtained the consent of President Hänsch to its removal from the document that will subsequently be officially approved .
To reconstruct the past without the slightest allusion to the persecution suffered by the Italian community , the revenge and political killings , the exile forced upon hundreds of thousands of people , is very serious and unacceptable and means that my group will not vote for the report if it continues to contain very serious falsehoods which are likely to give the public a completely misleading image of the European Parliament .
Mr President , despite the horrors of the civil war in the former Yugoslavia , Slovenia has developed into a stable democracy which guarantees the fundamental rights and freedoms of minorities .
As the country was at war for just a few days , all the conditions were present for a successful switch to a market economy .
As its traditional export markets in the former Warsaw Pact countries were lost , Slovenia managed to turn its attention to the West .
A rigorous monetary policy and strict fiscal discipline were the other conditions for a favourable economic development .
The Europe Agreement can give a new impulse to the Slovenian economy .
This is urgently needed at the present time due to the lower rate of economic growth , increasing unemployment and the deteriorating balance of trade .
The Slovenian Government is facing the typical problems of Western economies , such as managing labour costs and ensuring that social costs do not undermine public finances .
Maximum possible free trade relations between the Union and Slovenia should stimulate Slovenia 's further economic development .
The field of transport offers particular scope for the development of relations between the EU Member States and Slovenia .
Geographically , Slovenia is a link between Western Europe and the Balkans .
This is why the Slovenian Government is giving priority to the creation of an adequate infrastructure .
The inclusion of Slovenia in the TENs is of great importance in this respect .
But it will be several years before the road network has the capacity to absorb the increasing transport demand .
The Europe Agreement therefore includes limits to the free transport relations between the Union and Slovenia in order to give the Slovenian transport sector the necessary time to prepare for the internal market .
To briefly summarize , with the signing of the Europe Agreement Slovenia is included in the pre-accession strategy with a view to Union membership .
Partly by virtue of its culture which has been strongly influenced by Western Christianity , Slovenia is an obvious candidate for membership .
We express the hope that the Slovenian Parliament will be able to promptly ratify this Agreement following the elections on 10 November .
Mr President , as neighbours of Slovenia who , from the beginning , have followed and supported that country 's struggle for independence with much sympathy and active involvement , we Austrians naturally have an interest in bringing Slovenia into the EU .
But assistance and sympathy cannot be unilateral .
So we as free democrats cannot understand why Slovenia is today unwilling to revoke the decrees of the Yugoslavian partisan government of Jajce and declare them invalid , as Croatia long since did - those decrees that have brought so much harm and injustice , death and misery to the German-speaking former Austrians in that country .
Not only that , but for some obscure reason Slovenia is still unwilling to grant an equitable minority status to these German-speaking people or those in the Gottschee area .
I must emphatically contradict the previous speaker on this point .
This step has already been taken long ago with other minority groups , such as the Hungarians .
Furthermore , we have justified and still unresolved misgivings about the safety shortcomings of the Krsko atomic power station , which posed a genuine threat to the area around the Austrian border , especially during the struggle for independence .
Again , we have justified fears that insufficient consideration has been given to the moves towards closer economic ties which are laid down in the agreement , and in some cases take place automatically , or to free movement in the labour market - including family members ...
( The President interrupted the speaker ) ... that comes about because the smaller groups are given so little speaking time .
So , to repeat : we have justifiable misgivings in the economic sector and regarding freedom of movement in the labour market .
All of these are problems which have to be overcome primarily by Austria , and to some extent by Italy too .
It is easy enough for the other States to go ahead cheerfully with adopting resolutions - they don 't have to bear the consequences .
That is partly why the Land Government of Carinthia expressed its misgivings about the agreement on 9 October this year .
Finally , we note the absence of any sign of goodwill by the Slovenians towards their neighbours regarding some form of accommodation over the dumping policy practised by the Slovenian duty-free shops , which has such disastrous effects on small traders in the border region .
So we cannot vote for the agreement as it stands .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Slovenia too has now entered into a Europe agreement - late , but certainly not too late . This is a country that has reached very high standards of economic and democratic development , when you bear in mind where it started .
And it is true to say that Austria was one of the neighbours which , at an early stage , supported Slovenian independence and offered a helping hand during the first turbulent weeks .
There is no doubt that here we have a country following a line of development which may ultimately bring it into the circle of Member States of the European Union .
It is certainly very significant that , despite all the problems and delays that have occurred , it was under the Italian presidency that this agreement was concluded .
I would regard that as a good omen for the future , despite my consternation at a few things that have been said in today 's debate not only by Italian Members but by Austrian ones too .
There is no doubt that national and minority identities do cause many problems in Central and Eastern Europe ; but nor can there be any doubt that those problems cannot be solved by accusations , the opening-up of old wounds and mutual denunciations , but only by a shared vision of the future , directed towards shared objectives .
We shall of course be voting for this agreement , although there are many things that must be asked of the Slovenian government .
Krsko and the dumping policy of the duty-free shops have been mentioned , but the critical factor is the spirit of teamwork in a region which needs a new economic beginning and a new humanity .
Mr President , there are now nine States with which the European Union has concluded association agreements that hold out prospects for those States to accede to the Union in due course .
So the basic question of whether the Union should be enlarged eastwards has already been answered .
However , the question of when and how - the timing of accession and the conditions on which it takes place - remain open .
Whereas , before the events of 1989-90 , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe seem to be a relatively homogeneous bloc , at least from the Western European standpoint , we can now see that the candidates for accession differ so greatly in terms of their initial cultural , religious , geopolitical and economic circumstances that it is impossible to treat them all in the same way .
In other words , just as their starting points differ greatly , so too these individual Central and Eastern European States , whose objective is to become members of the European Union , will have to take very different roads to do so .

If we today , as the European Parliament debating the reports by Mr Iivari and Mr Posselt - whom , incidentally , I take this opportunity to thank for their extremely good reports - call for ratification of the Europe agreement between Slovenia and the Union , we mean this to be a signal to this young Slovenian State .
We mean it as a rallying call : you are on the right road !
We mean it as recognition of the outstanding efforts made by the Slovenian State and people to find their way back into a European association of States to whose economic , political and cultural development Slovenia has made important contributions in the course of its history .
The European Union sets high standards , both economically and politically , for the would-be new Member States from Central and Eastern Europe .
But I believe that Slovenia has deserved , by its efforts so far , to be received into the European Union as soon as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the matter we are discussing is a high profile issue .
Another troubled frontier in Europe is beginning to move back , a frontier that has moved in the past , witness to great tragedies and sufferings , not forgotten and not yet consigned to the calm of history .
I am speaking as a member of the REX Committee and will be looking only at the economic problems identified in this area , particularly in the region of the frontier between Italy and Slovenia .
As far as the Osimo agreements and the subsequent bilateral agreements with Italy are concerned , they must be complied with in full , and , in approving the association agreement , the European Parliament must act as guarantor .
On the issue of the development of the Slovene economy towards a market economy , it is worth pointing out that in Slovenia the pace of privatization is uncertain , while on the capital markets there are still limits on transactions abroad and foreign banks wishing to open branches are experiencing difficulties .
It would be helpful for experts from the Commission to help the Slovene government to develop the new legislation in the direction of European harmonization .
As far as transport and infrastructure of European significance is concerned , we consider that Ljubljana should be linked via high-speed train with the European Networks along the East-West axis - Budapest , Ljubljana , Trieste , Venice - while on the North-South axis there is an interest in completing both the route from Maribor to Capodistria and the intermodal transport system which follows the current Italy-Slovenia frontier .
The Isonzo Basin , situated between Slovenia and Italy will have to be subject to a general planning scheme in terms of both the use of water resources and management of the waters flowing back from Novagorizia .
The wine-producing region of Collio will have to be protected by European registered designations of origin .
Turning to the problem of employment , it has to be pointed out that the Italian regions on the frontier with Slovenia are economically at the margins , and this is reflected in the unemployment rate in the region of 15 % compared with an average in North-East Italy of 6.4 % .
The dismantling of frontiers will result in further unemployment which will have to be offset using European policy measures , both regional policy structural measures and exceptional measures to exploit trans-frontier cooperation .
Gorizia , finally , is the last city in Europe stilled divided by a frontier resulting from the Second World War .
On the basis of a European undertaking , Gorizia and Novagorizia could become a laboratory of ideas and initiatives between different cultures and ethnic groups , so that instead of being an encumbrance , the frontier becomes an opportunity for collaboration and growth .
Finally , I wish to make a technical comment on Mr Posselt 's report .
Part A , which is the only text on which we are required to vote , is the product of the collective efforts of the REX Committee , which I approve and to which I subscribe .
The explanatory statement ( Part B ) is the work of the rapporteur alone and I have reservations about it but these are not relevant to our vote .
Mr President , I have to ask this Union how and with whom it wishes to become great .
If the aim of bringing Slovenia closer to the Union is to consolidate a civil and democratic system within that country , as well as to promote economic development , then it is welcome .
If , however , Slovenia intends to enter Europe and obtain economic benefits only , riding roughshod over the sacrosanct rights of democratic freedoms , then I am in complete disagreement .
Slovenia should explain what it intends to do in response to Italy 's demands for the return of property taken away from hundreds of thousands of Italian refugees who fled from the former Yugoslavia in the 1950s and whether it intends according Italian citizens in Slovenia the fundamental rights of freedom and democracy , language and culture enjoyed by the Slovene minorities in Italy .
I support the initiatives designed to promote the integration of that state into the European Union , but I call upon the authorities themselves to encourage political initiatives to secure for all of the population and ethnic groups resident in Slovenia the basic guarantee of freedom , democracy , language and culture before it becomes part of this Union .
I would stress the great effort made and the substantial progress achieved by Slovenia towards the great democratic change as of 25 June 1991 , the date on which it invoked the right of peoples to self-determination .
That same right of self-determination , I have to say , is being suppressed within the Union by many Member States in regard to whole regions and population groups which have always guaranteed within their own confines those principles of freedom .
The most recent example of that is Padania !
I therefore call upon the Member States of the Union to ensure and take action to see that democracy is guaranteed and there is mutual respect for cultural and social differences .
Mr President , Members from the Alleanza Nazionale seize this opportunity of reiterating their belief that before it enlarges to take in other countries the European Union should consolidate its current base and establish also the political unity to which we attach greater importance than mere economic unity .
As regards the agreement with Slovenia in particular , we have to regret the way in which that country , abetted by the Prodi government , has disappointed the legitimate hopes of those Italians who , having survived the deadly ethnic cleansing on a vast scale carried out 50 years ago by the Communist army of the former Yugoslavia - 350 , 00 Italians herded out of Yugoslavia in just a few months and tens of thousands of Italians buried alive in the mountains of the former Yugoslavia - are calling for their stolen property to be returned .
That should already have been done not only as a proper gesture on the part of Slovenia but above all as evidence of the kind civilization that cannot be measured by weighing up different criteria and has to be demonstrated through gestures of high moral value , such as the return of goods to their legitimate owners and their descendants .
The European Union which constantly - and frequently in words only - sets itself up as the life-guide and beacon of justice of the people , must start ridding itself of the mind-set of bankers and traders , sadly neglecting the moral values which are the real test of the achievement of a mature civilization .
Mr President , can I say first of all how much I regret that this will be the last plenary session attended by Mrs Iivari .
Her assiduous work for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy will be greatly missed in the future .
Could I go on to say how much I welcome this agreement , which is not before time , and give my congratulations to all those involved in resolving the difficulties .
And credit must be given of course to the Spanish presidency for breaking the log-jam during their period in office .
This is of course an important agreement , important because Slovenia , as a number of Members have said , is clearly a strong candidate for future membership of the European Union .
I would hope that some of our colleagues will remember that what we are about in this institution is building a new Europe and not refighting the battles of the old Europe .
Of course Slovenia must not itself assume that membership of the European Union will stem automatically from this agreement .
There is still a lot of work to be done .
Slovenia should in particular bear in mind that membership of the European Union involves taking on the acquis communautaire in full , with no exceptions beyond temporary derogations .
However , I do not want to go over old ground that Members have already covered in this debate .
I want to pick up one particular issue and address my remarks to Commissioner van den Broek .
The European architecture now consists of a series of agreements - the European Economic Area , for example , the association agreements with Central and Eastern Europe , the CEFTA , the free trade agreements with EFTA countries .
The full benefit of all these will not be felt until we move towards pan-European rules of cumulation .
I recognize the work that has been done by the Commission in this , and particularly welcome the decision taken in July by the Budget Council to introduce diagonal communication between the EEA , Switzerland and the Central and Eastern European countries .
Nonetheless , what we need is to push towards total cumulation of rules of origin if we are really to maximize the economic potential of these overlapping agreements .
I hope that the Commission will give this major priority in the coming period , notwithstanding the discussions that may take place in relation to future enlargement of the European Union .
Mr President , I have heard a strange equation being made in this House : an incorrect report is said to mean an incorrect agreement .
But the agreement itself is the substance , the report is merely incidental .
I shall not at any rate use the adjective historical to describe the report , for a very simple reason .
The page has been turned , and what has actually to be described as historical is the ideological and political separation between the Community - now the Union - and Europe 's other life-force .
Currently , the agreements are in fact as they should be , not easy certainly but as they should be , seeking to define not so much co-existence but something more important in the circumstances of a shared continent .
I cannot therefore say that I am not in favour of an agreement of this nature , but that does not in any way mean that I forgive anyone for what has happened in the past , and when I say ' anyone ' , I mean just that .
But were Europe to stop at reckoning up the wrongs and the rights - with the former , the wrongs , being ascribable to totalitarian regimes and dictatorial systems - it would not be a Europe of today , far less of tomorrow , but the Europe of the civil wars of the recent and more distant past .
We have therefore strongly to confirm that the Europe which is today opening up to Slovenia and will in future be opening up to other countries of Central and Eastern Europe , is a democratic Europe in which respect for the rights of minorities and for all human rights is law , that same law which gives entitlement to citizenship .
We are a continent that has had a complex history and the frontiers of the nation-states have been a complex matter also .
Gardening issues , the Americans say , but theirs has been a different history .
Issues that have nothing to do with gardening - we might say - but only if we rely on the rationale of nationalism and the resultant closing-off into nation-states .
The scope of the agreement is different : it is European and within it even the complicated ' gardening ' issues can be given a national solution that respects the rights of all .
I do not , however , wish it to be forgotten that an Italianspeaking political grouping has not been accorded legitimate recognition .
This is a serious matter which needs to be remedied rather than explained .
Nor can it be said that this is a small flaw in a quite different framework .
Even if it were just a small flaw - and perhaps it is - it would still be an unacceptable violation of a civil and political right .
I wish at any event to express confidence that the wrong will be righted , by voting in favour of the agreement , justified - against the backdrop of the complex situation in Slovenia - by the fact that that Republic continues to be an island in the turbulent waters of the former Yugoslavia , thus offering possibilities of increasingly close cooperation including with the neighbouring countries and representing a sound and vital new source of European integration .
It is within that context that the remaining disputes should be resolved , in particular with Italy and the Italians who once lived and are now living there .
Mr President , I have listened to the debate so far with close attention , and in doing so I have been sorry to note a very short-sighted view of things by some speakers .
This agreement is not just about buildings or about Italy - it is about the closer integration of Slovenia into the Europe we all share .
This is a welcome development , and we should indicate as much by voting for it .
There is one thing , though , that seems to me to have received too little coverage in this debate - the need to provide more information and instruction for the citizens of the Union as to what this agreement actually means .
One important issue here is to provide that information so that our citizens , too , can approve this agreement .
As has already been mentioned , Slovenia and the Union , thus including my own country of Austria and province of Styria , can benefit economically from these agreements .
But what has not yet been mentioned at all is the fact that all of us - not just the Slovenes but all of us in Europe and throughout this larger area - can hope for a gain in terms of our foreign and security policy from the fact that we have an opportunity to extend the domain of peace and stability to include this bitterly contested Balkan region , with beneficial results for us all .
What has been missing from this debate so far is any reference to the fact that , for the first time , this agreement includes far more in the way of provisions on nuclear security than any previous agreement of the same kind .
It has also been pointed out that we have opportunities in the field of transport infrastructure , if we take advantage of them .
In this context , however , there is another point which should be made from the Austrian point of view , though with a somewhat different emphasis from what we heard earlier . We should never lose sight of an important sine qua non for this association agreement and , in particular , for Slovenia 's future membership of the European Union .
For us , and therefore for Slovenia as a future Member State , European Union means human rights , the rule of law and the safeguarding of minority rights .
So we call upon Slovenia , as a matter of urgency , to ratify immediately the European Council Convention on the Protection of Minorities !
In this way , we can ensure that the German- and Italian-speaking minorities in that region will enjoy appropriate legal guarantees .
On the same basis , I also appeal to Slovenia to find a humane solution , in a new spirit of European cooperation , to the problem of the expropriations which , on two occasions during the twentieth century , have left their mark on that region .
Mr President , may I first take this opportunity to thank Mrs Iivari for her report on the Europe Agreement and Mr Posselt for his report on related economic and trade aspects .
I should like to join with Mr Titley and on behalf of the European Commission extend my very best wishes to Mrs Iivari as this will be the last plenary session she attends .
As the various honourable Members pointed out , ratification of this Europe Agreement by the European Parliament is an extremely important step for Slovenia with a view to membership of the European Union . It also gives a clear signal to the governments and parliaments of our Member States of just how important it is for the national parliaments to be as dynamic in their consideration of the Europe Agreement as the European Parliament has sought to be .
Slovenia has had its sights set on joining the European Union ever since it first declared independence in June 1991 .
I remember very well the events of that time and how Slovenia stood on the edge of the abyss and was nearly sucked into what later developed into a full-blown tragedy for Yugoslavia .
Fortunately this was prevented and the European Union was also able to play a positive role in this .
I remind you of the agreement signed in Brioni in July 1991 , sponsored by the European troika .
I should also like to once again express my appreciation for the efforts made by the Spanish presidency in particular in overcoming the problems encountered in concluding the Europe Agreement with Slovenia .
I agree with all those who said that it is time to look to the future , to make the most of the agreement which has been reached and to seek a constructive atmosphere in which to solve the remaining problems which are no doubt present .
I should also like to draw your attention to the major contribution made by the President of the European Parliament , Mr Hänsch , in April last year .
I believe that his speech to the Slovenian Parliament played a major role in preparing both the Union and Slovenia for the signing of the Europe Agreement on 10 June of this year .
It was on this day that Slovenia applied for Union membership , thus confirming its commitment to European integration .
In reply to comments made by a number of honourable Members I should like to repeat that Slovenia has agreed to make the necessary constitutional and legal changes in order to permit the implementation of the provisions laid down in the Europe Agreement .
This was made very clear to me during the discussions I had three weeks ago with the Slovenian President , Government and Members of Parliament .
It was also confirmed by Prime Minister Donovtsjek to the delegation from the European Parliament during their recent visit to Ljubljana .
After the Europe Agreement had been signed the interim agreement with Slovenia was also initialled , and we would like to see this enter into force on 1 January next .
Yesterday the Commission approved the proposal on this and according to the timetable it will be possible to sign the interim agreement on 5 November .
As you know , this will make it possible to already implement at the beginning of next year all the economic and trade elements of the Europe Agreement in anticipation of its ratification .
I understand that the timetable for this decision and the consultation with Parliament is very tight .
I understand that Parliament is under pressure and I have therefore ensured that Parliament and the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy have been kept fully informed of progress made and I thank you for your support and cooperation in implementing the urgent procedure which is necessary in order to prepare for the signing of the agreement on time .
Slovenia is already working in close cooperation with the European Union with a view to thorough preparation for membership .
I would draw particular attention to the great efforts made by the Slovenian Government to provide answers to the Commission 's questionnaire within the deadline which expired on 25 July last .
The answers to these questions will be very important to the opinion on Slovenia 's application for membership , the opinion which the Commission will deliver after the Intergovernmental Conference .
When the Europe Agreement has been ratified and is in force , Slovenia will be able to participate in the pre-accession policy on the same footing as the other associated Central and Eastern European countries .
A positive signal today will give the new Slovenian Government which is to be formed after the 10 November elections even more encouragement to meet future challenges , especially in the framework of the national accession strategy , with equal success .
In addition to the liberalization of its legislation on the ownership of real estate , Slovenia must consolidate its economic reforms and its reforms of the government apparatus so that it can effectively manage a market economy and soon be ready to compete in the internal market .
I would like to draw attention to the Commission 's positive and constructive working relationship with the Slovenian authorities .
I hope that the new government will continue in this same spirit and I foresee a further widening of the bilateral relations , the ultimate aim of which is to welcome Slovenia as a new member of the European Union .
Finally , I would like to state that I have every confidence that both the Commission and the European Parliament will guide Slovenia on the path towards the European Union with constructive support wherever possible , but also critical support where necessary .
I have in mind in particular the problems which still remain and which can be solved through good dialogue and good cooperation .
Mr President , we are most certainly looking forward to further cooperation with Slovenia and a successful integration process .
Mr President , apart from thanking the Commissioner for his splendid work and assuring him that we shall be pushing ahead intensively with the interim agreement , I should also like to make a brief personal statement on the comments by Mr Dell 'Alba , who after all has accused me of falsifying the truth .
I believe that I have the right to do so under the Rules of Procedure .
I am sorry , but there was no personal allusion , rather a political debate in which a Member expressed his disagreement with your report .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 10 a.m.
Action plan for Russia
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
B4-0854 / 96 by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Council , on the European Union action plan for Russia ; -B4-0855 / 96 by Mrs Lalumière , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , to the Commission , on the European Union action plan for Russia ; -B4-0857 / 96 by Mrs Schroedter , Mrs Aelvoet and Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Council , on an action plan for Russia ; -B4-0970 / 96 by Mrs Schroedter , Mrs Aelvoet and Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , to the Commission , on an action plan for Russia ; -B4-0972 / 96 by Mrs Kjer Hansen and Mr Cars , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , to the Commission , on the European Union strategy towards Russia ; -B4-0973 / 96 by Mr Miranda , Mr Carnero González , Mr Piquet , Mr Vinci and Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , to the Commission , on the European Union action plan for Russia ; -B4-0980 / 96 by Mrs Hoff , Mrs Krehl , Mr Truscott , Mrs Iivari and Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Council , on the European Union action plan for Russia ; -B4-0981 / 96 by Mrs Hoff , Mrs Krehl , Mr Truscott , Mrs Iivari and Mr Wiersma , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to the Commission , on the European Union action plan for Russia ; -B4-0983 / 96 by Mr Lehne and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , to the Council , on relations between the European Union and the Russian Federation .
Mr President , Commissioner , the Council adopted the action plan for Russia on 13 May 1996 .
This was a praiseworthy initiative . Its main aim was to support the path to reforms on the eve of the Russian presidential election , which promised to be rather difficult .
A further aim was the selection of a number of actions to be taken while waiting for the partnership agreement itself to be ratified by all Members of the Union and for it to come into force .
But , however justified this plan may be , it seems to me to have some shortcomings .
That is why I wished to question the Council and the Commission so that they can , in the near future , explain their guidelines a little more clearly and describe their proposed actions in greater detail .
To us , after all , Russia is a partner different from others .
Because of its size , its geostrategic position , its history , both ancient and more recent , and its political and military strength , Russia is bound to play an important role both for us and with us .
Nevertheless , the country has immense problems .
And this vital partner is also an unpredictable partner , which requires from us a policy based both on a long-term view of our objectives and a great deal of short-term pragmatism .
We shall have occasion to talk about these matters again when I present my report on relations between the European Union and Russia .
Concerning the action plan for Russia , I should today simply like to emphasize this : as regards our contribution to the democratic and legal reforms in Russia , it seems to me that the plan lists actions but does not adequately stress the immense importance of the work , which will determine the establishment of the rule of law in Russia , which in its turn will determine the success - or failure - of the economic reforms .
In this connection , I should like to emphasize the importance of tax reform .
If we could help to set up a Russian tax system worthy of the name , we should have done some really useful work , for one of the evils gnawing away at this country is the pitiful inadequacy of the tax revenues .
There can be no democracy and no rule of law without a minimum of tax income .
As for economic cooperation , many ideas are put forward in the plan , including some in the fields of nuclear power , the environment or the modernization of the production system .
On this point , we must insist not only that our aid should be massive but that our programmes such as TACIS should be better adapted , better monitored and better coordinated with programmes carried out by our Member States or by financial organizations such as the IMF , the EBRD or the EIB .
But we must also be concerned about the social situation .
This is so serious that it could endanger the whole edifice of reforms .
Clearly , the sheer magnitude of what is required is such that the European Union will never be able to give as much help as is necessary .
In spite of everything , however , we must never neglect this social dimension in our programmes . Thus , the TACIS programme should give more attention to health , education and social protection .
Lastly , I regret that political cooperation is not mentioned in the plan of action .
Of course , it does mention cooperation in the fields of justice and internal affairs or questions relating to security in Europe . But all that is really very inadequate , since nothing is said about the practical means of combating the various kinds of trafficking carried out by the Mafia which are corrupting Russia and the EU countries .
In the same way , the section on foreign policy is also inadequate .
This should be set in its global context , particularly in the context of the enlargement of the Union to the countries of central and eastern Europe .
All these are matters for the Council and the Commission .
In Parliament itself , we shall be speaking about them in more detail when we debate relations between the Union and Russia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us remember that the Council 's sudden notion about this action plan for Russia could not conceal the fact that it amounted to an attempt to boost Yeltsin 's election campaign .
Nor , of course , the fact that it was yet another attempt to persuade the world , and especially the USA , that a common European Union foreign policy is not just hot air .
But , apart from the fact that any such action plan for the Russian Federation supports the dominant role of the Russians within the CIS , and apart from the danger that this may be misunderstood as supporting their claims for hegemony , this action plan really is nothing more than hot air .
It contains nothing that had not in any case previously been included in the partnership and cooperation agreements , the interim agreement , the TACIS Regulation and other forms of economic aid .
But , of course , it is true that Russia does need extensive support with the process of democratic and economic reform and with coping with the disastrous destruction of the environment within Russia .
What Russia needs most of all is an open Europe , willing to plan a joint security structure instead of adopting senseless decisions , such as the expansion of NATO and the drawing of new frontiers by means of the Schengen agreements , which in reality have the effect of partitioning Europe and furthering confrontation .
This , however , cannot excuse the inactivity of the Western Europeans when political intervention was urgently needed , as in the case of Chechnya , where massive violations of international human rights took place .
I need only recall our more than shameful silence on the crime of the war in Chechnya after it became known that Russia had used a new weapon of mass destruction - the vacuum bomb - against its own civilian population .
I expect the Commission 's statement to provide specific answers . I want to know what really has been done in the last six months to further the cause of democratic evolution in Russia .
To this extent , the action plan is a very welcome project , but there are still unanswered questions , one of which is what representations the Commission has made to the Russian government regarding Alexander Nikitin .
The Commission is already taking advantage of the excellent results of the Bellona report to prepare urgently needed TACIS programmes .
I know from my visit to Murmansk that the aid programmes are producing results there .
But Alexander Nikitin is still being held in an FSB jail ; I was not even able to visit him .
Indeed , he is being tried for espionage , though he has done a genuinely valuable service for his country and has supplied the essential information for the work we are doing .
He has been charged under a secret decree with having betrayed his country .
I consider it urgently necessary for the Commission to say , in highly specific terms , when and where it is taking action and what means it is using to bring pressure to bear .
Mr President ! It was in sharp contrast to the oppressors in the Soviet Union , to the injustices , the environmental nightmares and the economic misrule that Western Europe managed to drive back the large Communist parties and bring about the fall of right-wing dictatorships in Spain , Portugal and Greece .
This was an unparalleled success .
Equally remarkable in its way is the success of democracy in that same Russia , which has managed to struggle out of the Soviet strait-jacket .
Free and democratic elections for Parliament and President have now been held several times in Russia .
There are also newspapers and media forms which are largely independent and a system of justice prepared to protect the human rights of its citizens .
Environmental awareness is increasing and the economy is also showing signs that it is beginning to function .
This development was far from obvious in a country which had been governed since time immemorial by autocratic Tsars and Communist Party secretaries - so it is all the more welcome .
But perhaps someone is asking themselves : " Has this chap not realised how unstable the situation in Russia is , with a large reactionary socialist party , right-wing nationalist loudmouths such as Zhirinovsky , with Chechnya , fragile nuclear power stations , unpaid soldiers , corruption , gangsters and a president suffering with heart disease on his way to the operating theatre ? ' Yes , of course I am aware of this and much more besides .
But Russia & # x02BC ; s many and difficult problems should not cloud our view of the Russia which has done well , the Russia which we wish to seize hold of , to strengthen and to raise up .
This is the basis of our action plan and our debate today is about how the Union can help to develop a Russia which is sound , humane and working towards peace and cooperation with other democracies .
In this respect , I and other liberals would like to see the following from the European Union :
1.That the Union opens its doors to increased trade , in other words increased imports from Russia of both goods and services.2.That the Union financially supports the creation of Russian institutions which promote diversity , respect for the individual , the environment and economic development.3.That the Union increases exchanges with Russia of students and researchers.4.That the Union facilitates increased cooperation between Russia and its neighbours in Central and Eastern Europe through better coordination of the Phare and Tacis programmes.5.That the Union makes it absolutely clear to Russian leaders that disintegration of Russia is not in the interests of the Union but that we expect that Russian Statesmen shall always respect the rights of minority groups and individuals.6.That the Union , together with Russia and other States involved , works towards a new European order , an order which guarantees freedom and peace for Russia as well.7.That the Union , as a long term goal , keeps an open view on Russian membership of the European Union.What , Commissioner van den Broek , is the Commissions answer to our requests ?
Mr President , Commissioner , on 13 May the European Council adopted an action programme for Russia .
The purpose of that programme was , in the run-up to the Russian presidential elections , to reaffirm the importance of a real , genuine partnership between the European Union and Russia and at the same time to keep open the prospect of further reforms .
In recent weeks it has once again been made clear that this partnership is of great importance in ensuring security and stability throughout the continent of Europe .
The power struggles within the Kremlin , focusing in particular on the position of security adviser to the Russian President , in recent days have created uncertainty throughout the European Union , and especially in the States associated with it .
We are very glad that this job has now gone to Mr Rybkin , the former President of the Duma , because we hope that that previous experience will enable him to reinforce and restructure the process of dialogue with the European Union institutions .
But the internal stability of Russia is important to us not just because Russia is our immediate neighbour : it is also important because it offers the only hope of solving the serious economic problems of that country .
The successful introduction of new systems and the economic reconstruction of Russia would make the Republic a reliable partner for us .
The war in Chechnya is a heavy burden in itself , and especially on the Russian budget .
We hope that the peace negotiated by General Lebed will be preserved in the future and that a new start can be made on reconstruction in that region .
Further to this , absolute priority must be given to the economic reforms .
Recent reports received by us suggest that 75 % of the Russian population are living below the poverty line , and that millions of Russian workers have already been waiting months for their wages to be paid ; this social disaster could be another contributory factor to uncertainty and instability in Russia .
The action programme before us today can help to ensure that the European Union helps Russia to overcome its problems and further the process of reform .
But that will not be enough - additional , radical measures are needed .
We hope that the Council and Commission , together with Parliament , will prepare a further programme of measures , into which previously existing instruments must be integrated at once .
We hope that we will be able to continue discussions on this during the drafting of Mrs Lalumière 's forthcoming report in the Foreign Affairs Committee .
In my view , the partnership agreement remains the central element in the West 's strategy for partnership with Russia .
Both sides are going to have to continue making great efforts to breathe life into that agreement .
I hope that we in the European Union will be able to make our contribution to those efforts .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too should like to open my remarks by emphatically stressing the importance of Russia as a partner in Europe .
In our discussions , we often overlook the fact that Russia is the largest country in Europe in terms of population and that , even though it is no longer a superpower comparable to the USA , it nevertheless remains in point of fact the most powerful country in Europe .
It is , then , absolutely inevitable that we in the European Union should have an enormous interest in maintaining the best possible relations with this partner and neighbour . Not only that , but we should also do everything we can to help ensure that Russia , which has experienced and still is experiencing a great deal of turmoil , should enjoy the most stable economic , democratic and political conditions possible .
This in turn makes it obvious that , in the present situation , everything that Europeans can possibly do to bring about those stable conditions should be done .
Our activities in connection with TACIS , and especially with the TACIS democracy programme , are a very clear signal of the importance that we attach to this policy as a whole .
From the many occasions on which delegations from this House have visited Russia in recent years , I have formed the impression that our TACIS programme has generally been very positively received , and that very specific successes are already apparent .
That is not to deny that there is always room for improvement in specific areas , and of course we in this Parliament will continue to pay careful attention to these .
I also regard the political action programme , which has now once again been adopted , as a further helpful step in supporting the positive trend of events in Russia .
I should therefore like to express my emphatic support for this action programme .
There is just one aspect I would like to point out . In recent months and years I have very , very often formed the impression that , as far as European activities are concerned , not just in this case of aid to Russia but in other sectors too , there is often a discrepancy between the politically based intention , as in the case of this programme of action , and the assistance actually provided .
When projects like this action programme are decided upon , what they contain should actually be implemented from the European standpoint .
There must be none of the petty bureaucratic obstacles we are forever hearing about , the end result of which is that much of what has been politically decided is not passed on and never achieves what it is supposed to achieve .
In point of fact , political developments in Russia are still causing a degree of concern .
Even so , at least in my view , great strides have already been made towards increased stability .
The changes that have now taken place with regard to the security adviser , in other words the decision to appoint Mr Rybkin , which I also welcome , make it clear in my opinion that a high degree of stability has already been achieved .
Naturally , this has caused some turmoil , as does any political decision of such importance .
But the fact that subsequent events did not go as predicted by the Minister for the Interior on television signifies , to me , that such changes in important political positions in Russia today can and do proceed as routinely as they do in the world 's other democracies .
There is one other aspect I should like to mention : on the many visits we have made to Russia in recent years to observe elections , I have formed the impression that people conduct those elections - go to the ballot boxes , cast their votes - in a very serious spirit , wanting genuinely to construct a democracy in Russia .
This in no way changes the fact that we must naturally be alert to many developments and also draw attention to errors , as a reliable partner and friend does .
We did this , for example , to very , very good effect in connection with the evaluation of the conflict in Chechnya .
We have done the same thing with a number of human rights violations .
And we are going to have to continue doing so in future !
Mr President , in the few minutes available to me I will try to address the questions raised .
The Florence European Council welcomed the steady improvement in relations between the European Union and Russia , an improvement marked notably by the entry into force of the interim agreement in February 1996 and the adoption of the action plan by the Council on 13 May 1996 .
This action plan , which covers support for the democratic process , economic cooperation , security and foreign relations aspects and justice and home affairs , will be implemented promptly and efficiently in full cooperation with the Russian authorities .
The partnership and cooperation agreement provides the essential framework for the development of the Union 's relations with Russia .
Pending its entry into force , the trade provisions of the PCA are being implemented by means of an interim agreement .
The Council regards the action plan as an important element in the intensification of relations between the EU and Russia .
The plan covers a wide range of spheres of action identified by the Council on 20 November 1995 and concentrates on a number of priorities .
The main features of the action plan were presented to the Russian side by the Troika and the Italian presidency in both Rome and Brussels before the Council adopted the plan .
The action plan will clearly require close and ongoing coordination between the actions of the European Community , whose principal support instrument remains the TACIS programme , the actions of the Member States and , where appropriate , the other main donors in order to ensure maximum efficiency in terms of synergy and complementarity .
It is for the Union to ensure that implementation of the plan is the product of joint effort with Russia and of close cooperation between the Union and its Member States .
In the first pillar areas , progress has been made in the area of contractual relations towards the ratification of the PCA with Russia .
The interim agreement , which provides for the entry into force of the trade provisions of the PCA , is being implemented , while negotiations have taken place on the new agenda , as provided for in the PCA .
In the area of regional cooperation , the Commission has , of course , brought forward its initiative with regard to Baltic cooperation , and cross-border cooperation is also being supported under TACIS .
The actions set out under nuclear energy , nuclear safety and the environment and efforts to modernize the production system are , of course , of very great importance , given the damage done to the environment in Russia in the past .
These actions are also being implemented or examined under TACIS .
In the area of cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs , action to combat organized crime is to be addressed at a seminar in Finland in early December , which will be attended by experts from Russia and the Member States .
This will deal specifically with the impact of organized crime and drugs on Russia and the Union .
Cooperative measures to combat such activities will also be addressed .
The above is not an exhaustive list of ongoing measures .
Further actions will , of course , be addressed in the future .
A number of the specific actions contemplated under the action plan are covered by procedures which already exist , such as the TACIS programme .
The Commission , of course , is best placed to explain how TACIS can help with the implementation of the action plan .
In the context of the development of the Union 's overall relations with Russia , the Council greatly appreciates the valuable contribution of the European Parliament .
The present debate provides a useful opportunity for an exchange of views on these important issues and we look forward to similar opportunities in the future .
To address the further areas to which the honourable Members refer , I would point out that where research is concerned , Russia may , under certain conditions , already participate in several projects under the fourth framework programme .
Within the framework of available budgetary resources , cooperation programmes in the research and development sphere should undoubtedly be encouraged in the parties ' reciprocal interest , subject to effective and adequate protection being given to intellectual , industrial and commercial property rights .
Cooperation in the sphere of justice and home affairs I have referred to already but in relation to asylum and readmission matters this is one of the plan 's five major priorities .
Follow-up of the problem of refugees and displaced persons in the CIS is also high on the list of areas for action .
On the combating of organized trafficking and crime , the plan provides that such cooperation could take the form of regular exchanges of information , having due regard to national and international legislation on data protection , the setting-up of a network of contact points and participation in seminars .
As far as the EIB 's participation is concerned , it should be remembered that the European Investment Bank 's role is to finance the development of the Member States of the European Union .
It intervenes externally only on the basis of specific unanimous decisions of the Board of Governors .
In the case of Russia , it should be stressed that the EBRD , the World Bank and TACIS already finance operations and the contributions of the Member States supplement that funding .
As a result the financial commitment of the Member States and the international organizations towards the Russian Federation is already quite substantial .
On the question of cooperation on nuclear energy , the Council would point out that it has authorized the Commission to conclude on the basis of the Euratom Treaty two cooperation agreements in the fields of controlled nuclear fusion and nuclear safety , the purpose of the latter being to help improve nuclear safety and , in particular , to find and implement scientifically and internationally agreed nuclear safety guidelines .
In this context the Member has mentioned the case of Alexander Nikitin .
The Council is aware of the case and of the concerns of Parliament .
The case is currently subject to Russian legal procedures and the Council is following it closely and notes that Parliament is also pursuing this issue .
In addition to the TACIS programme for the approximation of laws in the context of the energy charter , action under TACIS will continue to aim to increase both the diversity and security of supply of hydrocarbons in Europe .
On 5 July 1996 , following the elections in Russia , the presidency made a declaration on behalf of the European Union voicing inter alia the Union 's determination to press on with the establishment of close relations within a substantive and constructive partnership with the Russian Federation on the basis of democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
The Union is monitoring closely the situation in Chechnya .
It has welcomed as a positive development the recent accords between the Russian authorities and the separatists which were concluded with the help of the OSCE assistant group in Chechnya .
Both in public declarations and in contacts with the Russian authorities , the EU has consistently stressed the importance and usefulness of the assistance group both in helping to bring about a ceasefire and in the search for a wider negotiated political solution of the problem .
In conclusion , the Council can only stress the great importance it attaches to the entry into force of the partnership and cooperation agreement at the earliest possible opportunity .
This agreement is to form the basis of relations between the Union and Russia and will consolidate legally and internationally the possibility of cooperation in all areas of mutual interest .
Pending that entry into force the action plan constitutes clear evidence of the Union 's resolve to strengthen its relations with Russia and to concentrate on specific practical issues and objectives .
Madam President , I will try to be brief as Minister Mitchell has already provided extensive information on the approach to Russia .
In regard to what Mrs Lalumière has just said , I should like to further stress that the action plan as such was not intended to further supplement the wide-ranging intended cooperation with Russia on the basis , in particular , of the partnership agreement and the interim agreement which has since entered into force , but rather to give concrete content to and provide a concrete action plan for the implementation of the framework agreement .
A memorandum has also been drawn up on this subject .
We will be pleased to submit this to Parliament as this also includes , for example , everything which has been achieved in the various areas with the existing TACIS instrument and the existing TACIS budget .
A great deal has also been said today about how we can possibly support the strengthening of democracy in Russia .
Many projects have been launched in this area .
One very interesting project , for example , is our cooperation with the Council of Europe , a joint programme in cooperation with Russia , designed to help Russia fulfill the necessary conditions for membership of the Council of Europe .
This is therefore closely concerned with adapting the constitutional and other legislation .
There are other projects which I happen to know about and which relate to stimulating certain town twinnings , indicating that attempts are also being made at a lower administrative level to strengthen democratic institutions .
The same applies in the area of education .
I should also like to mention a number of other very important policy areas , such as the environment , and I acknowledge Mrs Schroedter at this point , and nuclear safety in which cooperation with Russia is of course very important .
Of the total budget available to us for nuclear safety projects , which means the safety of nuclear reactors , one half of that which is available under TACIS is spent in Russia .
It is in Russia that we find the most nuclear reactors and the greatest risk .
I am leaving aside the whole Chernobyl business in the Ukraine , because that is in fact a G7 project and not exclusively a TACIS project .
In short , I should like to conclude my intervention at this stage by saying that I will also be pleased at a later date and in a Commission context , where necessary and perhaps also more regularly , to further discuss with Parliament the follow-up to our cooperation with Russia as it is of course something which can only be totally achieved on a progressive basis .
Quite complicated projects are also often involved .
We are dealing with government bodies which are far from being totally transparent and are also still in the process of reform .
I thus readily admit that when it comes to giving practical substance to our cooperation it is still very often a question of trial and error from which we also have lessons to learn .
I am in any event grateful for the interest shown by Parliament in providing new impetuses for cooperation with a country which finds itself in an exceptionally difficult situation .
Difficult in a political sense , as the leadership has serious health problems as we all know and the changes at the top are creating a certain political uncertainty .
The economic situation nevertheless offers some glimmers of hope .
Inflation , for example , has fallen considerably over the past year .
On the other hand , there are enormous economic problems with unpaid wages and an economy which clearly needs new impulses from abroad which are not coming because the investment climate in Russia is such that it is not a particularly attractive prospect at present .
In short , everything is linked .
I should in any event like to assure Parliament , also further to what Minister Mitchell has said , that cooperation with Russia is contributing to the country 's stability and is naturally a matter of top priority for the Council and the Commission .
Madam President , Russia has already made a degree of successful progress along the road to democracy in recent years , though much still remains to be done .
The EU action plan to assist this progress is very ambitious , supporting not only Russia 's democratic and economic reforms but also regional cooperation in matters of nuclear security , environmental problems , humanitarian aid and measures aimed at a future European security system .
Madam President , this is a massive workload that the European Union is taking on , as expressed in this action plan .
Unfortunately , this falls far short of proving that the EU has sufficient resources to take on a leading role in Russia .
Apart from providing support through the TACIS programme , the European Union must also evolve other programmes for Russia and take appropriate action if the problems existing there are to be solved .
Closer institutional links must also be created .
I should mention here in passing that the partnership and cooperation agreement has still not been ratified by every Member State .
In brief , the European Union is only one small player in the massive Russian social scene , with limited influence .
The financial framework even of the TACIS programme is limited by comparison with what other international organizations are doing , and certain Member States of the European Union , such as the Federal Republic of Germany , have greater political influence in Russia than does the European Union as a governmental institution .
In order to be taken seriously in Russia , the European Union needs to raise its profile and strengthen its support for economic and democratic reform ; the action plan can only be a first step .
Recent weeks have shown that political stability in Russia is still not fully established .
The very outcome of the presidential elections , in which General Lebed came third in the first round of voting , with the support of 11 million Russian electors , thus making Yeltsin 's victory possible , is an indication of a very difficult period of development , during which nationalism , in Russia as elsewhere , is gaining more ground than previously .
The deposing of General Lebed , the dissatisfaction with the Ministers for the Interior and for Defence , the problems in the Russian army and , last but not least , the absence of the sick President from the presidential position that holds so much power in Russia indicate that the political situation in Russia is an enormously difficult one .
The European Union cannot afford an unstable Russia .
We have a historic opportunity genuinely to promote democracy in Russia , and also to contribute to a peaceful solution to the conflict in Chechnya .
An inward-looking Russia , involving its own authoritarian variation on democracy which has more to do with the Romanovs than with a modern social constitution , is not an option for the EU .
Madam President , by adopting the action plan for Russia , the European Council has clearly declared its wish to support the reforms now in hand .
But the plan is inadequate .
What it covers , the ideas that will govern its implementation and the resources that will be given to it must be defined .
Russia is at present in a paradoxical situation .
Many disasters had been predicted for it - civil war , public disorder , famine - but happily none of these has occurred .
There was the terrible war in Chechnya but today the weapons are silent and negotiations are taking place .
The democratic reforms have had undeniable effects .
Repeated elections - parliamentary , presidential , local , regional - bear witness to the stabilization of institutions and above all to a growing democratic awareness in Russian society .
But democracy cannot survive in chaotic social conditions .
It cannot exist without a state which embodies all social interests .
This is where the main weaknesses of Russia lie , weaknesses which are slowing down its modernization and which could eventually call into question the progress already achieved .
I will list four of them .
First is nuclear insecurity : Russian nuclear power stations are dangerous : Chernobyl is the prime example .
There is also traffic in fissile materials .
With the nuclear problem we must associate that of the environment , ravaged by three quarters of a century of a development policy which despised nature to the point of destruction .
The result of this is a general deterioration in the health of Russians , accentuated by the accompanying collapse of the whole health system .
This is illustrated by a tragic piece of demographic information : the reduction in human life expectancy over the last fifteen years and the parallel increase in infant mortality .
The third problem is the security of individuals and property , and state security too , which is threatened by an explosion in crime , admittedly including some petty crime but mostly consisting of economic crime increasingly linked with international criminal networks .
The fourth problem , which stems from the process of economic transformation , is the growing inequality in society .
A considerable proportion of the population is poor , a situation felt all the more acutely by them , faced as they are by the growing wealth of the rest of society .
In order to alleviate the social suffering , to ensure that the most deprived are protected , and to provide security for everybody , Russia must be a strong state responding to the public interest .
But the Russian state is weak .
It is weak in the face of selfish and strong local powers .
It is weak in the face of crime . It is weak in the face of a helpless and divided society .
For the Russian state to be able to exist at all , for it to be able to play its proper role , it must , above all , have a financial basis and clear law .
What is most urgently required of the European Union is help for Russia in setting up the tax system it currently lacks , together with the means to make that system work and a legal system to make it really effective .
This is no mean task .
It will be accomplished only if a well-defined , comprehensive and coherent project , accompanied by the necessary resources and mobilizing all the European institutions - financial institutions , various programmes like TACIS - is implemented in a common effort to resolve all the problems I have listed .
Failing such a project , such a conception and such a concentration of resources , the plan of action will remain strictly theoretical .
Europe 's future is well worth such an effort .
Madam President , all of you - Christian Democrats , Gaullists , Centrists and Liberals - wish to help Russia to establish the rule of law and respect human rights .
This aim is praiseworthy .
But do you really think you are credible , while the Mafia and your own parties interpenetrate each other in Italy , France and elsewhere , while in Belgium and France pornographic , sado-masochistic and paedophile literature is on every newsstand , and the freedom to publish such literature is viewed with so much indulgence here ?
Do you think you are credible when in France the so-called Minister of Justice will shake hands with the paedophile murderer Patrick Henri , when the same Mr Toubon wishes to stifle the freedom of the press by forbidding it to talk about corruption and immigration and when he wishes to impose a law even more totalitarian than that of the Communist Gayssot , a law destroying liberty for use by thought police and police with ulterior motives : what the great journalist Annie Kriegel not long ago called the intolerable thought police ?
You - the Marxists and Socialist-Communists of all shapes and sizes - are now shamelessly demanding more democracy in Russia , worried as you are , you say , by the authoritarian tensions in the country .
I must be dreaming !
You did not demand such a thing in times gone by !
But why not , first of all , at least check that gulags no longer exist , closely tied up as they would be with the rest of the Communist nomenklatura ?
And why not demand that a census be taken of these camps , that the tens of thousands of victims be accounted for , that the torturers , many of them still alive , stand trial ?
Fifty years after Nuremberg , national socialism never ceases to be judged over and over again .
Today , on the fortieth anniversary of the Budapest uprising , is it not time to begin the still-necessary grand trial of international socialism , of its 80-year-long crimes against humanity , against peoples and against nations ?
This is what the Russian people are waiting for : they must shed themselves of the worst of pasts before they can discover the path to the future .
Madam President , while there has been some progress along the road to democracy in Russia , much remains to be done .
The EU action plan is highly ambitious , as has already been said , setting out not only to support Russian democratic and economic reforms through TACIS , but also addressing contractual relations , regional cooperation , nuclear energy and nuclear safety , the environment , economic reconstruction , humanitarian aid and the future European security structure .
These are massive tasks which the EU seeks to tackle in its proposed action plan .
Unfortunately there is not yet a scintilla of evidence that the EU is currently equipped to take on such a role .
Certainly the EU will have to target support from the TACIS programme better and consider opening other EU programmes up to Russia if it is to have an impact on the problems facing that country .
There will also have to be closer institutional links in place of the ad hoc arrangements which exist today .
Frankly , the EU is currently a bit player in Russian society , with only limited influence .
The support provided by the TACIS programme pales beside the financial support provided by international institutions like the IMF which supplied Russia with a £ 10.9bn standby loan .
Even individual Member States , such as Germany , have greater influence in Russia than the EU as an institution .
So , to be taken seriously the EU needs to raise its profile and support for economic and democratic reform in Russia .
Democracy and economic reform need the support of the EU and this House now more than ever before .
There is a growing tide of nationalism in Russia , as we have heard , and growing disenchantment with the perceived failure of Western-inspired reform and values .
The success of Alexander Lebed , which has already been referred to , in the presidential elections last summer where he came third , with 11 million votes , was an indication of this political trend .
The fact that a man who admires General Pinochet , called Mormons scum and filth , promised to shoot criminals and describes himself as a semi-democrat is regarded as a moderate nationalist in the Russian political firmament , shows the worrying drift of politics in Russia .
It is easy to scaremonger about the situation in Russia , but the fact remains that over one-third of the population live below the breadline , while the social infrastructure in the country has disintegrated .
The EU and the West need to support the social as well as the economic recovery of the country .
The EU has a historic chance to encourage real democracy in Russia and to support the peaceful settlement of the conflict in Chechnya .
The alternative is an inward-looking Russia , developing its own authoritarian style of democracy which has more in common with the Romanovs and Tsarist Russia than a modern constitution .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
Employment and labour market policy committee
The next item is the report ( A4-0316 / 96 ) by Mr Theonas , on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment , on a proposal for a Council Decision setting up an employment and labour market policy committee ( COM ( 96 ) 0134 - C4-0396 / 96-96 / 0097 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , with its proposal to set up an employment and labour market policy committee , the European Commission is doing something about the lack of a permanent structure in the sector of employment , a move comparable to the creation of the Committee on Economic Policy , which was founded in 1974 and aims to promote the coordination of the economic policies of Member States in both the short and the long term .
Since March 1995 the attempt has been made to fill that gap by an ad hoc group of personal representatives of the Ministers for Labour , convened by a decision of the Council for Social Affairs .
However , that group encountered many difficulties in carrying out the duties assigned to it , mainly because of the inadequacy of the means at its disposal , in other words the lack of a formal and permanent structure assisted by its own adequately staffed secretariat , which , within its terms of reference , was charged with the analysis , monitoring and preparation of related reports and comparative studies .
The need to set up a committee with a stable and permanent structure was asserted in the joint report by the Council and the Commission submitted to the Madrid Summit , while the European Parliament too , with the resolutions it approved in November 1995 and June 1996 , called for better coordination between macroeconomic policy and structural measures in the labour market sector , and for the upgrading of the ad hoc group on employment , to enable it to cooperate better with the Committee on Economic Policy in preparing the joint report on employment policy submitted to the European Council .
Madam President , your rapporteur does not believe that the constitution of this committee can on its own solve the most explosive problem of our times , namely unemployment , nor that it can promote employment in Europe decisively .
That is the task of the more general policies of the European Union and the Member States , though these do not seem to be contributing much towards it .
However , the constitution of the committee may contribute to the development and implementation of the common strategy for employment , and mainly , help with the formulation of common indices that would be useful for the closer monitoring of policy in the area of employment and of the implementation of the multiannual programmes .
It can also make important contributions to the better information of working people , their representatives , the social agencies , and the European Parliament and the European Union 's other institutions , by presenting useful statistics on employment , comparative tables of relevant data for each Member State , information about new forms of employment , data concerning the deterioration of social conditions in the Member States , and information about any negative or other consequences of the policy of promoting more flexible labour relations and reducing regulatory interventions in the labour market .
Those are precisely the functions which the three amendments tabled on behalf of the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment are intended to strengthen , which concern further clarification of the committee 's role - Amendment No 1 - enlargement of its competences - Amendment No 2 - and the obligation to forward the reports and recommendations it draws up to the European Parliament - Amendment No 3 .
Finally , I would like to point out that the role entrusted to the new committee is different from that of the permanent Committee on Employment in which the Council , the Commission and representatives of employers ' and workers ' organization participate , and that its aim is to ensure dialogue between the three sides on issues of social policy for employment .
In conclusion , the proposal for a decision submitted by the Commission is largely inspired by the orders relating to the constitution and operation of the Committee on Economic Policy and rests on the same legal base , namely Article 145 of the Treaty .
Besides , to the extent that the committee in question will fully replace the ad hoc group of Ministers for Labour , its effect on the European Union 's budget will be marginal .
Madam President , may I begin by thanking the speaker for an excellent report and for the good cooperation when the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment formulated this report which has just been presented .
The reduction of unemployment and the creation of new jobs is one of the most important tasks in the European Union .
Previously , it has been possible for individual countries to reduce unemployment through their own labour market and economic policies .
This is no longer sufficient as we have seen .
It is not sufficient in a world where capital now flows freely across borders .
Obviously there will continue to be action at a National level to reduce unemployment .
But there is also a new requirement now for action at Community level .
The Council has been aware of this and has mentioned it at many Council meetings in Essen , Cannes , Madrid and Florence .
But , really very little has been done to live up to those proud words which have been presented at the Council meetings .
In addition to actions at National level and at Community level , macroeconomic initiatives and labour market policies are required ; they must complement each other .
An economic policy is required which prioritises not only the fight against inflation and budget deficits but also the fight against unemployment .
A labour market policy is required which prioritises active labour market policy actions over and above the passive payment of labour market subsidies .
Labour market ministers and finance ministers need to work together on employment policies .
They also need the same resources to be able to follow up on the long term programmes which the Member States have taken upon themselves to implement to create employment .
There is currently a committee on economic policy which gives support to Council Finance Ministers in the form of analysis , proposals and evaluation .
Labour Market Ministers require the same support .
This was realised at the informal Council meeting in Córdoba , when a request was made to the Commission to prepare an appropriate proposal .
The proposal which the Commission has prepared is good .
In Parliamentary discussions on the budgetary deficit doubts have been expressed about the establishment of a committee on employment and labour market policies .
Let me lay them to rest .
This committee will be financed by the Labour Market Ministers in the same way as the existing committee is financed by the Finance Ministers .
Establishment of the committee will not involve any extra cost and it will simply establish a balance between Finance Ministers and Labour Market Ministers in terms of employment policy actions .
The committee will follow up national programmes .
Such evaluation requires common indices .
We have pointed this out in Parliament before and we point it out again today in our proposal .
Unfortunately , the Commission & # x02BC ; s proposal does not include such common indices .
The establishment of a committee on employment and labour market policy will naturally not solve unemployment problems in Europe .
But it is a start when it comes to creating a stable structure within the Community to be able to get to grips seriously with the problem .
Discussions are now underway at the Intergovernmental Conference to insert a chapter on employment in the report which would give the Union greater competence in the area of employment .
The fight against unemployment will be given the same place and status in the report as the fight against inflation and budget deficit .
For this , an employment committee which has the same status as the monetary committee is required .
For Parliament & # x02BC ; s part , we support such a proposal .
It will mean that we have an opportunity to make a real effort against unemployment at Union level and that coordination between Member States will increase .
Today & # x02BC ; s proposal to establish a committee on employment and labour market policy is one step on the road to the creation of a better structure within the Union to be able to conduct a more active labour market policy .
The committee will have contact with parties involved in the labour market through cooperation with the Standing Committee on Employment and will naturally have contact with the committee on labour market policy .
This will be an excellent support mechanism for the labour market ministers in their work .
Madam President , the number one problem of economic and social policy facing the Member States of the European Union and the Community is unemployment .
Unemployment is a challenge , too , to the Union as such .
The trans-European networks must be created , though this is difficult to achieve at present .
That leaves the employment policy options which were also recommended at the Essen Council in 1994 : joint focal points with employment policy activities and appropriate multiannual programmes by the EU States .
The informal ad hoc Working Party on ' Follow-up to the European Council in Essen ' , which was established around the beginning of 1995 , was supposed to nurture an exchange of information and experience between the Member States and to review the application of the programmes in question .
The present document finds that an informal group is actually insufficient to deal with the matter efficiently .
The proposed employment and labour market policy committee would form a more stable framework .
Since 1974 there has been a Standing Committee on Economic Policy , working towards the Ecofin Council .
A comparable committee for the Council of Labour and Social Ministers is needed , because although unemployment is an economic problem it is also a major social one .
In Mr Theonas ' valuable report , the view is expressed that the Commission should be involved to an appropriate extent in the committee 's work and that Parliament should be consulted .
A Standing Committee on Employment and Labour Market Policy can make an important contribution to the coordinated implementation , nationally and between the social partners , of the priorities adopted in Essen .
Those priorities are action to assist problem groups in the labour market , young people and women , reducing ancillary wage costs , a modern wages policy and investments in the vocational training sector .
What we want is not just economic upturn but its conversion into a sustainable process of growth which creates new jobs .
For this reason , the PPE group will be voting in favour of the Theonas report .
Madam President , we are now setting up yet another committee .
In this case it is a matter of advising on employment and labour market policy .
I remained rather quiet in the committee on this subject , although I did support the rapporteur in the final vote .
I kept quiet because I have a number of questions which I would like the Commissioner to answer .
Exactly what approach is this committee to adopt ?
Will its meetings be public , as the Committee on Budgets has requested ?
Will the committee members be asked to declare their financial interests ?
How will the committee approach the whole subject of an active labour market policy ?
What will be the committee 's approach in relation to the existing Standing Committee on Employment ?
These are all questions which I believe require a clear answer , not because I am considering proposing that my group should vote against setting up such a committee , but because I believe that if we set up this committee then it must operate exceptionally well . Because the reason we are setting it up is in order to improve the operation of the labour market .
I believe this to be the umpteenth debate on employment in Europe this week .
We discussed employment in the debate on the statement by the Commission President .
We discussed employment in the budget debate .
This morning we discussed employment during the poverty debate .
I notice that some of my colleagues again speak of employment when debating this committee .
The fact is that we always display a form of impotence when it comes to this question .
My question to the Commissioner is therefore : does he expect the committee to be able to achieve what the Council has to date been unable to achieve ?
Will a truly active labour market policy be pursued if we set up such a committee ?
For example , will the employment promotion agencies , which is one of Commission President Santer 's proposals , work together if such a committee is set up including at least four members from each Member State ?
In short , I have a great many questions , not because I am opposed to the committee but because I believe it to be essential for such a committee to provide truly excellent support .
I would therefore also like to ask the Commissioner how he believes the committee 's opinions should be dealt with and how Parliament is to be involved in implementing the committee 's opinions .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this week is actually the third or fourth occasion to date on which we have discussed employment .
But the question which arises is how this Community can also equip itself with the necessary instruments really to be able to coordinate the policies of the Member States and the added value of a European employment policy .
Other speakers have already pointed out how many questions are still unanswered here .
I , too , once again urge the Commission to give us clear answers .
The essential thing for me - and the reason why we shall be supporting this report - is that it offers a starting point for creating the kind of machinery needed to improve this coordination - including improvements on the part of the Social Affairs Council - and that is certainly a good thing .
But this must not be allowed to happen simply on the old principle of ' If you can 't solve a problem , set up a committee to bury it ' . I believe we should make quite sure that the Commission bears that in mind .
Strengthening the Social Affairs Council relative to the almost omnipotent Ecofin Council can only be a first step towards getting an effective , independent employment policy up and running in this Union , a policy free from the illusion that employment is something that happens automatically once growth , monetary union , competitiveness and the profitability of capital are in place .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal put to us is for the setting up of a new committee called the employment and labour market policy committee .
I see that the cancer of European bureaucracy is spreading .
The creation of this committee is yet another symptom of the disillusion and the mistaken centralizing and bureaucratic ideas which are infecting the European political class .
This committee will not be able to conceal the tragic failure of the Maastricht economic and social policy for Europe and will content itself with observing and commenting on the disastrous consequences for jobs of the choice of a socially criminal free-trade policy .
While committees and watchdogs multiply , unemployment , insecurity , poverty and the relocation of enterprises are increasing at a frantic rate .
No gimmick will be able to contain the legitimate anger of the European peoples who are suffering .
So we must not set up new committees : we must change the policy , guarantee preference for our peoples when vacancies are being filled and protect our Community market .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you will remember that the European Parliament was not wildly enthusiastic about the modest Essen results but we made up for this when it came to the follow-up procedure .
Such a follow-up procedure may not create jobs but we were convinced that this was the first modest step towards a European common employment policy .
Our experiences with the single market and the EMU convergence strategy have taught us that the combination of political will , a good timetable and a good follow-up procedure can serve to point everybody in the same direction and this is what we also wanted to do in the case of the employment strategy .
I am convinced that this was also the Commission 's motivation .
In this cooperation procedure , however , the Social Affairs Council and Ecofin are still not fighting with the same weapons .
Ecofin has repeatedly shown that it is not really concerned about employment .
It is therefore high time we had a committee for the Social Affairs Council which can put its contribution to employment strategy on a more equal footing .
But I doubt whether this proposal will in fact put the Social Affairs Council on an equal footing , and for two reasons .
First of all , employment policy is based on two inseparable pillars : a macroeconomic pillar and structural employment policy .
Commissioner , this two-pillar approach is not being consistently applied to the new committee .
Whereas the Economic Policy Committee can have a clear impact on employment policy and on economic policy , there are no plans for the employment and labour market policy committee to be able to make a necessary contribution to economic guidelines , for example .
How on earth are we going to be able to ensure that , in the guidelines , economic policy concentrates primarily on employment if this committee is not allowed to have its say ?
The European Commission disappoints me by not making this provision in Article 103 ( 2 ) , for example , as both the Swedish and Belgian proposal submitted to the IGC did lay these necessary bridges .
Secondly , I should also like to stress a point which has already been made by Mr Andersson : a follow-up procedure stands or falls on certain tests .
If the Council and Commission really take the priority actions for employment seriously , then we must have indicators in order to measure the efforts of Member States , in the area of training for example .
If training is important , Commissioner , why then can no guarantee be given that every year a certain percentage of the labour force can follow training .
Then comes the ultimate test : the halving of unemployment by the year 2000 as a concrete test of employment policy .
I am convinced that if this committee has no indicators at its disposal it will remain at most a paper tiger and at most capable of producing reams of paper .
I therefore hope that the Commission will also vote for our amendment .
Finally , Madam President , I should like to say that this committee marks just a small new step towards a cohesive European employment strategy .
I dare to hope , ladies and gentlemen , that the missing pieces to the puzzle will be provided during the IGC and that the committee will come to play an increased role in the Union 's employment policy , in accordance with the Treaty .
Madam President , the proposal which we now have before us is an important proposal as it follows on from what was decided at the Essen Summit on a European employment strategy .
Employment is one of the European Union 's top priorities .
It is good to set up a committee on employment which will be responsible for monitoring the employment policy of the Member States .
The committee can also encourage better coordination of employment policy between the Member States .
It is also important to involve the social partners when promoting employment in Europe .
It is furthermore important for this employment and labour market policy committee to be funded out of the Council budget .
If not , we will have problems of comitology as the committee does not satisfy the requirements of comitology .
The committee is a body supported by the Social Affairs Council charged with the implementation and development of European employment strategy .
This committee is an answer to the request by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment in the IGC report on social policy for which I was rapporteur .
It is a counter-balance to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
It thus provides a better balance between the European Union 's economic and social policy .
It is primarily a question of removing the differences between the internal market and social policy and creating a single economic and social Union .
It is a pity that this employment and labour market policy committee is being confused with the Standing Committee on Employment .
We have many examples of this .
In this respect it would have been much better to have looked for another name for the latter committee , which has to be adapted in any event and where we must ensure that there is no duplication of tasks .
I therefore very much regret , Commissioner , that the Commission has made no proposal for that committee .
I fear that you are failing to get to grips with this committee .
We know that representativeness is the sticking problem .
A decision must be taken on this and as quickly as possible , as if not we will all be much criticized for bureaucracy .
We will now have to do this later .
Parliament does not interfere directly with this new committee and we want to keep it that way .
The Council does not interfere with Parliament 's budget and Parliament does not interfere with the Council 's budget .
This House does indeed want to be kept informed of the committee 's reports and recommendations .
But as far as the rest is concerned we still have much to learn as the overall strategy is not yet clear to me .
Madam President , the current level of unemployment that we have in EU Member States at 20 million people is perhaps our greatest challenge .
One reason why it is so high - there are several - is the EMU .
It goes without saying that if one scales down , makes economic savings and cuts back in 15 Member States simultaneously , without introducing stimulation for the economy , that unemployment will be high .
The EMU project is one reason why it is so high and it must be met with resistance .
The best would have been to say no to the EMU .
Next best would have been to introduce criteria into the EMU which also covered goals for employment , the environment and regional responsibility .
None of this has happened .
The creation of a committee on employment to find joint strategies and solutions is at least a move in the right direction .
But I would like to say that this is no solution .
Those who believe that the committee will solve the problem of unemployment in the EU are wrong .
Each country must take its own responsibility for unemployment ; responsibility shall remain with the Member States .
The committee must not take over and create a supranational employment policy or conjuncture policy .
This would never work and , in my opinion , this is not the intention of the proposal from the Commission .
So : summarise , produce reports , come forward with ideas and recommendations , but no supranational policies at EU level please .
At least this will be a good step towards the solution of our greatest problem .
Madam President , the hopes expressed in the White Paper on Growth , Competitiveness and Employment of creating 15 million jobs by the end of the millennium and the hard facts of today are worlds apart .
There will soon be 20 million men and women out of work in the European Union , and they deserve better than declarations of intent and expressions of concern .
So it was an important signal for Europe when the Council Meeting in Essen decided to evolve a comprehensive strategy of cooperation between the Member States to deal with employment .
The concentration on those particularly affected by unemployment , increased investment in vocational training and the increase in the intensity of employment give reason to hope that the campaign against unemployment may be waged aggressively , with something more concrete than paper and words .
No one disputes the need to set up the committee on employment and labour market policy .
However , in order to be able to work successfully and effectively , it does need a stable organizational structure .
The expected reports on progress made and on omissions will pave the way for public debate , including debate in the European Parliament .
So we need informative data , analyses and conclusions , and we need them quickly , Commissioner .
The results will lead to a qualified exchange of experience with the Council , the Commission and the social partners on employee protection and social standards , on the conditions for greater mobility and flexible working hours , and , I have no doubt , on opportunities for young people , of whom so many are with us at this very moment in the gallery .
We expect information on the feasibility and efficacy of many policies and schemes which , though they may still be separate today , may in future be pursued jointly .
Madam President , Parliament , the Council and the Commission are at one in supporting the fundamental objective of combating unemployment in the EU .
However , while Parliament and the Commission are able to reach agreement on specific action , the Council is withholding its consent in important areas .
The decision situation is determined by the attitudes of the Economics and Finance Ministers , notably including those of the Federal Republic .
They can benefit from the preparatory work of a special committee , unlike the Council of Social Affairs Ministers , which has difficulty in forming a suitable counterweight to promote an active employment policy in the EU .
The stop-gap arrangement of an ad hoc group which does work for the Social Affairs Council but is inadequately resourced cannot meet the actual requirements .
The Commission proposal to the effect that a regular committee on employment and labour market policy should be set up , working both for the Social Affairs Council and for the general Council , conforms to Parliament 's intentions .
The Commission should have no problem accepting the amendments suggested by the Committee on Social Affairs and Employment .
No one will expect the labour market situation to improve simply because a committee is set up .
What can be expected , though , are useful contributions and specific suggestions to help solve the employment problem .
I should like to take this opportunity to call upon the Commission , and especially on the Commissioner who is with us here today , to lose no time in presenting the long-awaited proposals to increase the efficiency of the Standing Committee on Employment , which has existed since 1970 and includes representatives of both employers and employees .
Madam President , let me first of all thank Mr Theonas and indeed Members of the House for the very efficient and speedy way in which they have dealt with the Commission proposal to set up this employment and labour market policy committee .
The importance of the proposal has been recognized by the Members of the House here this evening and that is very reassuring for me and for the Commission .
We attach very great importance , of course , to the rapid development of this stable structure to assist the development of the European employment strategy .
The European Council requested the setting up of the structure in Madrid last December .
The Commission adopted the proposal in March this year and the Irish presidency has been very active in seeking progress at Council level .
They really want to see this matter adopted by way of decision at the Social Affairs Council on 2 December .
I believe it is useful for just a moment or two to go back on the reasons why the Council gave us the mandate to set up the structure in the first place .
The background is simply this : firstly and fundamentally this initiative has to be seen in the context of developing a more balanced European employment strategy where the structural , and especially labour market , policies are considered just as important as macroeconomic policies .
This is a major plank of the approach initiated by the Essen European Council and strengthened by the following European Councils .
In operational terms this balanced policy mix must be reflected in a fairer balance between the Social Affairs Council on the one hand and Ecofin on the other in the definition of a European employment strategy .
That is the basis behind the proposal .
Secondly , the Social Affairs Council must benefit from a strong analysis and proposal capacity in order to fulfil the mandate it was given in Essen jointly with Ecofin and the Commission to keep a close track of employment trends in the Union , monitor the relevant policies of the Member States and to report annually to the European Council on further progress on the employment market .
In particular it must be in a position to make a substantial contribution to the production of the annual joint report on employment for the Council .
The need for that good analysis was referred to by Mr Mann .
That is something this committee will do as well .
The Commission proposal responds faithfully to all of those requests .
The committee that we have proposed has the following characteristics and they are very important : stability , that is thanks to an elected chairman ; a solid capacity for analysis and proposal , thanks in particular to the Commission 's close involvement ; a status permitting a fruitful cooperation with the economic policy committee , the body which supports Ecofin Council ; and provision for effective collaboration between the Council and the Commission .
I would like to emphasize that we are not talking here about comitology .
I know this is a very sensitive issue for the European Parliament .
Comitology applies in the context of the delegation by the Council to the Commission of certain executive competences .
It is therefore a question of implementing decisions taken by the Council .
Here on the other hand the purpose of this employment and labour market policy committee is to propose policy debates and policy recommendations for the Council and for the European Council in the field of employment .
So the committee itself will not take any enforceable decisions .
It is important to understand that .
The committee will be there to assist the European institutions in making progress in the definition and the implementation of a common employment strategy .
Compared with the present situation where the Council deliberations are prepared by an informal Council body , the ad hoc group , the committee represents progress in terms of transparency , and of interinstitutional balance .
I believe the European Parliament should welcome this because it is something the European Parliament has been calling for some time now .
However , I have to say that at this stage the trend emerging from the discussions at Council level is towards a certain lowering of the status of the committee , compared with the original proposal .
I will not hide from you that I am concerned about that tendency .
I do not think that is the way it should be going .
For that reason I attach great importance to the message which is given by Parliament in its opinion on this proposal .
I am very encouraged by the type of response I am getting because we want to see a strong committee , rather than a weakened one .
I welcome the generally supportive approach here this evening for the draft resolution and I welcome several of the proposed amendments which better define and even strengthen the role of the committee .
Let me go through them quickly .
Amendment No 1 : I find the suggestion to add in the recitals a reference to the committee 's contribution to the definition and implementation of the European employment strategy very useful indeed and I will suggest to the Council that they take it on board .
Amendment No 2 : the introductory sentence .
As in the case of the recitals , I am happy to support an amendment in Article 1 ( 2 ) , establishing in general terms the contribution of the committee to the European employment strategy before the detailed description of tasks .
In the first indent I have no difficulty with the idea behind the request to mention the use of the common indicators and I can inform you that a reference to these indicators in Article 1 has already been agreed in the course of the Council discussions .
As regards what Mrs Van Lancker said about the indicators , I support that view and I would like to tell you that progress is being made on the question of the indicators .
It is not agreed yet .
But a lot of the Member States are coming over to that idea and I would hope that in the joint report to Dublin we will be able to accommodate that much more successfully .
In the third indent , I hope that the committee will contribute to a better coordination of the Member States ' employment policies as proposed under the amendment .
As you know , the Commission has proposed in the context of the IGC to include provisions organizing such coordination in the Treaty .
However , in advance of the Treaty revision I find it somewhat premature to introduce such a provision as part of the committee 's mandate .
I do not think that I can accept that at this time .
Later on , of course , we hope the IGC would agree to this .
In the fourth indent : it is really a question of style here , related to the proposed modification in the introductory sentence .
I have no difficulty with it .
The fifth indent : this particular amendment aims at mentioning the role of the committee in the preparation of two specific reports ; the employment in Europe report and the joint employment report from the Commission and the Council .
The first , the employment report , is a Commission report .
The 1996 report has been adopted by the Commission and I believe it will be discussed in Parliament very soon .
The report should in effect be considered as part of the analytical support which the Commission will provide to this committee rather than as an output from the committee .
As far as the joint report on employment is concerned , we believe that the mention made in the recitals should be sufficient for us here .
Although the submission of a joint report to the European Council is at the moment an important element of the Essen procedure , we cannot foresee whether or when this will be replaced by another instrument and we would not like to be too specific about having this in the mandate of the committee for this reason .
In the sixth indent it is proposed that the committee should regularly consult the two sides of industry at Community level .
As you know - and this has been mentioned by several of the contributors - the Standing Committee on Employment has been set up specifically to ensure a dialogue between public authorities and the social partners in the field of employment policy .
With our recent communication on the future of the dialogue we have proposed options to make the standing committee more efficient and a reform will probably take place .
I believe that the proposed amendment would create some confusion as to the respective roles of the standing committee and the employment committee and I am not proposing to accept it for that reason .
This being said , I would like to stress that the decision contains a provision on coordination between the two committees and this is important to make sure that the contribution of the social partners is heard and taken into account .
There was some reference to that .
Let there be no confusion so far as employment is concerned ; we have enough committees .
This committee is different , I want to have a good understanding between that and the Standing Committee on Employment .
Finally , Amendment No 3 : it says that the reports and recommendations drawn up by the committee should be forwarded to Parliament .
I would like to make it clear that I fully understand Parliament 's concern that they be kept informed of the committee 's activities .
However , my impression is that this amendment , as formulated , will not be accepted by the Council because strictly speaking it would be for the Council itself and not for the committee to decide that a given report or a recommendation should be forwarded to Parliament .
I would therefore favour , as an alternative to this amendment , a general provision providing and establishing that Parliament will be kept informed about the activities of the committee .
I would like to say to Mrs Boogerd-Quaak that there should be no confusion as to what this particular committee is about .
It is not a legislative committee , nor is it an executive committee and consequently we must understand the relationship and the cooperation that will exist between it and the standing committee , always remembering that the standing committee is based at ministerial level .
So I believe this is a very good proposal .
I am pleased that the House is supporting it .
We need to give the Social Affairs Council , labour ministers and ministers of employment the same kind of clout as EPC gives to the Ecofin ministers of finance .
That is the whole thrust and we would like as strong a committee as possible to achieve that aim .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow morning .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time to the Council ( B4-0971 / 96 ) .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Why was my question to the Council not printed ?
It was submitted on 19 September , which should have made it sixth on our paper .
It is a matter of great importance to one of my constituents , a lecturer at the Language Institute in Naples , who has been treated quite disgracefully in a Member State which is flagrantly disobeying and disregarding European employment law .
I feel that this is something that should have been put on the agenda .
We checked it had arrived .
Nobody told us it was inadmissible in any way and I would like to know why it was not included .
I note what you have just said .
As pointed out by the honourable Member in his question , the Schengen Agreement is an international agreement , concluded by certain Member States within a context quite different from that covering the Treaty on European Union .
The honourable Member will understand therefore that the Council , as an institution of the Union , is not in a position to reply to the question as to whether the Schengen Agreement should be incorporated into the European Union .
The overall question is being examined by the Intergovernmental Conference , which is responsible for the revision of the Treaties .
With regard to the possible consequences arising from the communitization of the Schengen Agreement in the areas of drugs , asylum , visa and refugee policy , it is hardly possible at this point to initiate anything like a credible evaluation .
I agree that it is a very important matter to which the Council will have to devote particular attention as necessary .
But , as I have indicated already , it would be premature to draw any inferences at present .
Finally , with regard to the policy on passports within the context of the Schengen Agreement , the Council has no authority to provide a reply since it is a matter which is the exclusive responsibility for the authorities which are party to the Schengen Agreement .
Thank you for the answer , even if there was little of substance in it .
I , myself , will attempt to describe the possible results of the incorporation of Schengen into the EU .
I am aware that currently there are IGC discussions underway and that there are proposals on this issue .
The speaker for the Council is also aware of this .
We have had a common passport union in Scandinavia for many years .
This means that it is not necessary to show one & # x02BC ; s passport when crossing between the Scandinavian countries .
We still maintain our border controls , however , and we still have the opportunity to check people at the border .
The incorporation of Schengen into EU would mean that border controls would be removed , as this is the main motive of the Schengen Treaty .
There is also a risk , as I and many others see it , that we will have tougher asylum , refugee , immigration and visa policies through the introduction of common regulations , as presumably the least generous regulations will become the norm for everyone in the EU .
This will mean tougher asylum policies for many Member States .
Is this to be the result of the introduction of Schengen to the EU ?
I also believe that one of the reasons for the possible incorporation of Schengen into EU regulations is an attempt to create a more unified and homogeneous State .
I would very much like an answer as to whether this is the aim .
Speaking personally , I share some of the concerns which the Member raises .
In fact , as a member of the Reflection Group , I raised the whole question of the use of passports within the Union .
Fundamentally , I feel there is a serious conflict in the description of European citizen which is in the Maastricht Treaty if somehow we are strangers to each other and must show passports while we travel within the Union .
My own country has a particular problem with the Schengen Agreement , not with the principle of it , but because of a long traditional arrangement with our nearest neighbour and because of a border situation with Northern Ireland .
I can say , however , that this whole area is being discussed at the Intergovernmental Conference .
Personally I feel that if we defended our external borders in the Union as carefully as we sometimes watch the internal Member State borders , we would do more service to the Union .
I hope the day will come when passports will not be used anywhere within the European Union .
It is something I advocate .
I understand very well that the Council cannot anticipate the results of the Intergovernmental Conference and make my comment about how Schengen will be incorporated , but it should be possible to hear the Council & # x02BC ; s objective in this area .
Is it the objective of the Irish presidency that issues currently regulated via the Schengen Treaty will be regulated by EU law after the Intergovernmental Conference ?
If this is the case , will they be regulated in the third column or within primary justice in the first column ?
Firstly , Schengen is not a treaty-based agreement .
Secondly , the Council will consider the report of the Intergovernmental Conference as a Council of Ministers and the various Member States will put forward their views .
There is no one view within the Council so as the representative of the presidency , I cannot speak on behalf of the Council .
Some Member States within the Council feel that Schengen should have a treaty base , others that it should not and they do not want to sign up for it .
Personally I would have no difficulty with it being treaty-based and , in my view , the day the passport goes will be the day we have really reached a Union .
It is something I feel strongly about but I cannot say there is one view within the Council on this matter .
Yes , it is possible to be frightened by Schengen .
I , myself , also come from Sweden and have lived with the Scandinavian passport union .
We have had Schengen in Sweden between Sweden , Denmark , Norway and Finland .
We have been able to maintain control over narcotics and we have been able to conduct different refugee policies and that is what we wanted .
At the same time , people have been able to cross the borders without showing their passports .
It is , therefore , possible to have a passport union within the EU . Let people cross the borders freely but , at the same time , have strong controls against narcotics , weapons and such things .
It is perfectly possible .
I would remind the House that I also come from a Schengen-type arrangement between Britain and Ireland which has been in existence since the foundation of the Irish state .
There is no passport control between Ireland and Britain and there never has been since the foundation of the state .
However , there are complications in the whole Schengen process .
As an Irish citizen I would find it extraordinary that Norway and Iceland , which are not members of the Union , may have advantageous arrangements for travel in the Union which are not available to citizens of my own state .
This is an implication which also needs to be addressed .
But I would hope that in the long-term all Member States would have the good sense to sign up for Schengen .
I can tell you that objectively it is something which my state wishes to do .
I repeat that as far as I am concerned we will not be a Union until the day the passport goes .
It is pointless talking about citizenship of the Union when we are foreigners to each other and have to produce a document , in most countries signed by the foreign minister , in order to travel between our countries .
I share the sentiments of Members here but I would remind the House that any treaty-based amendment can only be introduced if there is unanimous agreement to those amendments .
In relation to both of these questions which concern the protection of children , during the September plenary session of the European Parliament , the House will recall that I addressed them on the issue of the abduction of children for the purpose of sexual exploitation .
Today I would like to underline that the Council shares the concerns of the honourable Members of the European Parliament in relation to child sexual exploitation and is determined to ensure that no effort is spared in tackling the most appalling criminal behaviour which is involved in the sexual exploitation of children .
The EU demonstrated this concern when , following the tragic events in Belgium , it issued on 6 September a declaration welcoming the outcome of the world congress in Stockholm and stating that it would work towards the implementation of the Stockholm recommendations .
Parliamentarians will be aware that these recommendations included a call for commitment to make the commercial exploitation of children a criminal offence .
They also called for the prosecution of offenders , whether local or foreign , and the development and implementation of laws to establish the criminal liability of all those involved in child prostitution , child trafficking and other unlawful sexual activity .
On the specific issue which Miss McIntosh raises in her question , that of child pornography , the criminalization of both the trade in and possession of such abominable material is included in the recommendation and I can assure the honourable Member that the EU will do everything in its power to implement this .
The Union lost no time in beginning the work of translating the declaration it made into positive action .
By the time Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs held their informal meeting in Dublin on 26 and 27 September , they were in a position to focus the meeting largely on the issue of sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in human beings .
At this meeting ministers reinforced their commitment to maximize their cooperation in this area and reached political agreement on three important measures .
The first of these was an Irish presidency proposal tabled in the wake of the revelations of events in Belgium to extend the mandate of the European Drugs Unit to cover trafficking in human beings .
This instrument will cover the activities of paedophiles and those who supply children to them as well as trafficking in children for the purposes of sexual exploitation .
If affected , it will confer immediately on the EDU powers to combat this form of activity .
This work will be continued by Europol once the Europol Convention is ratified .
This measure will facilitate cooperation and the exchange of information between police forces and allow the EDU to provide any assistance that it can in relation to these activities .
The second measure was a Belgian proposal to establish a programme for the exchange and training of persons responsible for dealing with sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in human beings .
Finally , agreement was reached on a joint Belgian / presidency proposal concerning the creation of a directory of competences and specializations in the fight against paedophile crimes of this nature .
The implementation of these proposals will contribute significantly to international cooperation between operational police forces .
Ministers also discussed a range of other measures proposed by Belgium to strengthen the instruments with a view to responding further in a concrete and practical way to the concerns of the people of Europe .
They accordingly instructed senior officials to examine urgently and report to them by November on the following : adoption of agreed definitions of this kind of behaviour so that penalties in all countries of the European Union are standardized ; adoption of measures to ensure prosecutions are effectively taken ; adoption of measures to ensure the interests of victims of sexual exploitation are taken into account by the criminal justice system ; the effectiveness of existing international instruments for cooperation in the criminal justice area , especially concerning children .
Ministers also underlined the importance of the earliest possible ratification of the Europol Convention in fighting this type of organized crime and agreed that they would do everything possible to achieve that result .
The work which I have outlined represents concrete steps already taken by the Council to deal with this problem .
The Council will not stop there but is intent on pursuing this issue vigorously until everything within its power has been done to ensure that we have within the Member States of the EU an area where our children are safe and where there can be no refuge for paedophiles and those who shamefully profit from the sexual exploitation of children .
The Council is aware of the view expressed by Mr Harrison that the question of the rights of minors should be considered in the Intergovernmental Conference with a view to the introduction of Treaty provisions in relation to them .
This is a matter which is currently under consideration in the IGC but honourable Members will understand that I am not at liberty to go into details of the discussion at present .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for a very full reply .
There were one or two omissions , however .
For example , if we are setting up a register at European level , what action do we propose to take with the names entered on that register ?
In the United Kingdom , for example , we are going to disclose the names of those who have a record of criminal offences involving children to potential employers .
Is that the type of action we could coordinate at European level ?
Of more concern to me is the fact that you did not mention how we are going to control adverts currently being put on the Internet through the known paedophile ring , which is very difficult to trace .
That is an area where we can usefully insist on action being taken at European level .
I welcome what the President-in-Office said but I think we need to take action further than has been suggested .
First of all , with regard to a register at EU level and what we intend to do in using this - should we , for example , let employers know ?
This is an implementation matter which will require some detailed consideration .
I am not in a position to say exactly how it will be used but I can assure the Member that if the register is there the will is there to use it in every way possible to prevent paedophiles from continuing with their illicit and outrageous activities .
In relation to the Internet , in the first place Member States will be examining the discussion paper which the Commission recently published .
I expect that it will also have the effect of stimulating a wide debate on the issue .
This will be very valuable and the Council will respond very constructively to future proposals on matters of this kind from the Commission .
I should point out that the Industry Council of 8 October considered this matter .
The matter is being examined by the Commission at the request of the Industry Council , following on from that meeting .
This is not an easy situation to deal with because it requires certain voluntary assistance as things stand .
I do not know whether technically , for example , it is possible to control the Internet without having some control of those who input into the Internet .
But I can assure the Member that it is actively under consideration both by the Industry Council and by the Commission .
The Council of Ministers will do everything in their power to assist in this regard .
I am sorry to disabuse the President-in-Office but I am afraid his reply to my question was inadequate .
I had asked about the development of the single European market , in which three of the four freedoms are a danger , in my belief , to children .
He has talked about the freedom of movement of workers , in this case , paedophiles and those who have the ability to range across borders and inflict damage on children .
But I am also talking about the freedom of movement of services , like TV broadcasting , with implications for children in respect of advertising or programmes with adult content .
I am also talking about the free movement of goods , whether we are talking about drugs , food products or toys or whatever .
In other words , Mr Mitchell , we need to address ourselves to the question of the development of the single European market and whether it can have adverse effects on children , some of which are entirely unlooked for .
I am very grateful for your statement in September recognizing that children and young people may well be understood to be legally citizens under the European Union , but we want to have clarification on this important issue of the development of the single European market and on whether those bad effects on children can be mitigated by proper action at European level .
I cannot say whether the advent of the single market has contributed to lack of control in these particular areas , but I can say that , with the benefit of hindsight , we need to look at how we can strengthen controls in this particular area .
It seems to me , for example , that the problem exists , not just within the European Union , but with citizens of the European Union plying this terrible trade outside the Union where a single market does not exist .
It is not therefore entirely correct perhaps to attribute to the free movement of people the extent of the problem which exists .
But I can assure the Member that , in relation to the working of the single market and the free movement of people , the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers will consider the point raised .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for the full answers that he has given to questions relating to child abuse and to paedophilia .
I would like to ask him about the last part of his first answer to us when he told us that there was some thinking going on in respect of children and the IGC .
We as a Parliament want to see rights of children included within the Intergovernmental Conference and as part of the European Treaty .
Is this a matter which is being given serious and active consideration by the President-inOffice , and have proposals along those lines been prepared ?
As indicated in my reply , I cannot speak for the Council on this matter .
From an Irish perspective I would offer the following comments .
The possibility of strengthening the non-discrimination principle in the Treaty is under consideration at the IGC .
The Irish presidency has tabled a paper on this question which envisages the possibility of a general provision on non-discrimination as well as a suitable legal basis to adopt legislative measures to prevent such discrimination .
Discrimination on the grounds of age is one of the aspects covered in this regard in the Irish presidency paper .
The possibility of strengthening the justice and home affairs provisions of the Treaty in order to assist in the fight against international crime is also being considered .
In relation to the other Treaty provisions , the suggestion has been put forward very strongly that we should incorporate in the Treaty specific references to children and their rights as citizens .
The initial advice which I have received is that citizenship , as described in the Union Treaties , applies to all persons who are citizens of a Member State .
However , given the fact that the matter has been raised here in the House and has been raised with various Ministers in their Member States by a number of organizations , I think this is a matter which is worth re-examining .
I have asked that this be communicated to the chairman of the Intergovernmental Group and the matter is being examined .
If there is to be a change , however , it would require full agreement of the other Member States , but it is something which we are examining .
Thank you , Mr President , for your replies .
This is not the first time we have debated this matter .
I should like to have more details on the following point : the Belgian Deputy Prime Minister has proposed that a European organization be set up , identical to the one already existing in Washington , which searches for missing children , but whose exact name I have forgotten .
Do you agree with his proposal ?
Is this part of the arrangement proposed by the Irish presidency ?
This proposal has much merit and we will certainly look at it .
There is not , as far as I am aware , a specific proposal under consideration in the Council of Ministers at present , but the Belgian Minister 's proposal has much merit and I would like to see it examined .
The political and legal status of the three states in question does not undermine in any way the policies of the European Union .
Andorra and San Marino have concluded agreements with the Community making them part of its customs area and of the regulation of issues of mutual interest .
The day-to-day management of these agreements is regulated by decisions of the mixed committees established by the agreements .
Monaco is also indirectly part of the Community customs area . Its association with the objectives and work of the Union is effected by means of the Guarantee Agreement of 1918 and the Customs Convention of 1963 between the Principality and France .
If it were to arise that future developments going beyond the framework of the abovementioned agreements were to risk undermining the functions of the single market or other Union policies , the Council considers that the Commission and Member States , acting on issues pertaining to Titles V and VI of the Treaty on European Union , will take all necessary measures both at Community and Union levels .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for the detailed information he has provided on economic and financial matters .
However , I should also like to know whether there is a structured dialogue with these States , or whether such a structured dialogue might not serve a purpose , for example , in connection with questions of internal security , because there are wide aspects of internal security which concern these States in particular .
Structured dialogue only takes place with the associated states .
But I can say that there is regular dialogue with these states and the European Union .
I personally met with the Foreign Affairs Minister of San Marino within the last ten days and we had a very worthwhile exchange .
I am not aware of any pressure from any of the states mentioned in the question for improved dialogue with the Union and I believe that the dialogues which exist are working reasonably satisfactorily .
I was very interested to hear the President-in-Office 's reply .
I would just like to broaden the issue a bit and ask about a similar situation which exists with the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands .
Here are some islands which are wholly within the territory of the United Kingdom , reliant on Europe for many services and facilities and have the British monarch as head of state - certainly her portrait is on many of their bank notes - but these places are apparently outside the European Union .
Is this not just a loophole and a tax haven so that some wealthy people can stash away their riches and exploit the system to get richer still in a more favourable tax climate , or is there a real purpose for their separate existence as such ?
Does not their existence and pseudoindependence undermine to some degree the status of the European Union ?
I wonder whether the President-inOffice is aware of any dialogue existing with these islands to end this rather elitist anomaly ?
I am not in a position to hand down rulings that might be better sought from the Court of Justice .
I do not have a legal definition of all arrangements with the Union .
As far as I am aware , arrangements with the Isle of Man and the similar jurisdictions mentioned by the honourable Member were dealt with at the time of accession and are not presenting any difficulties .
Whereas some of these areas certainly are under the British Crown , there is no doubt whatever that , for example , the Isle of Man is the most Irish of locations .
I am not aware that there is any existing difficulty .
Arrangements for the Isle of Man and similar territories within the United Kingdom are well catered for and are not presenting any difficulties , and have been well catered for since accession in 1973 .
Given the problem which Glasgow Celtic Football Club had with Monaco over the transfer of John Collins , would the President-in-Office enlighten us as to whether freedom of movement of footballers and other Community citizens is part of the agreement with Monaco ?
If it is not , will he give us an assurance that there will be urgent discussions between the Community and Monaco to settle problems such as Celtic Football Club has experienced ?
That is a separate question but I can assure the Member that Ireland has not experienced any difficulties in this regard .
We have had freedom of movement for the Irish soccer team as regards Britain for a long number of years now .
Question No 5 by Michl Ebner ( H-0749 / 96 )
Subject : Action programme for minority languages
In early 1994 , the Commission submitted a communication on minority languages in the EU in the form of an activity report for 1989-1993 .
This represented the first official communication on the preservation and promotion of minority languages .
Does the Council intend to ask the Commission to draw up an action programme for minority languages ?
What kind of decisions will be taken in the future about our minority languages and cultures ?
The Council is fully aware of the importance of preserving linguistic diversity within the Union .
It is this diversity which gives our continent its extremely rich cultural heritage .
As was stated in reply to a question by Mrs Terrón i Cusí in November last year , it is precisely with a view to safeguarding the differences between the languages and cultures of the Member States that political direction in this area must respect the principle of subsidiarity .
The Council must be careful to ensure that any action at Union level adds real value to actions at national level .
Regarding culture , action by the Union is dictated by Article 128 of the Treaty .
The recent meeting of Culture Ministers in Galway served as a useful opportunity for an exchange of views on the Union 's cultural policies .
In addition to Council action under Article 128 , under the prerogatives conferred by the Treaties , the Commission conducts its own activities regarding minority languages and has its own budget conferred on it for this purpose .
The honourable Member will understand that I am unable to comment further on what is essentially a task for the Commission .
I would also note that the European Bureau for Regional and Lesser-Used Languages which is based in Dublin and which has as its aim the preservation and promotion of the lesser-used and indigenous languages of the European Union is part-funded by the Commission .
The Irish Government also contributes to the administration costs of the Bureau .
No specific proposals have been received from the Commission with regard to minority languages .
The Council can , however , assure the honourable Member that its full attention will be given to any proposals which the Commission may bring forward in this regard .
The Bureau in Dublin , to which you have just referred , has had to cut back its activities because of the fact that financial resources are no longer flowing to the extent that would really be logical and necessary under the budget .
There are also a number of other initiatives that have had to be restricted for the same reason .
On the occasion of the Commission 's last invitation to tender , there were more than 1000 applications in this area , but far too little financing available .
You have stressed the importance of the minority languages and protection of minorities , Mr President-in-Office , and I am grateful for that , but we should be setting more dates .
We are also , for example , setting a number of requirements for those countries wishing to join the Union .
We are asking them to take a number of measures which , in point of fact , are not actually being complied with by all States within the existing European Union .
In other words , we are asking more from others than we can offer ourselves .
Incidentally , I should like to ask you how possible it is that the European Parliament 's demand that the protection of minorities be incorporated into and enshrined in the Intergovernmental Conference will actually be met .
I think that with enlargement we have an opportunity to look again at the whole question of minority languages .
The whole Union will become an impossible place if all the languages of the Union are to receive official status and be used in the whole conduct of the business of the Union .
Since that is not going to be a reality and already is not a reality , we have to give some thought to how we treat those minority languages which are not used in the everyday business of the Union .
Coming from a country which has its own minority language , Irish , a language which , incidentally , is very much on the increase in Dublin where there has been an explosion of all-Irish primary schools , I certainly would like to give encouragement to the line taken by the honourable Member .
The future of the Union will be assured once we ensure that the diversity of the Union is protected and acknowledged .
I include in that adequate acknowledgement for minority languages .
I do not think it would be fair or reasonable to hold out the hope that all languages in the Union will become working languages .
The advent of enlargement , however , gives us a fresh opportunity to re-examine this matter .
I do not think the question was about asking that the over thirty minority languages supported by the magnificent Irish Bureau become official languages .
That was not the question at all .
The question concerns the budget line and the nurturing of a precious piece of Europe 's heritage in making sure that these languages can survive as they are mostly literary with enormous amounts of music and so on .
I really want to ask whether the Council is going to look sympathetically , when it receives the budget , at the proposed increase we would like to see for making sure we can nurture these languages . We are not asking for them to be working languages , that is a red herring frankly .
I would like to see the Council support our request for more money for these languages .
I am sorry if the Member thought I was introducing a red herring .
I was putting the whole thing in context .
I would assure her that the presidency will be very supportive of the line taken by her .
I cannot assure her that the Council of Ministers would agree .
Not every Member State takes the same view .
We can inform the House that the White Paper on foreign policy which was published by the Irish Government earlier this year stated that , if a suitable opportunity arose in the course of the Intergovernmental Conference , the Irish Government would seek an improvement in the status of Irish in the Union .
You can take it , therefore , that we would also seek an improvement for other minority languages .
Certainly the sentiment of what the Member raises is something the presidency , speaking as the presidency , would support .
First , as chairman of the Intergroup Working Group on Minority Languages , I would like to thank you most sincerely for your support for the maintenance of the budget line and its possible topping-up .
Even so , I would also like to put the question of whether it may not additionally be possible to make better use of other programmes too .
Mrs Ahern and I this week invited representatives of the Irish language , members of the various confessions in Northern Ireland , to come here .
I am glad to learn that the Irish language is now being nurtured in the north , too .
The question is whether increasing use could be made of cross-border programmes such as INTERREG and others for this kind of cultural cooperation , which furthers the cause of peace , and for the nurturing of minority languages .
I know that Commissioner Wulf-Mathies takes a positive attitude to this .
I also have a positive attitude towards this .
In case I get myself into any difficulty or any trouble at home , the Irish language in Ireland is not considered a minority language .
In fact , it is the first official language .
When I spoke about other minority languages I meant those within the Union .
So even the definition of what is a minority language is something which needs to be examined .
This is a whole area which will become much more centre-stage in the context of enlargement because there will be , in the context of the Union , that much more pressure from Member States to accommodate minority languages .
As far as I am concerned , the Member is pushing an open door .
This whole point has a lot of merit .
I was rather set back to hear the President-in-Office make the statement that there were no proposals before the Council .
In April 1994 there were seven major proposals sent from this Parliament , one of the last pieces of legislation passed in this Parliament concerning the lesser-used languages , which were sent both to the Commission and the Council .
No action has been taken so far on any of the seven proposals which , as it happens , arose from a report which I had the privilege to introduce into this House .
So it is not entirely true to say that there is nothing before the Council .
There is and I would like now at this late stage the President-in-Office to check back through the files and find those recommendations from Parliament which were adopted here unanimously .
They covered the physical , financial , cultural and all the other aspects of the lesser-used languages .
Finally , I am glad , President-in-Office , that you corrected yourself about Irish being a lesser-used language .
I do not have to say any more .
Question No 6 by Hugh McMahon ( H-0752 / 96 )
Subject : Registration of pharmaceutical products smoltine and azamethipos
Given the importance of smoltine and azamethipos for the Scottish and Irish salmon farming industry , can the Council give an assurance that the registration of smoltine and azamethipos will be based on objective scientific criteria and that , despite the failure of the veterinary committee to agree registration , the Council will speedily resolve this problem to satisfy both the interests of the consumer and aquaculture industry in the Union ?
I understand that the question of the registration of the pharmaceutical products mentioned by the honourable parliamentarian is still under consideration within the Commission .
The matter has not been referred to the Council as yet and so it would not be appropriate for me to pre-judge the views of the Council on this subject .
However , as the honourable parliamentarian is no doubt aware , under Community legislation , EU veterinary medicinal products legislation requires that all veterinary medicinal products must meet certain objective scientific criteria before being placed on the market of Member States .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
There is a very interesting and constitutional question because Commissioner Bangemann assured me last month in this Chamber that the matter had gone to the Council .
Now I wonder if Commissioner Bangemann was telling a lie and whether I should raise the question of Commissioners coming before the House and not giving us accurate information .
This is very serious for European elected representatives .
I would ask the President-in-Office to persevere with this issue .
I will obviously pursue it with the Commission to find out what exactly happened .
But my information is that because there was a deadlock with the veterinary committee , the matter is referred automatically to the Council .
It is very important for the salmon industry in Scotland and Ireland .
They are at present facing a predatory practice by Norway which we are debating later this week .
It is very important to have this chemical to eliminate sea lice , which was introduced because it has been proven not to be harmful to marine life .
So this is very important for the future of industries in very vulnerable and peripheral areas .
I thank the President-in-Office and I will pursue this with the Commission yet again .
I thank the Member for his comments and , just in case there is any mistake , I will also check the matter .
I am advised that the matter is still under consideration within the Commission and that the reply I gave is accurate but I will check that for accuracy and communicate again with the Member .
Question No 7 by Georges Berthu ( H-0757 / 96 )
Subject : Abolition of Article 235
In its written reply to my Oral Question H-0686 / 96 , the Council states that Opinion 2 / 94 of the Court of Justice concerning the possible accession by the Community to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms does not relate to the provisions of Article 235 in their entirety , but is limited to the specific case of Community accession to the Convention .
By what process of reasoning does the Council believe itself to be in a position to claim that , when the Court states , for instance , that Article 235 ' cannot serve as a basis for widening the scope of Community powers beyond the general framework created by the provisions of the Treaty as a whole ' , it is issuing a specific opinion , limited to the case before it , rather than a general view of Article 235 ?
If this is a general view , as common sense seems to indicate , is the presidency minded to propose to the IGC that it should remove all ambiguities and affirm the democratic and transparent nature of European decision-making procedures by supporting the abolition of Article 235 ?
In my capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , I am unable to adopt a position on the assessments and the proposals contained in the first part of the honourable Member 's question .
The only institution and power to interpret Community legislation in general and the provisions of the Treaty is the Court of Justice .
In reply to the second part of the honourable Member 's question relating to the Intergovernmental Conference I have to point out to him that the Council as such has no part in the conference to amend the Treaties .
Under Article N of the Treaty on European Union the government of any Member State or the Commission may submit to the Council proposals for the amendment of the Treaties on which the Union is founded .
Speaking as President-in-Office of the Council , I am not in a position to refer to the discussions at the Intergovernmental Conference relevant to the honourable Member 's question .
Mr President , the Council refuses to draw conclusions from the opinion of the Court of Justice of 28 March 1996 which nevertheless is perfectly clear since it says that Article 235 cannot serve as a basis for widening the powers that the Treaty confers on the Community or for revising the Treaty .
The Council then seeks ways out of this - I have raised the question several times - and we understand this since it very often makes use of Article 235 itself , leading to a violation of the Treaty .
I will give you quite a recent example of this .
The Commission has just published , with the informal recommendation of the Council , a legal regulation about the euro which contains a revision of the Treaty since one of the provisions of the regulation consists of changing the name of the currency from the ecu to the euro .
The name ecu is properly provided for in the Treaty .
It is not an abbreviation nor an acronym , it is a name which comes into the Treaty several times .
The Council wishes to use Article 235 to carry out this disguised revision of the Treaty .
This is absolutely intolerable .
Clearly , not only must Article 235 be abolished but the conversion from the ecu to the euro must also be abandoned .
I do not share the Member 's general views as expressed on Article 235 .
Article 235 is clearly intended to cover action by the Community to attain one of its objectives in fields not expressly covered by other specific provisions in the Treaty and it has proved the most useful and necessary tool in the development of Community policies .
The Member refers to a particular case in relation to accession to the European Convention on Human Rights and Freedoms , which the Court ruled on .
This was a specific case not a general ruling .
In fact the question of Article 235 was examined by the Reflection Group and in its report it underlined in paragraph 125 that - and I quote : ' The Group is not inclined to incorporate into the Treaty a catalogue of competences of the Union and prefers the present system which details in each case the legal base of actions and policies of the Union .
As a result the Group favours maintaining Article 235 as an instrument capable of responding to the inherent , evolutionary character to interpret the objectives of the Union . ' That is a quotation directly from the Reflection Group report of the fifteen Member States , the Commission , and European Parliament .
Question No 8 by Per Gahrton ( H-0758 / 96 )
Subject : Transformation of the EU into a State as a result of EMU
Sweden 's prime minister , Göran Persson , said some time ago that EMU could lead to the emergence of an EU State .
This is because EMU requires closer coordination of Member States ' economic policies , for which ( according to former Commission President Jacques Delors and others ) the EU would need an ' economic government ' , as its economic policies could not reasonably be conducted by a committee of central banks behind closed doors without grave consequences for democracy .
Does the Council agree with the view that , in order to safeguard democracy , implementation of EMU would require the EU also to have an ' economic government ' , which in turn would entail its transformation from a cooperation-based organization into a sort of State ?
In reply to the honourable Member I must stress that in accordance with the duty of reserve which attaches to the function of President-in-Office of the Council , I am obliged to abstain from giving an assessment or commentary on statements made outside formal Council meetings .
I would like , nevertheless , to draw the honourable Member 's attention to the fact that the provisions for economic and monetary union are set out in a very precise manner in Title IV of the Treaty on European Union .
Preparations for economic and monetary union must be , and are being made , in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Treaty .
It is interesting that the Council representative has not denied the conclusions drawn by the Swedish prime minister , that EMU could mean that the EU would develop into a State .
This is an interesting message in itself , as this is one of the big issues under discussion in Sweden at the moment . The discussion is concerned with whether the introduction of a common currency , according to the Statutes of the Maastricht Treaty , will mean a fundamental change in the EU from a cooperation organisation to an organisation with State-like features .
It is perhaps well known that resistance to EMU is quite strong in Sweden .
If , in addition to this , either directly or indirectly the fears expressed by the Swedish prime minister that we , in this way , by the back door , without explaining to people what is happening , create a European super power which as a next stage would require , as Jacques Delors said , a government , then these are unheard of matters in hand .
I would have thought a clearer comment from the Council representative would have been interesting .
I would hope that Members of the House would not attribute to me things that I did not say .
The fact that I did not comment on what the Swedish Prime Minister said does not mean that I agree with what he said .
I made it very clear that I am obliged to abstain from giving an assessment or commentary on statements made outside formal Council meetings .
The European Union is an evolving Union , it will only evolve as far as the Treaties allow it to evolve .
The Treaties will only be agreed by unanimous agreement of the Member States and the purpose of the European Union is to ensure that the peace and stability that we have had in the second half of this century , compared to the mayhem which caused the loss of 60 million lives in the first half of this century in Europe alone , remains the order of the day .
It behoves us , as politicians , not to be raising fears and using terms which alarm people .
Nobody is going to be coerced into anything .
This whole enterprise can only come about by agreement .
Quite frankly , I think the way we are going about our business as we head into the 21st century is a lot better than the way we went about our business heading into the 20th century .
I hope that the peace and stability and the resulting prosperity which we have enjoyed in the second half of this century will continue as a result .
That is the civilized conduct of statesmanship , it is the civilized conduct of diplomacy and it is the civilized conduct of politics .
Nobody should jump ahead and put any sort of term on it .
The whole situation as I said is evolving .
As pointed out in Mr Andersson 's question , combating Europe 's drugs problem is indeed one of the major priorities of the Irish presidency .
There has been much activity in this area thus far during our presidency ; we would hope to see rapid results from the measures taken .
The Irish presidency 's task is to prepare a programme of activities which will take into account the guidelines laid down at the Madrid European Council in December of last year . This work is well advanced and progress will be examined at the Dublin European Council meeting in December .
Combating the problem of synthetic drugs is one of the most important elements of this programme .
These socalled designer drugs can be manufactured from ingredients that in themselves are quite legitimate and are used in everyday industry , but when combined are lethal .
In many ways the ready availability of these drugs , their varied forms and the ease with which they can be produced make them even more dangerous to our young people than the traditional root-based drugs like cocaine and heroin .
As pointed out in Mr Andersson 's question these designer drugs are also being manufactured in Member States of the Union and also in our European neighbours .
Urgent action at European level is required to block the manufacture of such drugs .
Measures under discussion by the Council which will help limit the production , trafficking and use of synthetic drugs include : a Community-wide initiative to encourage Member States ' customs administrations to enter into agreements with relevant bodies and companies in the private sector with a view to enlisting their help in the fight against drugs - work is well advanced on this measure ; measures to ensure enhanced cooperation between police and customs authorities ; the exchange of personnel and expertise between law enforcement authorities of Member States ; the compilation of a handbook on prevention and deterrence of illegal drug production to assist law enforcement authorities tackling this problem ; the development of a directory of Member States ' specific law enforcement skills , knowledge and expertise in the fight against drugs trafficking which will incorporate expertise in the area of synthetic drugs ; exchange of information on drug trafficking routes and synthetic drugs with the countries of Central and Eastern Europe ; this will be one of the major themes of the drugs seminar which the Irish presidency is organizing on 23 October to which all these countries are invited to send experts .
As precursors are an essential component of synthetic drugs , control of precursors has also been prioritized by the presidency .
Substantial progress has been made by the Commission in concluding precursor agreements with third countries and enhancing the central database and during exchanges of information at seminars and workshops on this matter .
The Council is considering practical law enforcement responses to the control of precursors .
The Council also supports the full implementation of the recommendations of the chemical action task force .
As the honourable Members are no doubt aware , priority of action against synthetic drugs was also emphasized at the recent informal justice and home affairs council in Dublin .
Turning to the issues raised in Mr Dury 's question the Council is aware of an abuse problem concerning Rohypnol especially among drugs addicts who are on methadone maintenance .
However , as far as I am aware , convincing evidence has not yet been put forward to suggest that the harmful effects of Rohypnol on its own or in combinations with other substances are any worse than those of other similar substances which are available on prescription .
I refer specifically to benzodiazepines .
The question of which EU Member States this product is on sale in is a matter which would have to be confirmed with the manufacturer .
The Council has no immediate plans to ban this substance .
The exact reasons why it is so popular among drug addicts is still unclear and until this is established it would be unwise to consider banning its use .
I would like to thank the Council for a very detailed answer .
I would just like to make one brief point on the previous question , as the Swedish prime minister is my party colleague .
This was an isolated quotation which did not reflect in any way what the Swedish prime minister said about the EMU .
I would just like this said so that we do not believe that he has poor judgement .
On the issue of the fight against narcotics , I consider what has been said to be positive as are the actions to be taken against synthetic drugs .
These are actions which aim to limit the supply .
We know that the supply , particularly that from Poland , and trade across the border from Poland , is on the increase .
But this is only part of it .
My main concern regarding the fight against narcotics in Europe at the moment is the increased demand .
We will never stop narcotics if we do not fight against demand .
We must therefore ensure that we conduct a policy in Member States which makes young people and others say no to narcotics .
Let us also work towards this within the Council .
I hope therefore that you have both actions to limit supply and also actions to limit demand .
The honourable Member has raised a very important point .
I am a member of the Irish Government 's Task Force on the demand side of the problem which recently published an interim report .
One of the reasons why , particularly in our inner cities and in our more disadvantaged areas , people turn to drugs is because of the old saying ' the devil finds work for idle hands ' .
There are in fact so many people who are long-term unemployed , who are living in difficult housing conditions , who are not being retrained for employment and who do not have educational opportunities .
Unless we target resources to the demand side , we literally cannot win simply by tackling the supply side .
I commend to the honourable Member and to Members of the House an examination of the local development programme currently under way in Ireland .
We are holding a conference in November for Europe on this particular subject .
It has a signal contribution to make in tackling the demand side .
I certainly share the concerns expressed by the honourable Member .
Mr President , I do not know who prepared the written reply made to me in connection with Rohypnol , but really !
As a result , the officials should be asked , if need be , to seek information in the USA since studies do indeed exist there on the appalling effects of Rohypnol .
The American authorities have asked the multinational Hoffman-Laroche to withdraw this product , which is a medicine and has disastrous effects when taken with other products .
I am asking you the question because near where I live in Brussels , I have seen Rohypnol being passed between young people : you would only need to see the state these young folk were in to realize , quite clearly , that there is really a drug problem here .
That is what led me to ask the question .
My own belief is that we should check , at the Commission or elsewhere , at Lisbon , country by country , where we stand legally as regards Rohypnol and that we should ask the USA if they have carried out any research on the substance .
Perhaps we should also have an exchange of views with the multinational Hoffman-Laroche since , in fact , it too has its share of the responsibility in this type of phenomenon .
It earns a lot of money from medicines : it is a very large multinational ! It could , from time to time , have a more public-spirited attitude to the products it manufactures , in other words , an attitude of critical reflection on the effects - unwanted I can well imagine , but all the same real - of this type of product .
This is a very serious matter and one which the presidency takes very seriously .
I will ask for a report on the effects of Rohypnol in the United States .
I will examine the matter further when I have received that report and I will ensure that the relevant Council minister receives a copy of the report .
Question No 11 by Winifred Ewing ( H-0812 / 96 )
Subject : Single currency and the issuing of banknotes
Article 105a of the Treaty on European Union clearly states that , in the event of a single currency and the introduction of ' euro ' notes and coins , only those banknotes issued by the ECB and national central banks will have the status of legal tender .
Protocol 3 , Article 16 states that ' the ECB shall respect as far as possible existing practices regarding the issue and design of banknotes ' .
Three Scottish commercial banks currently issue their own banknotes , which are not legal tender .
Would it remain possible for the three Scottish clearing banks to continue issuing their own banknotes , thus respecting existing practices , in the event of the introduction of a single currency ?
In December 1995 the European Council in Madrid agreed that the third stage of economic and monetary union will begin on 1 January 1999 .
This was confirmed by the European Council in Florence in June 1996 .
The single currency - the euro - will come into being at the beginning of the third stage .
The reference scenario adopted by the European Council in December 1995 states that by 1 January 2002 at the latest , euro notes and coins will be introduced into circulation .
Protocol No 11 of the Treaty on European Union states that the United Kingdom shall not be obliged or committed to move on to the third stage of economic and monetary union without a separate decision to do so by its government and parliament .
The Government of the United Kingdom has indicated that it will not decide whether the United Kingdom will participate in the third stage beginning on 1 January 1999 until closer to that date .
As the honourable Member states in her question , Article 105a of the Treaty , which does not apply to Member States not participating in economic and monetary union , assigns to the European Central Bank the exclusive right to authorize the issue of banknotes within the Community .
The article further provides that the European Central Bank and national central banks may issue such notes and that the notes issued by the European Central Bank and national central banks will be the only such notes to have the status of legal tender within the Community .
As the honourable Member further points out , Article 16 of the Protocol on the Statute of the European system of Central Banks and of the European Central Bank requires the European Central Bank to respect as far as possible existing practices regarding the issue and design of banknotes .
If the United Kingdom participates in economic and monetary union , it will be a matter for the European Central Bank , after its establishment , to decide whether Scottish banks should be authorized to continue to issue banknotes without legal tender status .
President-in-Office , thank you very much for that clear answer , because my party has been to meet Mr Lamfalussy , who has confirmed that situation .
I just wish to say that , of course , as the Scottish banks have been issuing for over 200 years these notes that are not legal tender , we do not come under the Maastricht rules and , therefore , we are not posing a problem to anyone .
The problem is as always - not just for the people of Scotland but for everybody - one of public acceptability .
The German Foreign Ministry indicated to me when I raised this in the debates that public acceptability would be strengthened enormously if everybody could have something familiar on one side of the note or the coin .
However , in the case of Scotland , as we have no legal tender status , we have every right to say : let us carry on an excellent practice which is very acceptable and has gone on for over 200 years .
Question No 12 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0801 / 96 )
Subject : Price rises and a single currency
The widespread perception among the general public that many retail businesses used the currency changes as an opportunity to raise prices was a contributing factor to the unpopularity of the process of decimalization of the Irish and British currencies some years ago .
The support of the public in participating countries will be a vital ingredient of a successful launch of the single currency .
In this context what plans does the Council have to ensure that the introduction of the EURO will not be seen by traders as an opportunity to impose price rises on consumers ?
The reference scenario agreed by the European Council in Madrid in December 1995 states that notes and coins in the single currency , the euro , will become available by 1 January 2002 at the latest .
The Commission has presented proposals for a Council regulation setting out the provisions for the use of the euro .
These include detailed rules on rounding .
These rules aim at ensuring that the conversion rates will not be rounded or truncated and so guard against the possibility that rounding inaccuracies might be exploited as a profit .
In addition , I understand that the Commission is considering ways to ensure that the public will be familiarized with the euro-pricing and to make it difficult for enterprises to conceal price increases .
Healthy competition and vigilant consumers are of course the best means of ensuring that traders are not in a position to conceal price rises in the changeover to the euro .
Should it be found necessary for the Council to implement measures to counter any such risk , I am confident that the Council will be prepared to take the measures identified .
Finally , in accordance with Article 105 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union , the primary objective of the European system of central banks , that is the European Central Bank and the national central banks will be to maintain price stability .
I have no doubt that in the implementation of this objective the ESCB will bear in mind the point mentioned by the honourable Member .
I thank the President-in-Office for his comprehensive reply .
Members from Ireland and the UK will be very familiar with the advantage that was taken by many traders in the process of conversion from the old system to decimalization .
I would ask the Minister to use his good offices to ensure that the necessary action is taken .
I fully appreciate what he has said and he has said it in good faith but I am concerned that the necessary action is taken against offenders to ensure that the consumer does not pay as happened before .
I would like to give the honourable Member the assurance that we will do everything in our power to ensure that the question he raises is addressed and that this problem is examined well in advance .
I thank him for raising it in the way he has .
I will ensure that it is brought to the attention of the president of Ecofin as a matter of course .
It is a point which deserves particular attention well in advance of the actual introduction of the currency .
Question No 13 by Irini Lambraki ( H-0771 / 96 )
Subject : Measures to reduce tension in Diyarbakir
Following the recent dramatic developments in Diyarbakir it is imperative that the international community take immediate measures , as the number of victims of Turkey 's savage use of military force is increasing in a frightening manner .
What does the Council intend to do to reduce the steady increase in tension in the region , and what measures does it intend to take to protect the lives - at least - of the thousands of Kurdish inhabitants of the region ?
The Council remains concerned about the unsatisfactory human rights situation in Turkey and this naturally includes the incidents in Diyarbakir .
The Council has made it clear repeatedly - and continue to do so - that observance of the rule of law and fundamental freedoms is an essential element for closer relations between Turkey and the European Union .
It insists that the fight against terrorism must be conducted with full respect for the fundamental values of democracy and human rights .
The honourable Member may be assured that the need for progress in the areas of democratic reform and respect for human rights will continue to underlie the Council 's approach to relations between the European Union and Turkey .
Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office both for the answer he gave me and for the sensitivity which his answer shows .
I have only three comments :
Unfortunately , Mr President-in-Office , neither our resolutions nor your good intentions , as the Council , have improved the dramatic situation of the Kurds in Diyarbakir .
What is needed is specific action , and I do not know if you have any in mind .
Like yourselves , we too in the European Parliament condemn terrorism , but the excuse of terrorism should not be used by composite states and societies to justify the genocide of their residents .
I ask you to give special consideration to the problems of Kurdish farmers in Diyarbakir , since winter is approaching .
With the excuse of fighting terrorism , 3000 villages in the area have been laid waste and Diyarbakir itself , a town with a population of 300 , 000 some 3 years ago , now has a population of 1.5 million who are dying of hunger in the streets .
I do not know what measures you could take to prevent the death of thousands of children from hunger in Diyarbakir .
The European Union recognizes the need for further improvements and progress in the whole area of implementation of human rights and democratic freedoms in Turkey .
We have continued to make it clear to the Turkish authorities that observance of the rule of law and basic liberties is the basis of continued rapprochement between the European Union and Turkey .
We have received assurances by the Turkish authorities of their intention to pursue the process of constitutional and legislative reform .
We will continue to urge early progress in introducing and implementing the further reforms necessary adequately to safeguard human rights which do not meet the standards we expect .
The Commission , for its part , has supported Turkish NGOs and professional organizations promoting human rights for a number of years , including the Human Rights Association , the Human Rights Foundation and the Turkish Medical Association .
The Commission will continue to cooperate and grant aid for various projects aimed at promoting human rights in Turkey .
This can be taken as an indication of the ongoing concern of the Union about the matters which the Member has raised .
Question No 14 by John Cushnahan ( H-0774 / 96 )
Subject : Resources to combat drug trafficking
With the abolition of internal frontier controls , does the Council appreciate the importance of providing adequate protection at EU seaports and shorelines to prevent international drug trafficking ?
What new measures does the Council intend to implement in this area ?
It has been one of the major priorities of the Irish presidency to secure more coordinated and effective action at European Union level against drug trafficking and drug abuse .
An example of this is the setting in motion of a thorough review of the adequacy of cooperation in protecting the external borders of the European Union against the importation of drugs by land , sea and air .
As I have already said in a reply at last July 's parliamentary session , the presidency has already initiated a discussion on the external frontier customs strategy .
It has put forward proposals on training , technical aids , control equipment , intelligence , risk analysis and improved communication .
It intends to propose a joint action to serve as a legal base for the allocation of funds from the budget of the European Communities .
These proposals are aimed at achieving a more effective level of cooperation against drugs smuggling and will fulfil one of the action points of the list adopted by the Madrid European Council meeting in December 1995 with regard to drugs .
The Council will also give priority to the review of the Naples Convention on mutual assistance between customs administrations , on the Customs 2000 strategy programme for the Third Pillar , and on EU participation in the strategic plan of the World Customs Organization for implementing an operative measure on the Balkan drug smuggling route .
The presidency will also bring under scrutiny the present arrangements for joint customs surveillance operations at the external frontier .
This examination will be with a view to improving their efficiency .
A global mandate will be sought from the Council for these operations so that Council approval does not have to be obtained each year as at present .
It will also seek to encourage cooperation between Member State customs authorities and private trade and shipping interests in the fight against drug trafficking .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
I acknowledge and pay tribute to the Irish presidency for making this issue one of the top priorities during its term in office .
I wish them well in trying to persuade our European partners to give it the same priority .
I invite the Minister to make a comment , in view of my dismay at the budgetary provision for next year of ECU 24m .
It is hardly an indication of a strong priority to combat what is a $ 1 , 000 billion international business of drug trafficking .
I also pay tribute to the Minister himself .
I am well aware that he was involved in this issue long before he became a minister .
He was always very committed to dealing with the problem of drug abuse , particularly in his own native city .
I should like to remind you , President-in-Office of the recent drug finds in Ireland in Moneypoint ( Co Clare ) and Cork , also the large seizures in , for example , ports like Rotterdam and Amsterdam where 450 tonnes of drugs were seized last year .
I remind you of the comments that I passed on to your office by the Commander of the Rotterdam Police Authority on the lack of judicial and police cooperation in protecting shorelines and coastal areas .
Is the Council prepared to consider the long-term solution of establishing a European coastguard ?
In the shortterm , would the Council , along with other European institutions , provide assistance to countries like our own which have a heavy burden with responsibility for policing some + 20 % of European coastal waters but with inadequate resources to deal with this problem ?
The EU must allocate more resources particularly for the naval services in those countries in the short-term .
However , in the long term , let us plan for a European Union coastguard .
I am at one with the honourable Member , Mr Cushnahan when he raises this issue .
I have to say - and there is no point in not calling a spade a spade - that I think the amount of resources we have committed to the European fight against drugs as distinct from the fight Member States engage in individually that the European Union budget is feeble in relation to the extent of the problem .
The Irish presidency has sought to improve on this situation ; we have made it a priority .
It intends to propose a joint action to serve as a legal base for the allocation of funds from the budget for the European Community .
It further intends to propose a global mandate from the Council for operations which I have outlined so that the Council approval does not have to be obtained each year as at present .
There is a lot of concern expressed about this matter in this House , at Council of Ministers meetings , at European Council meetings , by Commissioners .
There seems to be a will and now we have to find a way .
There was a will and we found the way for EMU .
This is a priority .
We are always asking how to make the Union relate more to the citizen .
This is one way we can make the Union relate more to the citizen but we cannot do it on a budget for this year of ECU 40m .
It simply cannot be done .
I do not have the budget figure for next year , but ECU 40m this year is simply not sufficient .
It is not anywhere near sufficient and it is not taking the problem seriously .
Certainly we will do everything we can to ensure that resources are increased .
I think this House should push the boat out in this regard because the concern is being expressed .
It is time that we met our concerns with resources .
As I have said , the presidency and the Council 's concern will be to ensure that the external frontiers of the European Union are adequately protected against drug smuggling .
Drugs come in by land , sea and air .
Different routes are used depending on the nature and origin of the drugs .
Drugs are brought in by various means : by people , personally ; in unaccompanied cargo ; hidden in cars , ships and containers ; and especially in the case of cannabis , in small craft .
Clearly there is a need for tightening up .
No one action or approach , including enhanced naval protection , is likely to be effective on its own .
It will be important to ensure that the various possible approaches to the question , before they are applied , are likely to make an effective contribution to the security of the external frontier against drug trafficking and that they are then applied in a coordinated way .
I think that the proposal to have some sort of coastguard cooperation is one which is worthy of more constructive and detailed examination .
People talk about defence and security .
Security is a different thing to defence .
The drugs issue is a security issue .
Already in Ireland , for example , there is cooperation between the Irish Air Corps and the RAF on search and rescue .
It could be something as loose as that or it could be something more structured within the Union .
But we need - and this is something in the whole area of the Petersberg tasks , which are being examined - to look at this aspect .
It is time we looked at ways of protecting our external borders , including our coast , against these drugs .
It is too late when they arrive on the street .
I feel that there is a very worthy proposal here which should be examined .
I cannot give a commitment or an answer but I think it is worthy of examination in a professional way so that we will be able to give a conclusive answer .
I thank the President-in-Office for his response .
I should like to ask for clarification on the question of the amount of money to be allocated this year .
Is it ECU 40m , ECU 24m or , as some of my colleagues believe , is it a smaller amount ?
Secondly , as the President-in-Office is so much in favour of the idea of concerted effort and concerted action at European level , could we have a commitment from the President-in-Office that the monies which are presently in a bank account in Brussels and are to be allocated to the Irish naval service for the upgrading of equipment and for the provision of extra ships be released as soon as possible to enable the Irish naval service , which in effect is the western wing of any European coastguard service , to protect that large area against the illegal importation of drugs .
Finally , with regard to preventing countries in South America in particular finding it an economic necessity to grow the raw product of drugs , are any new proposals coming from the Council with regard to assisting those governments in South America ?
In relation to the money in the account in Brussels , if the Member puts down a question I will endeavour to answer it .
I do not have information in the brief to assist me in answering the question .
I understand , subject to re-examination , that the figure available over three pillars in 1996 is ECU 40m , about £ 32m .
In relation to the growing of the produce , this is a central consideration to any tackling of the problem .
A lot of the tackling of the problem of drugs is a matter for Member States individually , but there is a role for the Union .
The European Union could undertake the task of taking the case to other regions where the drug is grown .
There are about five regions of Asia from where something like 80 % of the heroin coming into Western Europe derives .
Also there is a clear indication in South America , for example , where traditionally cocaine was sourced , that heroin is now being produced there .
That has horrendous implications because here there are already established routes throughout the world .
There is much merit in the point made by the honourable Member .
It is something which is on the agenda .
We are looking particularly at the area of the Caribbean .
This has been discussed at the Asian / European Ministerial meeting and is being pursued by our officials .
Question No 15 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0777 / 96 )
Subject : Andalusia and the COM in olive oil
In Andalusia , one of the most prominent regions of the EU , olives are the most important crop , not only in economic but also in social and environmental terms .
Moreover , this Autonomous Region is the biggest olive producer in Europe and the world , employing 140 000 people in regions and marginal areas which are not suited to any other type of farming .
Does the Council not consider that , before taking any decision , it should consult Andalusia to ensure that the reform does not make the present regulatory arrangements in this sector worse ?
Is it aware that the preliminary draft text submitted by the Commission has aroused strong opposition in Andalusia ?
Does it think this is the way to allay the discontent of Andalusian farmers , following the ' mad cow disease ' debacle and the reform of the fruit and vegetables sector ?
The Council shares the opinion of the honourable Member as to the necessity of maintaining conditions suitable for the economic , social and environmental circumstances for the pursuit of a production as important as that of olive oil , notably in the regions of the Community characterized traditionally and predominantly by this type of farming .
The timeliness of embarking on a reform of the Community olive oil regime is generally recognized .
However , the Council can only give an opinion on the basis of a formal proposal by the Commission .
At this stage a proposal has not been submitted .
In any case , it is evident that in the context of the examination of any future proposition , each Member State will be able to highlight the interest of its producing regions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , many thanks for your reply , which I appreciate very much because it means a lot to know that the Council of Ministers shares the opinion of Andalusia at this time , is sensitive to the situation , and understands that 140 , 000 jobs are certainly at stake , so that this decision is highly important , not just for agriculture , but for employment , social policy and the environment .
The Council of Ministers speaks well - but it is not going to make the decision . The Council of Ministers should work in coordination with the Commission and needs to be aware that at the moment the Commission is reticent about what is being asked .
Before such a wide-ranging decision is presented to the Council there should be a period of reflection and consultation so that the sector itself can make its view known .
It would be barbarous if a decision like this was taken against the will of Andalusia , the leading European and world producer . And it will be an unprecedented travesty , when there have been periods of reflection and consultation on other reforms , if that does not happen in this case and nobody knows why .
Many thanks to the President-in-Office of the Council for understanding the gravity of the problem .
The Member has quite rightly taken the empathy which we have , as presidency , with the situation she outlines .
The Council can only give an opinion on the basis of a formal proposal by the Commission , so perhaps she might wish to pursue the matter with the Commission ?
Andalucia will be consulted in the normal way through the consultation process with Member States as far as the Council is concerned .
But I wish to conclude by reassuring the honourable Member of our understanding and sympathy towards the problems she expresses .
I wish to thank Mr Mitchell particularly for some very good answers .
You prepared very nicely the answers on drugs .
That concludes Question Time . Questions not taken for lack of time will be answered in writing .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.10 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Protection of financial interests
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0288 / 96 by Mrs Theato , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the draft Council Regulation concerning on-the-spot checks and inspections carried out by the Commission in order to protect the European Communities ' financial interests against fraud and other irregularities ( 8055 / 96 - C4-0358 / 96-95 / 0358 ( CNS ) - Reconsultation ) ; -A4-0313 / 96 by Mr Bontempi , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft second Protocol drawn up on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union , to supplement the Convention on the Protection of the European Communities ' Financial Interests ( 7752 / 96 - C4-0137 / 96-95 / 0360 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , perhaps you are asking why another two reports on the protection of the EU 's financial interests are on the agenda .
Is it because we are making such rapid progress with regulations to prevent fraud and irregularities with Community money ?
No , quite the reverse !
We are making slow and painful headway .
The subject of my report on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control on on-the-spot checks and inspections goes back to March 1994 .
At that time Parliament had drafted a resolution calling on the Commission to submit proposals for more wide-ranging measures to prevent the misuse of the Community budget , including on-the-spot inquiries .
A first step in the right direction was Regulation 2988 / 95 which entered into force in December 1995 .
However , to a large extent the question of on-the-spot checks by the Commission remained open .
The Commission subsequently improved matters with a second proposal for a regulation early this year .
In our resolution of May 1996 we assessed the proposal as generally satisfactory ; nevertheless we tabled 13 amendments , which the Commission largely incorporated .
I warmly thank Mrs Gradin and her staff for their efforts in this respect .
But then we had objections from the Council .
We are now being consulted again , on the basis of the Council 's changes to the Commission proposal and Parliament 's opinion .
I have described the chronology of events in order to ask how long the Union and the Member States will go on just standing and watching the activities of defrauders , especially in the transnational area , since they are so slow in producing legislation .
According to the Commission 's report , more than ECU 1.1 billion of the Community budget went missing last year as a result of dishonest wheeling and dealing .
The real figure is probably quite a bit higher .
On the one hand our maxim is to economize and reduce budget expenditure .
That is precisely what we are doing with the first reading of the 1997 budget this week .
On the other hand , large sums are disappearing unlawfully because the necessary protective measures are not being set up .
Let me take up a few points in the proposal submitted by the Council .
First , it emphasizes the need for subsidiarity .
Parliament never disputed that .
The Commission should carry out checks on transnational irregularities and thereby ensure an equivalent level of protection of the Community budget in all the Member States .
Also , any Member State can ask for these checks to be made .
Not included are cases which are already subject to sectoral EU or national checks .
Secondly , the checks are administrative .
We do not dispute that .
But what is important is that the same conditions should apply to the Commission inspectors as to the national ones , i.e. , in particular that if they find suspicious circumstances they must have access to all information and facilities and their administrative reports must constitute admissible evidence in the same way as those drawn up by the national administrative inspectors .
Articles 1 , 7 and 8 make this clear .
Thirdly , of the original 13 amendments , 7 are satisfactorily incorporated in the new text , 2 others in the recitals .
The Council did not take up our proposal that the Commission should confine unannounced checks to urgent cases , in order to avoid delays .
But we can live with the present version , provided the Community and the national administrations are willing to cooperate in such a way as to produce practical and satisfactory results .
The fourth point , however , remains open .
No penalties , such as blocking the funds or exclusion , are imposed for the event that the access to the information , documents , premises , etc . , of recipients of EU money referred to in Articles 5 and 7 is refused .
In this case we have to maintain our call for administrative penalties and are therefore tabling an amendment -just one , incidentally .
It is now up to the Commission to state whether or not it is prepared to submit the appropriate proposal in order to remedy what we regard as a very serious weakness .
I want to thank the Irish presidency of the Council for the open-mindedness it showed in repeated talks , some also with our committee .
We hope it can bring the question of on-the-spot checks to a conclusion before the end of the year .
Mr President , I would like to give the position of the Committee on Budgetary Control on Mr Bontempi 's report .
But first let me sincerely thank my honourable colleague for his clear and also courageous report , which he has drawn up with his usual thoroughness .
As I said earlier , the Commission , Parliament and especially the Member States are treading a very long road , at times coming to a standstill , in their attempt to crate a legal framework for the criminal protection of the Community budget .
Parliament has always emphasized that it would have preferred rules in the form of a directive because it is difficult to achieve equivalent protection with agreements and additional protocols .
But since the convention procedure was adopted , we will help ensure it is implemented quickly .
As the fifth Irish presidency on this question , I hope that the Irish presidency will bring this second additional protocol to the Convention on the protection of the EU 's financial interests to a successful conclusion .
Unfortunately , it is still impossible to tell when the overall package will be ratified in all the Member States .
We can only accept the protocol on the criminal liability of legal persons as a Council compromise if there are no further efforts to water it down .
That means we must have rules on penalizing natural persons who act in contravention of the Community budget in the name of legal persons .
Member States may not draw out of this unilaterally .
Penalties must be imposed for the money laundering of the proceeds of fraud - which are usually large sums , dishonestly obtained on an international basis .
The rules on administrative and judicial assistance are disappointing .
Mr Bontempi has already discussed that .
We must at least call for the legal protection of exchanges of information with the national judicial authorities and the creation of a register of fraud prosecutions as a minimum objective for the Commission .
The primary responsibility of the country in question in the event of fraud and the responsibility of the European Court of Justice also need clarifying and let me also stress the need for cooperation between the national courts .
If a consolidated text of this kind is adopted before the end of the year , that would be another small step forward in the fight against fraud .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to join Mrs Theato in thanking Mr Bontempi and add my thanks to Mrs Theato herself .
It is always a difficult business : people cannot praise themselves , but Mrs Theato is equally committed colleague in an area that I would not want to confine just to the text of the convention before us .
Since both Mr Bontempi and Mrs Theato have said a great deal in relation specifically to the text , I shall make a few comments of principle on behalf of our group .
First , not because of the late hour at which we are discussing the subject but , to put it nicely , because of the apparently lukewarm interest in the subject in this House - and I am not trying to criticize colleagues - I think it would be right to say that this is very typical of a subject that really deserves immense attention but is in actual fact perceived as a marginal , rather technical matter .
It is true that Members do not leap up from their seats when we consider dry documents .
It is not one of the great moments in Parliament for us to come and discuss the second supplementary protocol ; but the actual issue which has forced us to talk about it should in fact make all the alarm bells ring in every political camp of this House and also in the national parliaments and governments !
I do not really need to say or emphasize this here among us who are here together in this Chamber , for you all know it : corruption and fraud in the form in which we are getting to know it , in the ever more sophisticated form in which we are encountering these two phenomena , are no longer just acts of crime that have to be fought with the instruments of criminal and Community law but have meanwhile become serious threats to the democratic legal structures not only of the European Union but also of its Member States .
Mr Bontempi just referred to developments in Italy .
They are known , partly because of the massive action taken by the Italian authorities , the Italian state , the Italian public to combat the invasion of corruption and fraud into increasingly large areas of public life .
But Italy is only one Member State of the European Union and what concerns me so much is the fact , as I have said here once before , that systematic fraud and systematic corruption - and not just coming from and supported by criminal circles but also from the legal economy and official government offices - are no longer a purely Italian phenomenon but are on the advance in all the Member States of the European Union without this being fully realised .
If in a country such as the one I come from bribe money that is paid out can be deducted from taxes , regarded in a sense as working expenses which the operator simply has to pay in order to do his deal , it is justified to ask whether that does not simply open the door wide to corruption !
Then we have to ask why the largest Member State of the European Union did not bolt the door a long time ago , for since we do not have a harmonized criminal law we can go on having discussions in this House as long as we want .
So long as the national criminal prosecution authorities , so long as the national criminal law provisions and the national fiscal law provisions , for instance , remain as they stand , it is pointless !
We will not be able to combat it in my country !
Since we have just been talking about legal persons , let me draw your attention to a particular point : the fight against corruption , the fight against fraud also has something to do with public awareness and individual moral perceptions .
If the employee of an enterprise - and Mr Bontempi referred to this too in his explanatory statement - is praised for landing a contract for his firm at whatever cost , using any means whatsoever , including criminal ones , then I can understand the wage-dependent employee of the firm saying : ' I will even use that kind of method to protect my job . ' So long as the firm as a legal person does not place itself under a moral code , I cannot reproach the employee !
That is why the objective of the second supplementary protocol is so very important , quite apart from the original question cited by Mr Bontempi and going back to Roman law of what needs to be added to a legal concept at the end of the 21st century , namely that it is no longer the individual alone who is behaving wrongly but that the structure that encourages him to do so is at least as much to blame .
In that regard I hope these considerations will find their way into this convention !
You are right , Mr Schulz .
The problem is not just that the debate is taking place at this time , but also that it is doing so in an empty Chamber .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are once again faced with the half-hearted nature of Europe 's attempts to combat fraud , as has already been pointed out by previous speakers and by the two rapporteurs .
On the one hand we are dealing with a draft Council Regulation , or in other words a measure under the first pillar .
On the other hand , we are discussing a draft Protocol and thus a legal instrument from the arsenal of the third pillar .
At the last session in Strasbourg we already criticized this irritating ambiguity and we were supported in our stance by Commissioner Gradin .
If we take the two reports which we now have before us together , a clear picture then emerges of the absurdity of such a hybrid solution .
Suppose that the Council Regulation enters into force and UCLAF carries out on-the-spot checks and inspections in various Member States on the transactions of various companies .
If then in certain cases major negligence or serious irregularities come to light it will be up to the legislation and the courts in the Member State in question to decide what action is to be taken and in what way verdicts and sentences will be pronounced .
But above all it will be the individual Member State which decides whether or not legal proceedings will be initiated and to what extent fines or penalties are to be imposed .
Let me give you two examples of different situations .
Example one .
In some countries legal persons are criminally liable .
In other countries , such as Belgium , this is still not the case .
This means that a civil or administrative case must be brought or otherwise the criminal liability of the natural person must be invoked .
Example two .
In some countries , Belgium among them , the laundering of money from illegal transactions is broadly defined .
In other countries this is not the case and practices are permitted which are not tolerated in Belgium .
They are simply not considered to be an offence and are therefore not the subject of legal proceedings and resultant penalties .
These differences bring a number of problems , especially when it is a matter of the same damaging practices in respect to the financial interests of the European Community , because what is a criminal offence in one country will not be an offence in another , thus presenting the Euro fraudsters with an interesting choice .
This non-fictional example shows that we need better solutions , but I will not of course oppose the Regulation or Protocol we have before us today .
Because this is better than doing nothing at all .
But it is not enough .
Both our rapporteurs , Mrs Theato and Mr Bontempi , have also already made this clear and I congratulate them on their work .
I also support the amendments proposed by both committees .
But I do want to point out one specific problem .
The rapporteur , Mr Bontempi , is aware of this .
We discussed it in committee .
In the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs we not only brought amendments which sharply define the responsibilities of the responsible Commissioner and of UCLAF .
We made the list more flexible and supplemented it with sanctions , also adding the question of money laundering in a separate vote which in my opinion was open to dispute .
There is already a money laundering Directive and this Directive includes all the elements , also in respect to proceedings against legal persons and thus companies .
I fear that when we now include money laundering in the Protocol we will weaken the situation of the Directive because the Directive is the strongest measure .
This belongs to the first pillar .
In the light of all this , I believe that we need more clarity from the Commission on the subject of the criminal liability of legal persons - and banks and other financial institutions in particular - and the possible consequences , also in cases of fraud committed by other legal persons and in particular by companies or organizations .
I should like to ask the Commission to provide clarity and make it clear here in a statement to Parliament which the choice is to be , the first pillar or the third pillar .
I should like to once again express my appreciation for the work of the two committees .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , every day the news brings us examples of the spread of fraud in Europe .
In the last few weeks we have learned of the arrest of a political figure in one Member State of the European Union who has falsified invoices and fraudulently obtained money from the Commission for fictitious contracts in the tourism sector .
More recently we registered the solemn call of an association of Geneva magistrates for real international cooperation in the fight against fraud to overcome the inertia of national administrations .
For example , Italy has waged an intense battle , especially at the criminal level , but other countries have not .
All this has created grave disparities .
So the situation is alarming and today 's regulation from the Council is hardly going to succeed in allaying our fears .
The first necessity is to attack fraud through the penal system in the same way in every country of the Union .
As the rapporteur , Mrs Theato , has actually understood very well , the Council 's position on the Commission 's onthe-spot inspection methods is revealing in its reticence .
In fact the Council , which has rejected the most important amendment from the European Parliament on the key question of sanctions , certainly recognizes a power of intervention to the Commission , as long as that power is purely administrative and strictly bound by the principle of subsidiarity .
The Council in fact refuses to grant any power of sanction , because otherwise it would give the Commission a power of control , but by doing so it actually reduces any effectiveness that control might have .
For our part , we do not intend to bring the application of the principle of subsidiarity into the debate provided it is not conceived of and interpreted as a right of veto on the part of the Member States .
Subsidiarity should add something to the Community , not work against the Community .
So , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I cannot disguise a certain discouragement and a certain anxiety from you when I note once again that the Member States frequently concentrate their efforts on obstructing the development of the Commission 's powers in this matter and , more generally , in everything relating to the fight against fraud , as Mr Bontempi has so rightly emphasized .
All say they condemn fraud , but few actually try to prevent it .
It involves more than legal issues and jealous guarding of prerogatives ; there must be proof of real political will to carry on an effective struggle against the spread of fraud .
If a scandal of European proportions should explode because of bad management of Union funds and the spread of fraud , the construction of Europe we all work for so patiently and passionately , would run a grave risk of collapse .
Mr President , Parliament is right to make a major stand on the combat against fraud .
I believe that if there is one area of policy where we can do ourselves credit this is the one .
Too often everything to do with Europe is associated with financial mismanagement .
This must change .
I believe that the subjects we are debating this evening - and I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the work they have done - represent a further step in the right direction .
It is a good thing that UCLAF is to obtain the necessary facilities to carry out its work in all the Member States and to conduct on-the-spot investigations into all suspect matters .
As a liberal group we accept everything to do with the principle of subsidiarity .
If the Member States can do it then they must do it but it is also a good thing that the Commission officials are there to support the national authorities where and when it is necessary .
We also believe it is regrettable , and Mrs Theato has already said this , that it is not possible for Commission officials to carry out independent inspections .
It would be better if that were the case .
National Member States must have nothing to hide in this area and if a Commission official wants to carry out an independent investigation then that should be possible .
We do not , however , believe this to be a matter of essential importance , but a pity all the same .
What is a matter of essential importance is the option of not imposing sanctions .
What is the sense in issuing regulations when we cannot say whether or not they are being respected .
And if they are not being respected what sense does it make if you cannot take any sanctions whatsoever to penalize people or to instigate proceedings .
Unfortunately there is nobody from the Council here this evening to say how we are to remedy this shortcoming .
Perhaps the Commission can give us some explanation .
We believe that this is a major drawback in the present proposals .
But you cannot have everything at once .
It is a step in the right direction .
We will therefore support it , but more must follow .
Over coming years we hope that Parliament will take bigger steps in this direction .
Mr President , it goes without saying that I congratulate both rapporteurs on two reports that have support across the House .
In the context of this debate , however , we should state quite clearly that crime and criminality are two of the fundamental European growth industries today .
There are higher and higher levels of profit to be made illegally from public funds and there is a lower and lower rate of detection and , in some cases , risk of detection .
It is becoming so easy to make a good living out of crime at the taxpayers ' expense that when we talk about the level playing field , in so many areas of activity involving public subsidies you could say that the level playing field is now crooked .
This report is extremely important , because although Mrs Theato 's report accepts some of the Council 's amendments , we have to say that we accept them with a degree of reluctance because we know whence they come .
Subsidiarity : yes !
But if the Council is to use subsidiarity as the basis on which it asserts its right to do nothing , then , of course , we have to repudiate it .
Administrative penalties : of course , we can say yes !
But administrative sanction without penalty is no sanction .
What we see tonight - and that is all I want to take my two minutes to say - is the contempt with which the Council holds the views of this House .
It clearly feels we can have these two important debates taking place without even a junior clerk from the Council coming to take a minute that he could at least pretend that he has sent to his political masters .
That is an act of contempt for this House and it should be made quite clear that this House will persist to go further than these reports allow us .
It is on that basis that we support both reports tonight .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am now becoming an assiduous frequenter of night sessions which , symbolically perhaps , since night is linked to fraud and robbery , bring us here to speak to so few people .
The truth is that the Bontempi and Theato reports show two people who are deeply interested in finding a convincing solution to combating organized crime .
I should like to tell Mr Bontempi that , without being Caius or Justinian , and having read the quotation according to which ' collectivities cannot commit fraud ' , I should like to say that the legal problem which is being posed now is that : ' States may take part in fraud ' .
At this moment in time , the main problem facing Europe is that , despite all of the legal frameworks and all of the machinery which can be set up , public administrations , as a result of subsidiarity , are not letting go of any of the prerogatives they have nor are they collaborating in the fight against crime .
That is the real issue from a philosophical and political point of view . This is what is happening : a brutal crisis in the legal system , an enormous crisis in the justice system such that now , thanks to the lack of justice in other fields , we are witnessing the biggest public demonstration since the War .
We are all involved in this fight now .
However , unless we have a code of practice with a legal basis that States must willingly adhere to - just as TV journalists must obey a code of practice , it will be impossible to fight against corrupt firms or States in cahoots with organized crime .
I just would like to wish both rapporteurs all the best and thank them for their huge efforts . I am a fan of theirs .
Mr President , it will already be apparent to you that we have before us two excellent reports , both of which address the vital subject of how to protect tax-payers ' interests .
Unfortunately , there are not more tax payers here this evening , but nevertheless I am sure the business can faithfully be undertaken even as they retire to their beds .
First , Mrs Theato is to be congratulated for the clarity and constructiveness of her report on on-the-spot checks to combat fraud .
The text on which agreement in principle was reached in the Council in June , as the House will know , is the result of considerable effort by the Commission , the Council and particularly the Italian presidency to bring this matter to a successful conclusion .
I believe that it responds in great part to the major concerns expressed by Parliament in May of this year , reference to which has been made in the course of this debate .
It is obviously important for this text to be put into practical effect as quickly as possible and , once Parliament has decided on its position , the Council should be able to adopt the text in time for the regulation to come into force on 1 January next year .
This new regulation will enable more effective investigations to be carried out by Commission anti-fraud inspectors .
It will lead to an equivalent level of protection of the Community 's financial interests everywhere in the Union .
That provision for equivalent protection of the budget is a new element in the Union 's anti-fraud strategy and over time it will clearly vastly improve controls .
The regulation confirms the central responsibility of the Member States for the prevention of irregularities and gives the Member States the facility for preparing these controls , together with the Commission - an approach which is obviously consistent with the partnership approach in the Commission anti-fraud strategy .
Commission inspectors will be able to carry out controls directly on economic operators and they will benefit from access to information to the same degree as national inspectors , a point made very forcibly by Mrs Theato in the course of her contribution .
The reports will be assimilated for the purpose of admissibility as evidence in courts with reports produced by national inspectors .
I might add , Mr President , that UCLAF is now in the process of checking the efficiency of all instruments and procedures available at national level to protect the financial interests of the Community .
The result of this work will become available next year .
As you may know , Parliament proposes the introduction of some form of sanction against operators who refuse to cooperate with the Commission inspectors or deny access to information .
Obviously we are not unsympathetic to the purposes of that amendment .
However , since my colleagues Commissioners Gradin and Liikanen have launched the sound and efficient financial management 2000 project , it is clear that the issue of sanctions is now under very active consideration in partnership with Member States and this is also obviously directly related to control and auditing eligibility and penalties .
I am therefore sure that we will be able to find solutions within the remit of SEM 2000 that will , I hope , meet the concerns registered by Mrs Theato .
In response to the specific and forceful point that she made in the course of her contribution seeking a Commission proposal on administrative penal sanctions , I can say definitely , Mr President , that the Commission will integrate the content of Mrs Theato 's proposed amendment in its 1997 anti-fraud work programme .
The Commission fully supports the spirit of the amendment , as I indicated , and the reason for not embracing it now arises simply from the need to find answers in terms of legal provision , which would give full effect to the Commission 's powers to carry out controls , an objective which I am sure that Mrs Theato and her colleagues heartily support .
Now to the Bontempi report on the draft second Protocol to the Convention on the Protection of the Community 's Financial Interests .
According to the rules , under the third pillar , honourable Members are consulted by the presidency and not by the Commission and the text on which this House has been consulted reflects an intermediate compromise established at the end of the Italian presidency , with some further amendments .
However the Commission , in the person of Mrs Gradin , at the Justice and Home Affairs Council in June insisted , as only Mrs Gradin can , that Parliament should be consulted .
So I am happy to offer my comments on the report .
Obviously the presidency will have to make its own comments when it gets the opportunity .
Generally speaking the Commission is very satisfied with Mr Bontempi 's report .
We can go along with most of the amendments although I have some minor remarks on a few of them .
The fact that we support the various amendments does not , unfortunately , carry the same weight in the third pillar as in the first pillar , as the House will know .
There is no monopoly of initiative .
The Commission can only promise to argue as well as it can for the points accepted this evening .
I am sure that honourable Members will understand that .
On the title , Amendment No 1 , it is the Commission 's view that it is better that we stick to the more general terms of the original proposal .
We welcome Amendment No 2 which calls for a separate instrument on judicial cooperation .
This was an important element in the original Commission proposal but it has now been dropped in the Council negotiations .
As honourable Members might know , a horizontal instrument which aims at improved mutual judicial assistance is currently before the Council .
However , I cannot exclude the possibility that a separate instrument aimed at fraud against the Community budget will still be needed , in particular when it comes to defining a particular role for the Commission in judicial cooperation .
Amendment No 3 rightly draws attention to the adoption of the protocol on corruption as the relevant date .
Amendment No 4 meets our concerns relating to the need to cover all forms of legal persons involved in fraud .
However , this matter is obviously largely regulated by national law and in order to respect subsidiarity I do not believe it is area into which the Commission should venture .
We therefore suggest that the text stays as it is .

Amendment No 5 defines the scope in the title and we can agree with Mr Bontempi on that and on Amendments Nos 6 and 7 .
The latter rightly provides for criminal or administrative penalties when a company lacks the proper organization , supervision or control and thereby makes itself vulnerable to fraudulent behaviour .
Amendment No 8 does not pose any problem to us and we can also accept Amendment No 9 in part .
We particularly welcome the exclusion of fraudulent enterprises from participation in public procurement .
However , we do not see any use in restricting the application of a judicial winding-up order only to companies with fraud as a primary purpose .
In serious cases it might be necessary to close down and restructure any kind of enterprise that is guilty of fraud .
To exclude important fraudulent behaviour from winding-up orders seems to us to be rather weak .
We can accept Amendments Nos 10 and 11 which delete those articles of the proposal that are taken up elsewhere in the text .

Changing Title III as suggested by Mr Bontempi in Amendment No 12 obviously clarifies the point but we do not believe this is absolutely necessary in view of the clarification in the text that follows .
On Amendment No 13 the Commission fully agrees on the need to confiscate the proceeds of fraud and to take conservatory measures .
Most of the problem is , however , already solved in the text that is being negotiated by the Council .
We also subscribe to the call for full reimbursement of the proceeds of fraud to the Community budget .
However , this issue might be better solved in the context of the clearance of accounts procedure under the normal budgetary rules rather than in the present third pillar instrument .
Amendment No 14 deals with whitewashing of criminal proceeds and money laundering .
The amendment actually suggests a slight softening by talking of sanctions only in cases of serious corruption .
The Commission still believes that all corruption cases are serious and should be liable to sanctions .
We agree of course that legal persons should be held liable for money laundering but the text proposed is still under scrutiny by our legal service and might pose some problems .
Amendment No 15 introduces the notion of mutual assistance in enforcing penalties .
Mutual assistance normally occurs , of course , before the court cases .
Enforcement of the penalties is the remit of Member States and we suggest that it should be kept as such .
May I remind honourable Members that we now have in the on-the-spot checks regulation the possibility of checking that measures by Member States to protect the budget are equivalent .
It means that Member States must provide for comparable deterrents and that , in our view , should provide a safety net .
Amendment Nos 16 and 17 widened the scope of fraud to include corruption and we readily accept that .
Amendments Nos 18 and 19 come back to the request for judicial cooperation under the issue of competent authorities .
Amendment No 19 even suggests that the unit for the coordination of fraud prevention be given a special role and that Mrs Gradin as Commissioner responsible for fraud is appointed mediator .
I am at liberty to say that Mrs Gradin is , of course , very honoured by the proposal but she also takes the view that it is barely realistic at this stage in the discussions .
However , Mr Bontempi 's suggestion raises a real issue .
Member States are increasingly creating their own national specialized bodies to deal with fraud against the Community budget .
Those units like the Guardia di Finanzia , the OECD , the DEFO in Belgium and the recently created ICLAF in France would need a privileged interlocutor at the level of the Commission .
It might be useful to reflect on how to provide a legal framework for swift and efficient contacts between anti-fraud units in Member States and the anti-fraud unit in the Commission .
In practice work is carried out smoothly and efficiently on an informal basis but a formal framework might be called for .
I can promise the House that the Commission will reflect on this issue in a very constructive manner .
It is clear that the rapporteurs deserve much credit for their reports .
The Commission really needs support in this most difficult and complex area of judicial and penal cooperation .
We believe that both Mr Bontempi 's and Mrs Theato 's reports have provided exactly the kind of well-informed support that the Commission is looking for .
I thank them and I also thank the House for its great patience over what has inevitably been a very lengthy Commission statement .
Mr President , I want to offer warm thanks to the Commissioner for his very clear statement .
The question that was raised several times in relation to my report , first by me and then by other speakers , concerned penalties in the event that the Commission officials were refused access to premises and information during inspections .
It is not possible to incorporate penalties in this draft regulation ; nor do we want to delay it .
If I understood you correctly you made it very clear that the Commission will be dealing with this very soon in the framework of SEM and incorporate penal measures .
I assume I understood you correctly ; for that affects the amendment I tabled on this draft regulation .
It would be most helpful if you would confirm that .
I can confirm that the honourable Member has correctly interpreted the motives and indeed the objectives of the Commission .
Our view is that a very comprehensive and stringent view should be taken of affairs and , within the powers available to us , we want to try to ensure that we reach the same objectives as those desired by the honourable Member .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Marine equipment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0294 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on marine equipment ( C4-0370 / 96-95 / 0163 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Kaklamanis ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the subject we are to debate is marine equipment , a subject related to safety at sea , the safety of ships and those who work on them .
A subject that is extremely topical and , I would say , sometimes acute - and I refer to recent shipwrecks which we have discussed at length , both on the committee and in Plenary .
Related decisions exist and have been taken in the context of the International Maritime Organization , but these proved insufficient .
So the aims of the directive we are debating , are : 1 ) to improve safety standards on ships sailing to and from European Union ports ; 2 ) to promote the integration of the internal market by ensuring that the equipment on those ships will be of uniformly high quality ; and 3 ) to see that the equipment in question does not affect the competitiveness of European shipping .
Finally , by renewing and improving marine equipment we also aspire to protect the marine environment .
These are ambitious aims . The final text we arrived at is not exactly what everyone on the Transport Committee would have wanted , but this text certainly covers an existing gap and certainly improves the current situation considerably .
The final text is the product of a compromise with the Council and the Commission .
Through the person of the Commissioner here present , Mr Kinnock , a Commissioner who knows both how to debate and how to listen , I want to thank the relevant service of the Commission for its cooperation .
However , there were three points in the final text which our committee , the Committee on Transport , refused to accept because they infringe , or if you will , they go against firm principles held by Parliament .
On those three points we have come back with rapporteur 's amendments , ones of my own , which were approved unanimously by all of us on the Transport Committee . I would be happy if the same thing happened tomorrow in Plenary as well .
Mr President , I do not think details of this report need be gone into now , both because they are very technical and because , from what I see , the colleagues who do me the honour to be present this evening at this time , know them perhaps better than I , your rapporteur , do myself , since they are older and more experienced members of the European Parliament 's Committee on Transport .
I hope this report , with the Commission 's help - and we expect quite a lot from Commissioner Kinnock - will make some small contribution towards improving safety at sea , the safety of ships and those who work on them , so that we may not have such frequent cause to mourn the shipwrecks we all know about as we did during the past year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , once again today , the House can take satisfaction from helping to encourage safety in European waters .
Parliament and the Committee on Transport feel a sense of pride and responsibility at having played their part in shaping many directives through their reports on marine safety .
And in this context , let me pay tribute to my colleague , who wrote the report on marine safety which has been a textbook for what we are dealing with today .
There is broad agreement in the Commission , the Council and Parliament that something reasonable will come from this directive .
Some Member States still find it hard to put safety at the top of the agenda , and are more concerned about the conditions for competition .
The situation is improving , however , not least because of the commitment shown by Parliament .
I do not need to mention the names of ships or to describe tragedies here in the House to make this directive easier to understand .
Firstly , we have a legal framework .
Secondly , we have the task of harmonization and laying down standards .
For many , these two things may be very technical , not political .
Thirdly , we need to elevate this task , so that international testing methods can be used .
Fourth , it is important that this directive should be applied internationally , and I am thinking here of the fact that European shipping extends worldwide .
It is therefore essential for the Commission to ensure - as I know it is doing , and I know that Commissioner Kinnock is working on this - that the IMO is also involved in future action .
And fifth , it is important that the directive should be able to incorporate or adopt - whatever word we use - further improvements , so that we are not isolated from developments .
In conclusion , I would say that , perhaps unlike the rapporteur , I welcome these amendments which have been voted through Parliament , and I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on his willingness to cooperate .
In my view , this is a good report .
I hope that it can also be implemented in the Member States , once it has been adopted .
We often find ourselves in the position that implementation lags behind .
And my final comment to the Commissioner is that I believe that anything which comes under the heading of marine safety or safety in transport should be something to which we hold the Council of Ministers in future .
Mr President , I wish to strongly welcome this proposal for a directive on marine equipment as another essential step forward in the improvement of maritime safety in the European Union .
We cannot overemphasize the need for such action .
Maritime disasters have caused a tragic loss of human lives in the last decade - over 12 , 000 lives have been lost at sea .
These many accidents have prompted us in the EU to prioritize safety at sea to try to prevent such a loss of human life again .
This proposal , therefore , is welcome because it is the first piece of Community legislation dealing with the effectiveness of marine equipment .
There is no doubt that safe and reliable equipment can be one of the key elements which prevents tragedies at sea in the future and I hope that this directive will do just that .
The directive tackles two key issues : one deals comprehensively with standards for all marine equipment and the second ensures that those bodies appointed to carry out testing can reach the high standards that we require .
I cite an example from my own constituency , because it highlights very well the pressing need for this directive .
I refer , of course , to the test earlier this year in Dover on the ro-ro vessel Stena Invicta , carried out by the UK maritime authorities .
The evacuation , which took place in perfect daylight conditions , failed because of the failure of vital pieces of marine equipment .
In particular , one in five of the life rafts on that ro-ro ferry failed to inflate .
That delayed the evacuation in perfect conditions for the people on board that ship by over 20 minutes .
Think what could have happened if that had been in rough seas at night .
That was an exercise .
Next time it could be for real .
I am , therefore , extremely pleased that this proposal , which covers , for example , inflatable life rafts , will enforce high standards throughout the European Union and I hope in the UK , in my constituency and in Dover .
Indeed , I would welcome the Commissioner 's views on that exercise in the context of this particular proposal , which clearly sets high standards for key pieces of equipment , such as inflatable life rafts .
We simply cannot tolerate any more a sloppy attitude to safety at sea by any Member State .
I wish to conclude by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Kaklamanis , whose report will greatly contribute to safety on all our ships .
Mr President , in addressing you , I would like to protest at the mis-spelling of the Greek notice displayed in this Chamber , which reads ' elliníka ' , and from this platform I ask you to act and get it corrected as soon as possible .
As you know , we have had mis-spellings in the Chamber in Brussels , and we must correct those here as well .
Turning to the subject , I must say that we agree with the common position Parliament is debating and will be voting on .
We also agree with the rapporteur 's comments and the amendments he is proposing , and I would like to ask the Commission and Commissioner Kinnock in person to do what he can , so that these few amendments , which I hope Parliament will approve tomorrow , will be accepted by the Commission as well and by the Council after it .
It is indeed a noteworthy common position , and the Commission , Parliament , and I must say the Council too have all played their part in arriving at this happy outcome .
I take this opportunity to remind us all that safety at sea is an issue that cannot be invoked to serve any other aim .
Safety at sea is an aim in itself , I would say it justifies itself , and it is the duty of us all to ensure the safety of shipping to save both lives and property .
But I must stress that the safety of shipping must not be used as an excuse for the enaction of measures unrelated to it .
To explain these generalizations , I must tell you that in your statement on ' maritime strategy ' , the need to ensure safety at sea , which nobody questions , is used to promote solutions related , for example , to shipping registers .
There is no connection other than in the Commission 's documents , between provisions - and indeed ones governed by directives - relating to national registers of shipping , and issues concerning the safety of shipping .
But this , of course , is not the time to talk about that .
I hope that next week and in the weeks that follow it we will have the opportunity to discuss this really contradictory text , I would say - please excuse the expression , Commissioner - which of course I hope can be improved after debate and dialogue .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , really I can only confirm that , which is why I am also cutting my speech by half .
So many right and good things have been said that it would be wrong to repeat them all over again .
I believe the main point is not just that all the Member States of the EU should sign the IMO rules but that they are also applied uniformly .
That is the decisive point if we want to protect the people , to protect the environment and also - and I believe my Danish colleague agrees with me - to create equal conditions of competition in every part of the Community .
It also meets the wishes of the industry .
That is why the report by Mr Kaklamanis is a very good report and that is why I will confine myself to Amendment No 1 .
In my humble opinion the justification for amendment is sightly unfortunate .
The reason we ask for the sentence ' This paragraph shall not apply to radiocommunications equipment ' to be deleted is not in order to exclude the testing of radiocommunications equipment from this directive .
It is quite clear from the annexes that the radio equipment must also undergo the necessary tests .
Much more to the point is that we do not want to have several procedures side by side but a uniform , sensible testing procedure which will help us avoid bureaucracy and therefore provide a fair procedure both for the equipment makers and for the shipping companies .
Regardless of its justification I therefore hope that you , Commissioner , will approve Amendment No 1 for the right reasons , of which I am sure you are aware .
I do not want the same to happen as unfortunately occurred in the case of overland transport services when we worked very hard in this House to draft sensible amendments that the Commission could support and then the Commission did not put a single one of our amendments before the Council .
Oh yes , it did put one , but a minor one .
So I hope , Commissioner , that you will approve the three modest but clear amendments and will also support them before the Council .
Amendment No 1 in particular is designed to simplify , to standardize and to help create sensible framework conditions for the equipment makers and the shipping companies .
I wonder whether you will follow the House this time .
I am pleased to note the support of the Committee on Transport and Tourism for the common position on the Marine Equipment Directive .
I agree that it is a clear improvement on the original proposal .
I am also pleased to be able to give my support to Amendment No 1 because it is the words that are put forward in the amendment and not necessarily the justification that the law has to take account of .
Therefore we support and accept the amendment as tabled by the committee since it will avoid the unnecessary application of overlapping provisions to the same piece of radiocommunications equipment , without in any way jeopardizing safety performance .
I regret to say , however , that the other two amendments are not acceptable largely for procedural reasons which I do not think the House , on reflection , will find objectionable .
I said at first reading that the principle of independence for notified bodies would be set out in Annex C of the measure . That is what has happened in the common position which states that a notified body must be independent and not be controlled by manufacturers or by suppliers .

Amendment No 2 merely repeats that call and it is , in our view , an unnecessary duplication of the provisions already laid down in Annex C. I therefore invite the House to look again at Amendment No 2 and Annex C and see for itself that its concerns have been fully taken into account .
As for Amendment No 3 , I am changing the type of committee referred to in the common position .
I have just to remind the House that all the Community measures on maritime safety have established regulatory committees .
The common position is merely continuing a standard practice which I hope the House will also support .
I conclude by thanking the House for supporting this new measure which represents yet another important step towards greater maritime safety .
As Mr Watts said in his contribution , every safety loophole that is closed by the legislation produced by this House and the Community is real progress in safeguarding human life and , indeed , the environment .
Again , I am very grateful to the Committee on Transport and Tourism and particularly to the rapporteur , Mr Kaklamanis , who has done a characteristically thorough job yet again .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Roadworthiness tests
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0295 / 96 ) on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their trailers ( C4-0369 / 96-95 / 0226 ( SYN ) ) ( rapporteur : Mr Belleré ) .
Mr President , Commissioner Kinnock , we are now into the final straight with this seventh directive .
The first was in 1977 , the others amended the original text to make road travel safer for persons and vehicles , understood in the broad sense .
The logic of this report may seem rather stringent , but that is not the case , Mr Kinnock .
This is what has to be done if we want to achieve safety in harmonizing the sector across the various Member States .
We do not have to make room for the lobby and so-called political agreements .
So why exclude fire brigade and police vehicles from the scope of the directive in Article 4 ( 1 ) ?
Why exclude vehicles of historic interest manufactured before 1 January 1960 in Article 4 ( 2 ) ?
Why put off the date of compliance with the directive in Article 11 ( 1 ) ? I would like to see it already applied in 1997 , if only in the second six months .
Why remove the proposal to ban vehicles from the road it they do not meet the minimum requirements for braking systems and exhaust gases , by demanding deterrent legislation from the individual Member States .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am retabling all the amendments adopted at first reading . They have the consensus of the house , except for the one on granting the Member States the power to carry out more rigorous and frequent controls not restricted to braking systems alone .
And as regards the tests to be carried out by the various Member States on historic vehicles built before 1 January 1960 , the speed-limitation devices must be checked to ensure that the maximum values recorded cannot be exceeded .
I am retabling Amendment No 5 on extending roadworthiness tests to two- and three-wheeled vehicles .
I am also retabling the reduction to three years and one year in the intervals between tests on vehicles weighing less than 3.5 tonnes which are used for the carriage of goods , the extension of category 5 to vehicles used for the public transport of passengers - Amendment No 8 - and cold-start tests on carbon monoxide emissions for petrol vehicles .
These tests must also be carried out at authorized centres appointed for the purpose by the various Member States and subject to spot checks .
As you see , Commissioner , we are not far apart , and I count on the support of the house tomorrow so that we can consider all the problems in a more general light .
Then , as I said at the start , we will see what form and substance we should finally give the seventh directive .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying to Commissioner Kinnock - because I know his heart is always close to South Wales and I come from a mining village myself - that this week is the thirtieth anniversary of the Aberfan disaster and we always remember Aberfan .
I hope he will pass that on to the people of South Wales .
I thank the rapporteur for his hard work on this directive but , I have to say , that on closer examination my group has some reservations regarding the amendments submitted by the rapporteur and subsequently voted on by the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The subject of roadworthiness tests is a complex one and no one would deny that there is a need to harmonize such tests throughout the Union so that we can be assured that a vehicle deemed safe in one member country will be accepted as such in another .
Certainly , at the moment , standards vary , causing a great deal of concern with regard to road safety .
However , my group believes that in some instances the rapporteur has overcompensated for this and extended the scope of the directive far beyond what was intended or , indeed , desired .
To illustrate the point , I turn to recital 26 in Amendment No 3 which would delete the possibility for Member States to exclude from the directive motor vehicles of an historic nature - veteran vehicles , if you like .
My group believes that such an act will not only reduce the possibilities to maintain such historic vehicles but does not recognize the loving care owners of such vehicles lavish on them .
In my view these vehicles are probably amongst the best maintained on our roads .
Indeed , as someone who lovingly follows the maintenance of steam locomotives , I know that they are the best maintained .
The same goes for fire appliances , which the rapporteur believes should be included in the directive .
I notice in his report he talks about police vehicles as well but there is no mention there of police vehicles , just fire appliances , which is included in his Amendment No 6 .
It is my experience that these vehicles are very well maintained as a matter of course .
Anyway , being so few in number , they do not pose a road safety threat .
Other areas where my group has problems are Article 11 and Amendment No 7 , which seeks to shorten the delay for implementation to six months .
This is simply just not practically possible .
Amendment No 5 asks for a feasibility study on extending the scope of the directive to two and three-wheeled vehicles .
The Commission , as I understand it , has all the information it requires on this matter .
So why another study ?
Amendments Nos 1 and 10 seek to amend the ways of testing the carbon monoxide content of exhaust from a cold start .
Whilst my group can support such a move on modern vehicles , to do so with a blanket coverage would not only be unfair on owners of older vehicles but also discriminatory .
Also we are not so sure that cold-start testing was not included in this directive anyway .
Three amendments where we can agree with the rapporteur are Nos 2 , 8 and 9 - some of which seek to tighten up the regulations to include vehicles greater than three-and-a half tonnes that carry passengers , to increase the frequency of testing and to ensure the removal from our roads of vehicles that do not conform to the roadworthiness regulations .
Whilst my group appreciates the difficulties this may cause in the Council of Ministers , we cannot accept the fact that vehicles deemed as unroadworthy , having failed the approved test , should be given any leeway or time to put them back on the road .
In conclusion , my group will support just three amendments and believes that , on the whole , the Commission 's directive is one that we can support .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after we all survived the first reading in the Committee on Transport and in plenary I must say quite frankly that I am somewhat surprised now at second reading to see the Socialists suddenly diverging from our common road .
But at this point we should no longer be surprised at anything relating to the Socialists ' politics .
What we are discussing today is a major component of our single market legislation .
It concerns the approximation not just of type approval but also of technical tests and integrating them on a European basis .
Let me base myself partly on the amendments .
The crucial one is of course Amendment No 8 , the reduction of the frequency of tests to three years after the date of first use , and thereafter every year for the listed categories of vehicle , which now also include vehicles for the public transport of passengers .
I think that is a decisive point in relation to transport safety questions , which are of course more serious in the case of older vehicles than newly approved ones .
In the case of Amendment No 10 , which goes back to my initiative - it concerns the cold start of vehicles - I would like to point out that the Socialists in particular call for such things on every conceivable and inconceivable occasion and keep demanding environmental standards which are no longer feasible for the industry .
At present we are discussing the motor-oil programme in the Committee on the Environment .
I am drafting the opinion for the Committee on Research .
Here we have something which is already being tested in the United States , for example , and is included in the measurement cycle .
And suddenly we are told : no , we cannot do that , it would be outrageous because it was never included in the directive .
Even if we may not manage to get this through here because the Socialists do not support us , we will certainly manage to have it included in the motor-oil programme or in later Euro-3 / Euro-4 legislation .
I wonder how enthusiastically the PSE Group will then approve it .
We will reject Amendment No 6 - and here we agree with Mr Brian Simpson .
I myself am a local politician , we ourselves have a municipal fire-brigade , and they really are the most beautiful vehicles you could ever see .
They are always perfectly polished , perfectly maintained , always filled up , the oil level is checked at least once a day and these vehicles really are in top condition ; here the exception is definitely justified .
I also regard it as acceptable for the old-timers to be granted special protection .
That is why we will reject Amendment No 6 .
Amendment No 7 : I do believe it is possible to bring all this into force in the space of six months .
Here we really should deal a bit fairly with one another .
Similarly , in the case of Amendment No 9 I can only support the rapporteur .
We have to exert a little pressure here to ensure that certain vehicles are taken off the road if they do not satisfy certain genuinely important requirements for the safety of other transport users , for instance in relation to brakes .
Speed limitation devices are another question that still needs examining .
Today 50 % of the value of a vehicle is accounted for by electronics .
Those are questions we are not examining .
So something cannot be right here .
And surely a speed limitation device is the most harmless thing one could ask for .
We will still have much to do in this area of electronics in future in relation to the regular tests .
The EPP will also support Amendment No 5 concerning two- and three-wheeled vehicles .
After all we have been waiting for ages for the Commission 's words of wisdom on this .
To summarize , the EPP will support all the amendments except for Amendment No 6 .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council Directive on roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their trailers was submitted for two principal reasons .
Firstly , the inclusion of checks on speedlimitation devices installed in lorries and coaches in roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their trailers .
Secondly , the consolidation of the 1977 Directive which has been amended on numerous occasions since its introduction .
In the common position the Council adopted a number of amendments tabled by the European Parliament , but at this second reading the Committee on Transport and Tourism proposes a number of further amendments to the common position .
We cannot , however , support all of these .
First of all there is the amendment which allows the Member States to apply stricter tests in other areas than brake systems .
Such demands are not yet laid down in the type approval for entrance to the market and would therefore distort competition .
The same applies to the emission standards for cold starting and the determination of the carbon monoxide content .
Also , unlike the Committee on Transport and Tourism , we would like to leave the decision on whether or not to test vehicles of historic interest to the Member States .
We will be supporting most of the other amendments , but generally endorse the Commission 's proposal .
Mr President , in the second reading , Parliament is asked to give an opinion on a proposal for a Common Council directive relating to roadworthiness tests for motor vehicles and their trailers .
The report on the subject undoubtedly contains mainly positive elements that should be accepted and supported .
I am very pleased that from now on each Member State will recognize the evidence provided by another Member State that a motor vehicle registered in the latter , together with its trailer or semi-trailer , has successfully passed a roadworthiness test that fully complies with the provisions of the present Directive .
I wonder however what Mr Ferber wished to imply .
We have opted for a reasonable policy and a feasible one - although this is another matter open to discussion .
I am sorry , however , that the common position has disregarded the obligation for Member States to conduct tests on vehicles prior to the first registration and to carry out regular checks on speed limitation devices .
This is indeed a double-edged weapon , for we must face facts and accept that the speed limiting device is an electromechanical instrument which can theoretically be falsified .
From this point of view , checking is essential .
However , such testing presupposes monitoring equipment which is highly efficient in detecting defective or inaccurate speed limiting devices or ones that have been tampered with .
We must therefore ask ourselves , and the Commissioner is right in this case , whether all Member States are ready to make it compulsory for their various testing services to be equipped with such test equipment , whose very efficiency makes it expensive .
The common position seems to me a step in the right direction .
Despite my concern to see legislative provisions come into force as quickly as possible , we believe that the six month deadline suggested by the rapporteur is too short for Member States to be capable of complying with the new provisions .
As for the frequency of tests , it seems to me that Amendment No 8 of the rapporteur , providing for testing three years after the date of first use and then annually , is the most reasonable .
I sincerely believe that the aim of the present Directive is a step in the right direction .
It clearly involves very strict testing .
It goes without saying that vehicles that do not pass will be taken out of circulation , as provided for by Amendment No 9 of the rapporteur .
In conclusion , may I say : thank you , Commissioner , you have done a good job .
Thank you , Mr Rapporteur , we have made progress , and that is something .
Mr President , could I welcome the Commissioner at this late hour to the Chamber .
I hope you will join me in my admiration of Mr Simpson 's new look .
I think he is looking remarkably smart and it is a pleasure to see the Socialists following the Conservative style of dress .
Could I just say I would like to support what Mr Simpson has said on the position , as he called it , of ' veteran ' cars .
I would crave the support of the rapporteur in an otherwise very good report in asking him to consider withdrawing Amendments Nos 3 and 6 .
The position of classic cars is that they have long enjoyed a special exemption under our own United Kingdom rules .
I am sure the Commissioner and the House will agree that the United Kingdom rules are exemplary .
For new cars , we already insist on a roadworthiness test after the initial three years , and thereafter annual tests .
I hope the Commission , and indeed the House , will support us in maintaining an exemption under the rule of subsidiarity to this directive for classic cars .
Otherwise I am sure my group will support this excellent report and I would like to congratulate the Commission on bringing forward this directive .
I hope also that the Commission will actually , when the directive has been adopted , ensure that its provisions are implemented in each and every Member State .
First of all I should like to respond to the very sober note struck by Mr Simpson with his reference to the anniversary of the Aberfan disaster 30 years ago .
That has particular resonance for me because I held a class every week in the village and I was there on the morning of the disaster and for some time after it - indeed , dealing with the families for several months after it .
I do not think anyone can ever forget the appalling horrors of that time or everything that has followed from it .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism and its rapporteur , Mr Belleré , have worked quickly to bring this proposal back to the House for a second reading .
I appreciate that very much since it will obviously facilitate the final adoption of this measure before the end of the year .
It is regrettable , therefore , that the haste with which the common position was reviewed appears to have resulted in some amendments that are not acceptable .
I refer in particular to three of the four amendments which were put forward previously , at first reading , and which , as I explained at the time , I simply could not support .
Amendment No 1 refers to the accelerated working method on official qualification .
That implies that the proposal is mere codification which is certainly not the case as significant new elements have been introduced into the basic text .
Consequently the cooperation procedure is fully applicable , illustrated by the fact that we are having this second reading debate .
Amendment No 5 asks the Commission to submit a report on the feasibility of extending road worthiness tests to two- and three-wheeled vehicles .
If I could remind the House , I already committed the Commission to drawing up rules for testing these vehicles and to base a proposal on the established testing scheme existing in several Member States .
Neither I , nor indeed Parliament , need a report .
On the contrary , what is needed is a proposal .
I intend to submit such a proposal for action to the Commission before the end of this year .
The third amendment , which falls into the repetitive category - Amendment No 10 - calls for a cold start test in relation to the carbon dioxide content of exhaust gases .
Again , as I said at first reading , if cold start standards do not feature in the type-approval requirements for a car , it is unjustifiable to impose a test which a car is simply not designed to be able to pass .
However I said that I would keep this under review and certainly if type-approval requirements are amended to include cold start standards then there may be scope to modify testing requirements accordingly .
I can understand the reasoning for the fourth amendment , which returns from first reading - Amendment No 8 - relating to testing frequency .
I fully accept the political statement that the House wants to make .
Indeed the Commission 's original proposal many years ago was itself based on three years for the first test , two years for the second and then annual tests .
I hope that one day all Member States will adopt such a standard , as some have already done , as Miss McIntosh reminded us .
In the meantime it is not practical to force the pace on those Member States which even now benefit from derogations from the present provisions .
Nevertheless , I repeat my undertaking from first reading to include an assessment of testing frequency in my report to Parliament scheduled for 1998 .
I now turn very quickly to the new amendments that have been proposed .
Amendments Nos 3 and 6 seek to remove the possibility for a Member State to exempt from tests fire appliances and certain vehicles of historic interest .
The recommendation for second reading seeks to justify these amendments by claiming that they reinstate the possibility for Member States to test such vehicles .
But the common position provides this possibility already .
Parliament 's amendment , however , would have the effect of imposing unnecessary tests on a relatively small number of vehicles which are generally maintained to very high standards already .
I cannot support Amendment No 2 which would extend the possibility of carrying out more stringent and more frequent tests to all standards and not just to braking systems as at present .
Our long-term goal is to harmonize testing standards at levels which guarantee safety , and this amendment is incompatible with that objective .
With regard to Amendment No 4 I have to advise the House that checks on speed limitation devices are problematical .
We recognize , therefore , the need to give the matter further study and when this is completed we will make proposals that address the issue .
I must also ask the House not to think that what is adopted here today can be implemented tomorrow .
The sixmonth deadline for the implementation of this directive , as suggested in Amendment No 7 , is clearly inadequate .
I therefore have to insist on one year simply for practical reasons .
I come , finally , to Amendment No 9 .
The House will be aware that I have a lot of sympathy for this amendment although I also recognize that if the spirit of the common position is respected then the objective behind it will , in any case , be attained .
However there is also a practical difficulty because there is as yet no common response to dealing with vehicles which do not meet test standards .
Some vehicles cannot leave the test centre ; some can be take away to be repaired ; while in other cases pass certificates may be issued on the undertaking that the defect is corrected before the next test .
That situation is clearly unsatisfactory and I intend to investigate it further and include it in my 1998 report .
Then we may be able to do something .
I very much regret that I am not able formally to accept any of the amendments that have been conscientiously tabled .
I hope the House will understand that I would not be properly playing my part in the legislative process if , on this occasion , I were to do otherwise .
I thank the committee , and particularly Mr Belleré , for the attention that they have given to this issue .
I am certain that my disagreement with them on this occasion will not prevent the pursuit of our joint objectives on many other occasions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
Fourth R & D framework programme
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0856 / 96-0-0172 / 96 ) by Mr Scapagnini , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , to the Council , on the increase in funding for the fourth framework programme of activities in the field of research , technological development and demonstration ( 1994-1998 ) ( RTD ) ( C4-0092 / 96-96 / 0034 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Minister , only two and a half years have gone by since the European Parliament and the Council completed the conciliation procedure on the fourth framework programme in April 1994 .
That occasion , as we know , marked the first true application of the conciliation procedure introduced by the Treaty of Maastricht .
In that act of co-decision of 26 April 1994 , the parties decided to review the financing of the framework programme , leaving open the possibility of a funding increase of ECU 700 million in view of the development of European financial perspectives .
This possibility of financing should have been adopted not later than 30 June of this year .
While Parliament completed first reading in June , the Council wanted to take its decision in the light of the outcome of the Ecofin Council of 14 October .
Furthermore there was no follow-up to the proposal put forward to Parliament 's Committee on Research to postpone the Research Council until after the Ecofin Council . The fact is the presidency has agreed to the research ministers becoming hostage to the finance ministers .
Up to now it does not look as if the presidency has taken any apparent action in the Research Council to overcome this impasse .
In fact the Research Council of 7 November asked the Commission to find additional financial resources in the area of the third budget line in the current financial perspectives .
And I am sorry to say that in addition to that , the presidency has refused to inform the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy of the results of the Research Council .
In my capacity as chairman , with the agreement of all the Members , I wrote to President Hänsch on that occasion asking him to raise the matter at the meeting of the trialogue planned for this week thus safeguarding the rights of Parliament vis-à-vis the Council .
I want to stress that , through the relevant committee , Parliament has demonstrated its openness to a compromise , as is now happening as regards consideration of the budget .
But the Council does not seem to be making much effort to find some form of dialogue .
To be successful , the co-decision procedure cannot be initiated only after the Council has adopted its common position .
The Irish presidency should examine the reasons holding it back from continuing the useful informal contacts initiated last July which seemed so promising .
But , Mr President , this is not just an interinstitutional question .
The basic problem is whether the Council of Ministers really wants to respect the commitment taken in April 1994 .
Without that financial commitment there can be no progress in important areas like aeronautics and space research , multimedia education and research into water and renewable sources of energy , and that is bound to have major repercussions on competitiveness , employment and environmental protection in the European Union .
In the debate on the 1997 budget - and the vote will be taken tomorrow - the European Parliament is considering the possibility of putting ECU 100 million into the reserves for research and technological development .
This amount , planned as an addition to the actual achievements of the fourth framework programme , should not exceed the limits of the financial perspectives .
To this end a formal decision is needed on the revision of the fourth framework programme .
It is also planned to include another ECU 100 million in the 1998 and 1999 budgets if the programme is extended to 1999 , which the European Parliament already voted for at first reading .
These considerations should be interpreted as a clear political signal from the European Parliament to the Research Council and the Commission , because they make it explicit that the supplementary funding for the fourth framework programme no longer depends on the revision of the financial forecasts .
We hope the Council can react to this signal and adopt its common position on the fourth framework programme in December .
But I want to invite the Irish presidency and in particular Minister Rabitte who demonstrated such readiness to respond positively to the offer of the European Parliament Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy in preparation for the common position , avoiding arguments about formalities .
Only through cooperation between our institutions will it be possible to achieve the common objective of European research , thus contributing to the creation of new jobs and encouraging investment .
Mr President , I thank Mr Scapagnini for raising this matter .
The Council re-examined the question of the Commission 's proposal for a financial supplement to the fourth research framework programme during its last session on 7 October 1996 but was unable to reach a common position .
You will recall that when submitting its proposal for a supplement to the research framework programme the Commission indicated in its explanatory memorandum that a substantial increase in the present ceiling of category 3 of the Financial Perspective would be necessary .
On 7 October last the Council attempted to identify a limited number of themes which might be implemented on a trial and experimental basis but in the absence of any indication from the Commission as to availability of funds within the existing financial ceiling , it was not possible to make progress on this basis .
In view of the above , the Council decided to await a possible identification by the Commission of additional resources within the ceiling of category 3 of the current Financial Perspective and to re-examine this question at its next session in December so as to finalize then its position in the light of the budgetary situation .
It should be recalled that the framework programme decisions of 1994 to which Mr Scapagnini refers committed the Council and the European Parliament to undertake a mid-term review of the framework programme , the amount of ECU 700m constituting a maximum target figure for a possible increase of the overall amount depending on the situation at that time regarding in particular the Financial Perspective .
Following the outcome of the Ecofin Council on 14 October 1996 it is now clear that there will be no revision of the Financial Perspective .
Therefore the original Commission proposal for a financial supplement of ECU 700m is no longer a realistic working hypothesis .
The Council has carried out its obligation to undertake such a mid-term review and has had to recognize that in the present budgetary circumstances it is not possible to envisage an increase of the framework programme on the lines proposed by the Commission .
The Council is now awaiting a clear position from the Commission in order to proceed further with this dossier .

On the matter Mr Scapagnini raises about my own willingness to maintain contact with Parliament and this matter being the subject of a letter he wrote to President Hänsch on 10 October , I wish to put on the record that I took part in direct contacts with Parliament and its Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy on 6 March , 26 June , 9 July , 25 September in Dublin and last week at the Socialist Group meeting .
In May I invited Mr Linkohr to Dublin but unfortunately he had to cancel at the very last minute .
On 7 October I had the Research Council meeting in Luxembourg followed by my presidency address as chairman of the Consumer Council to answer to the European Parliament , to the Consumer Committee on 8 October .
Despite that schedule , I offered to see the Energy , Research and Technology Committee again on the evening of 8 October but that was not suitable and I fully understand that .
At official level my colleagues and the Irish representation in Brussels have been in regular contact with your secretariat since December of last year and , as you know , my officials also met with MEPs of the Energy , Research and Technology Committee on 16 July here in Strasbourg and several times in Ireland .
So , I would argue that my record and that of the Irish presidency as a whole stands up to scrutiny .
There is really not any reluctance at all on our part to maintain contact with Parliament .
We have been very anxious to do that from the very beginning but unfortunately we have had to do it within the stresses and strains of the requirements of the presidency .
Mr President-in-Office , I have listened very carefully to your reply to the question put to you by the President of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
This reply did not disappoint me as I did not expect anything else from you .
Nevertheless , I am forced to say today that the Council has clearly proved itself lacking in dealing with the matter .
You yourself recalled the codecision of April 1994 in which I played a very active part , providing for a decision on your part before 30 June 1996 .
The European Parliament itself got on with things quite quickly , as did the Commission , by making a proposal according to a timetable enabling the Council to come to a decision before 30 June .
You have not done so .
You pleaded that it was necessary to wait for the decisions of the Florence Summit , and so on and so forth : in short , you have decided nothing .
In October , you had a ' Research ' Council .
We had several contacts with you , as you recalled just now , and at that time you made yourself readily available to us .
Parliament , like you , noted in these contacts that the absence of any revision of the Financial Perspective changed the problem and that it was now clearly necessary to find ways towards a financial compromise .
Everybody agrees about this , but nothing is happening .
On 7 October , there was still the same deficient report from the Council , which did not even manage , independently of the financial package , to reach agreement over some of the priorities .
Nothing at all came out of this Council .
Two Councils wasted , despite the fact that they have on the table the proposal from the Commission , together with the resolution and the report from Parliament .
Today , you say to us that we still have to wait .
But wait for what ?
I do not believe there is any indication in the text of the Treaty that the ' Ecofin ' Council is a super Council .
The Council is a single legal entity , and the Research Council is not legally of lower status than the ' Ecofin ' Council .
In reality , Mr President , the ' Research ' Council - and you certainly are not alone responsible for this , far from it , you undoubtedly bear less responsibility than others - the ' Research ' Council virtually went down on its knees before the ' Ecofin ' Council .
And it expects the ' Ecofin ' Council to say to it : ' Here you are , here are a few crumbs ' .
Today we are concerned with the budgetary procedure and a proposal will be voted on tomorrow morning by the European Parliament with a view to setting up a reserve of ECU 100 million for 1997 , with the intention of reaching ECU 300 million for refinancing the framework programme over the next three financial years .
You cannot say that the European Parliament has not shown imagination and willingness in the matter .
You are now waiting for the Commission to make you a counter-proposal and I believe in fact that an amended proposal from the Commission would now be welcome so that next December 's Council could finally be a Council that comes to a decision on a common position .
For it is in the codecision with the European Parliament , Mr President , that things have to be decided , not in the upper levels of the ' Ecofin ' Council , not in the Council of Finance Ministers .
It is at your level that this must be done .
It is at the level of your relations with the European Parliament , clarified by the Commission .
That is the Treaty , the whole Treaty and nothing but the Treaty .
And I say to you straight away that if , in December , the Council does not assume its responsibilities , we in the European Parliament will consider using any legal method of denouncing the shortcomings of the Council .
Mr President , officially this is an oral question to the Council .
But Commission representatives are present and I would like to go into the matter in a little more depth .
Let me repeat what we all know . On 26 April 1994 we had the result of co-decision between Parliament and the Council .
This was the first co-decision act since Maastricht and at the time the two institutions were quite happy with the procedure .
The Council and the European Parliament , and let me stress this fact , the Council too , were satisfied with the result at the time .
Barely two and a half years have passed since then , and although the refinancing should have occurred before 30 June , we find ourselves in a desert .
I cannot think of any other term to describe it .
The Research Council has not taken any decision , it is waiting for Ecofin .
Ecofin has asked the Commission to present a new proposal .
Well , I really do ask myself whether the European institutions have become unable to act .
What are we as Parliament doing ?
The Linkohr report concerns a Commission proposal that not only calls for an increase in funding but - and I say this plainly to the Commission - is also an entirely new version in terms of content .
After the Linkohr report I heard that the Commission had somehow or other produced a new proposal that was not , however , any different from the first one , although our colleague 's report was different from the Commission proposal .
So why are we actually here and why are we working ?
Second question .
In the light of our responsibility for the difficult financial situation in the Member States - even my own country , Germany , is not doing particularly well financially - we as Parliament are proposing a reserve of ECU 100 million with the prospect , as you have just heard , of maintaining this increase over the next two years too .
We have received no response to this proposal , which is a quite genuine proposal .
So I want to ask why not ?
During this period - and I am coming back to the Commission now - the Commission has been working away on a fifth framework programme , but why in fact ?
It evidently seems unable to bring the middle of this fourth framework programme to a conclusion .
What is actually happening with research now ?
What can the researchers expect now ?
What can the SMEs expect of this Commission now ?
In short , we are in a right mess , that is all I can say !
Mr President-in-Office , can you actually give us and the citizens of Europe a plausible answer to this question : why are you prepared to put so much money into maintaining the existing and in part obsolete structures and so little into the only thing that protects jobs , namely research and development and strengthening the innovative power of the SMEs ?
I regard that as in total contradiction to the declared aim of President Santer , which was to reduce unemployment in the European Union .
You can all see how difficult that is from the efforts the Member States are making at national level and from the fairly meagre results .
Here again I do not exclude my own country .
For the rest , I have to say this : as far as I remember , you were not there on 8 October , Mr President !
That you or one of your representatives went to the Socialist Group last week is not officially known to the European Parliament .
Mr President , you are a minister and enough of a politician to know that has something to do with party politics !
We still exist too !
Mr President , I am glad that Mr Scapagnini has asked this question .
My fellow committee members have already explained the technical details .
I do not therefore intend to repeat them .
However , I have the feeling that the Council is trying to hide something somehow .
They are shifting the blame onto others , such as the Ecofin council .
This feeling is hanging in the air the whole time .
The question is why they do not want to invest these resources .
What is behind it ?
It is a question of important research which is needed for the European Union and for the Member States .
It is research which is needed to renew energy sources and for the development of IT .
These are areas where we can be competitive and where jobs can be created .
It is therefore important to obtain access to these resources .
We in the Green Group naturally support this kind of research .
What we do not support , on the other hand , is research concerning fusion .
The Council has already cut resources for the Save II programme and the Thermie programme , which I truly regret .
It is therefore important that we obtain an answer from the research council and the Minister here today as to what is really going on .
Mr President , to what extent is the Council actually still able to decide - that is the crucial question here , which goes far beyond the subject of research .
That is not your problem , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , it is not Mr Rabitte 's problem ; the Council as a whole is unable to decide and , as previous speakers have made very clear , is putting off the decisions .
Here one has to ask what the European Union and the institutions look like from outside .
The Commission proposes task forces .
This gives the impression that suddenly something very special is happening at European level .
Large task forces are to be set up , the industry adapts itself !
And what is the end result ?
No decision , hot air ; in the end we are disgracing ourselves .
Today we still do not know whether we will get nothing , get 100 million or 200 million , get it perhaps in two years ' time ?
Neither we nor those who are watching us have any information on that .
But we also have a problem with the Commission .
For strictly speaking the Commission will have to revise its proposal , internally at least , in view of the presumably realistic background of about ECU 100 million for next year .
There is talk of a number of task forces , and this is also mentioned in the Council decision .
The European Parliament has also given its views on a number of task forces .
If we now only have 100 million available for the next year , that will have to be distributed .
And then the Commission will have to tell us where it puts the priorities .
So strictly speaking this is a problem we all three have and that could certainly be resolved in the appropriate trialogue , not through spontaneous action but in a proper , organized trialogue .
In my view that should be possible .
The problem is exacerbated by the fact that we have already begun to discuss the fifth framework research programme .
And this increase in the funding of the fourth framework research programme is a kind of qualifying round for the fifth framework research programme .
These task forces are a test of what we may find in the fifth framework research programme .
There are certainly some very interesting ideas in it .
But decisions also have to be taken .
Parliament made you an offer , the Committee on Budgets put this offer , and Parliament will take a decision on this too .
That is a good basis and a realistic one on which we could work .
I very much hope it will not take much longer until we really do achieve a basis of trust so that we are not just seen , from the outside too , to be producing hot air but really can also take decisions .
Mr President , I agree , firstly , that the question is an important one .
I also agree that the deadline of 30 June was not realized .
But Members would have to agree that since 30 June I have attempted to move this dossier forward .
It a complex one for reasons we all know , and we have made very considerable progress in bringing it back towards the top of the agenda .
That should not overshadow the importance of discussions getting under way on the fifth framework programme .
Therefore , it is important that it is brought to finality .
I would point to the conclusions of the last Council meeting of 7 October when it was agreed that the matter would be brought to a conclusion at the December Council .
Commissioner Kinnock 's remarks are very welcome in the situation in which we now find ourselves .
There is not much point in tracing the history of this particular dossier .
Everybody here in Parliament tonight is familiar with that .
It should be recorded that when the preliminary draft budget for 1997 was being presented , the Commission made it very clear that it did not include provisions for the ECU 700m to which Mr Scapagnini referred ; it did not include the Commission 's proposal for that increase in the financial envelope of the fourth framework programme .
That was subject to evaluation and an assessment in the circumstances that now prevail .
I have also heard what Members have said about Parliament 's proposal for a reserve of ECU 100m .
Again , I unequivocally welcome that .
One can begin to see a possible consensus taking shape , because it is not possible to ignore the budgetary process .
I accept - and have always accepted - that the budgetary process involves both Council and Parliament .
But it is going to have to work its way through ; the information that Mr Scapagnini has given us is helpful and I hope we can work on that .
Mr Linkohr raised the question of what this means in terms of the Council being able to arrive at a decision .
Perhaps they may have been some dilatoriness earlier but the Council is committed to finalize it at the December meeting .
In answer to the other question : there are certain priorities that probably have brought consensus within the Council on what the priority areas are .
The Commissioner referred to the question of vaccines and diseases and specifically the question of BSE ; aeronautics has featured prominently ; transport intermodality and multimedia are also possibilities .
I have a preference myself and I have said before to Parliament that in addition to dealing with questions like the BSE vaccines programme and aeronautics , landmines is something that ought to be considered .
There is a compelling morality here apart from any other considerations .
A strong case has been made by Members of Parliament to me as President-in-Office .
I would record again my own sincere commitment to advocate that position to my colleagues within the Council .
The budgetary process must take its course and therefore it would be very foolish to send out positive signals saying that this difficult dossier is being brought to a conclusion .
A the same time one can certainly see a chink of light at this stage .
I welcome the positive remarks from Parliament and from the Commissioner .
It will not be for want of any effort on the part of the presidency if we fail to bring this to a positive conclusion .
I am determined we should do so .
The issues involved are important ones and it is important that we resolve them so that we can deal with the major issue which is the shape and content of the fifth framework programme .
Mr President , I should like perhaps to clear up an ambiguity , because I understand the President-in-Office of the Council to be saying on the one hand that the Council could take a decision on 5 December but on the other that we must wait for the end of the budgetary procedure .
The budgetary procedure will not of course be completed on 5 December since we shall at that time be between the first and second reading .
Nevertheless , precisely because the budgetary procedure will not have been completed it is absolutely essential that the ' Research ' Council of 5 December takes up a clear position .
That would be the best way for Ministers of Research to help Parliament , faced with the other branch of the budgetary authority : the Council .
Mr President , two very short final questions .
One to the Commission which is also keeping us in suspense , without an answer . When is the Commission actually going to respond to the Council 's demand ?
And finally , one specific question to the Council in the light of the statement by the Minister : is the Council prepared to resume the informal meetings with the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy as soon as possible , and really make the dialogue work ?
I can reply briefly in response to the question : hopefully by midNovember .
I have no difficulty at all about such informal meetings being resumed with a view to resolving this entire matter as soon as possible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 10.00 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 p.m. )
Commemoration and official welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , may I ask you to remember , this morning , the tragic events which shattered the hearts of many Europeans exactly forty years ago this week .
The invasion of Hungary by the Warsaw Pact troops , under Soviet command , annihilated one of the most courageous and ambitious attempts to break the totalitarian system .
This brutal aggression not only precipitated millions of Europeans into tragedy and oppression , but also confirmed the division of Europe into two blocs .
In 1956 , Europe seemed condemned to remain a divided continent .
Democracy and tyranny stood face to face in the very heart of our continent .
This is why I am particularly glad to welcome , at today 's sitting , Mr Victor Orban and his colleagues from the Committee on European Affairs of the Hungarian National Assembly .
Friends from Hungary , you represent your Parliament and your country , a country recently welcomed into the family of democratic nations .
Since 1989 , the establishment of a new and larger European Union has become the challenge of our generation .
This Union will be built on the basis of the achievements of the founding fathers , without calling all their work into question .
The events in Hungary in 1956 coincided with the initiatives of Jean Monnet and others , aimed at giving new impetus to the process of European integration .
For several decades , no one dared dream that Europe could really regain unity without another world war .
The events of 1989 and the peaceful revolutions which took place in Hungary and in other countries have enabled us to realize this dream , without war .
All our work towards cooperation with our sister countries in Central and Eastern Europe is therefore not simply another element in Parliament 's heavy work programme .
It is a fundamental responsibility for us all . To take the historic opportunity we have before us to achieve a peaceful , prosperous and democratic Europe .
My friends , may I ask you kindly to observe one minute 's silence in memory of the martyrs of the Hungarian Revolution in 1956 .
Thank you .
( The House rose and observed one minute 's silence )
( Applause )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , may I begin by saying how much I appreciate what you have said .
My comment relates to Point 16 of yesterday 's Minutes : food additives , the Riis-Jørgensen report and the vote on it .
The vote was very close , an important amendment was just two votes short of a qualified majority , or so it seemed .
Meantime I see from Page 21 of the Minutes that seven Members claim they had intended to vote in favour of the amendment in question but did not do so due to a misunderstanding over the way in which the amendment was shown on our own electronic display .
So there is now some confusion as to whether or not Parliament adopted the amendment in question by the required majority .
My feeling is that it did .
Several hundred jobs in Europe are at stake over this , Madam President .
So we must proceed carefully for the sake of the workers concerned .
I would thus ask you to put this matter to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , for a ruling on whether or not Parliament 's adoption of this amendment is legally valid .
It is a difficult matter .
Hundreds of jobs are at stake , we must proceed with the utmost caution here and I urge you yourself to help us .
Ladies and gentlemen , obviously , as you well know , there is absolutely no question of re-voting .
Let us be perfectly clear about this . You can intervene as much as you wish by making points of order , but that would not change anything as the vote has taken place and you cannot go back on a vote that has already been cast .
On the other hand , Mr de Vries has made a request .
I take note of this and state that it will be put to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , as he desires .
Madam President , with the distinguished guest that we have , it is appropriate that I rise on page 18 of yesterday 's Minutes which records that this Parliament adopted a very strong resolution on the situation in Burma .
Members may not yet know that the BBC and others have just reported that Aung San Suu Kyi has just been placed under house arrest again and other democrats have been arrested .
This may well trigger US sanctions against Burma .
I know that you and President Hänsch both have a very strong personal commitment to freedom and democracy in Burma , as does this whole House .
Will you , therefore , today make urgent representations to the Commission and especially the Council of Ministers that the time for talking has clearly ended with Burma .
Now is the time for action , including effective economic sanctions .
I take note of your statement very willingly , even if it does not really concern the Minutes .
Madam President , I rise on the same point that Mr De Vries raised .
Can I make clear the very point that we were trying to make yesterday .
There is no question of asking for the vote to be taken again , but clearly we wish this House to be sovereign and the clear will of this House to be carried forward .
If the clear will of the House is that there was a sufficient majority , then that decision would need to be enacted .
I would hope that until such time as the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities has been able to pronounce , after all due consideration , the decision that was reported yesterday will be held in abeyance .
If the Rules Committee decides that , in the circumstances , the will of the House was clearly to approve the amendment by a sufficient majority , that should then be proclaimed as the decision and we should not have to come back and vote again on the item .
Mr Barton , my answer to you is the same as to Mr Gilles de Vries .
That is how it will be done .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Madam President , may I congratulate you on your decision which , moreover , is the same as that adopted with regard to the calendar .
I would like to draw attention to Rule 5 of the Rules of Procedure .
In actual fact , several articles and several audiovisual transmissions have called into question the system of allowances for Members of the European Parliament .
Yesterday morning and this morning too , France 2 , the national television channel , presented reports on our system of allowances .
These incidents are seriously damaging to our Parliament 's image .
Naturally it is not the colleagues mentioned who are called into question , but the whole system ; a system which is not acceptable to public opinion .
This is why I request , pursuant to Rule 5 , that you refer the matter to the Bureau , which is responsible for regulating the payment of expenses and allowances to Members , for three reasons .
Firstly , the attendance list must really be an attendance list and not a transit list .
Unfortunately , a recent decision by the Bureau highlights the transit list nature of this list .
Secondly , I would like to ask the Bureau that intermediate trips be paid on the basis of not only the ticket , but also the embarkation card .
Thirdly , the mileage allowance must actually correspond to the journeys made .
I feel that there is not a moment to be lost and that the Bureau should take this matter in hand immediately , as it is very important for our Parliament 's image .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , as you know well , my answer is that the Bureau has not waited for you in order to study these problems for which reasonable solutions must be found .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , we have the honour of welcoming , in the official gallery , His Holiness the Dalai Lama , the 1989 Nobel peace prize winner .
( Sustained applause ) Ladies and gentlemen , those of you who had the opportunity of hearing His Holiness at the joint meeting of several of Parliament 's committees yesterday afternoon , certainly appreciated how interesting it was to hear what this important religious and spiritual leader had to say concerning human rights in Tibet and the worrying situation of the Tibetan people .
May I express my warmest greetings to you .
Votes
Madam President , I sent the President a letter yesterday jointly with Mr Kristoffersen , concerning an amendment , Amendment No 635 to budget heading 1872 .
The object of that amendment is to halt translation of the verbatim report of proceedings into the eleven languages .
In my view , Madam President , this decision infringes both the letter and the spirit of Rule 134 of our Rules of Procedure and I know that not only Mr Kristoffersen and myself but a whole lot of other people too are concerned about it .
We fear that if this amendment is adopted we shall be unable in future to enforce Rule 134 .
This , Madam President , is why I asked in my letter for the admissibility of this amendment to be checked .
Perhaps that has been done in the meantime or perhaps you can give me a ruling on it now , but I think it is too important just to let it pass .
Mrs Thyssen , we have examined the matter .
The amendment is admissible , but a separate vote will be taken .
Thus , your comments will be taken into account .
Madam President , I would like to fulfil certain obligations at the beginning of this debate , because most of our colleagues have left the Chamber before the end of the debate .
I would therefore like to give warm thanks to the sessional services and to the secretariat of the Committee on Budgets for the fact that everything we will be voting on in a moment was promptly translated into all the languages .
You know how short the deadline was , between Monday evening and now .
I think this deserves praise and that the House should applaud those concerned .
Thank you very much !
As you see , Mr Samland , the House unanimously endorses these thanks .
I feel that we will be able to vote in the best conditions .
Madam President , I wish to point out that when we vote on the structural fund aspects of the greening block , in fact , our amendments and the comments on this line contravene the structural fund regulations .
I would like the services and , indeed , Parliament to look at this because environmental certification of all projects is not possible , is not in line with the regulations and contravenes the memorandum of understanding between Parliament and the Commission as well as being , of course , against the principle of subsidiarity .
I would like the services to correct that before the second reading .
Madam President , I am slightly surprised by this comment by Mrs McCarthy because last year we voted a ' greening of the budget ' amendment which was exactly the same .
It is , therefore , a bit surprising that this should come up at this particular moment .
We should always look at things in a reasonable way but we should not now disrupt the vote on this particular matter .
I just want to make it clear that there really is a misunderstanding here .
It is a question of wording .
I have already discussed this with the author , Mr Florenz of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Affairs .
It was simply a question of the wording of the text .
There is in fact no dispute either with the Committee on Regional Policy or with any other committee on the substance of the matter .
I think we can resolve this question by making technical adjustments following the vote .
Draft amendments and proposed modification relating to the appropriations in Section III ( Commission ) of the draft general budget of the European Communities for 1997
Draft amendments to Sections I , II , IV , V and VI of the draft general budget of the European Communities for the financial year 1997 relating to the European Parliament , the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions
Regarding block 2 :
Madam President , before we come to the vote on the next block , i.e. , agricultural expenditure , I would like to make it quite clear once again on behalf of my group that we are not entirely satisfied with the legal interpretation in regard to the decision on the ad hoc procedure .
In our view , even when the ad hoc procedure has been completed , amendments relating to changes to the comments and to non-compulsory expenditure in the field of agriculture can still be tabled under the ad hoc procedure .
I would like to see this legal interpretation acknowledged and clarified before the second reading .
Madam President , under Rule 9 , Annex I , Article 1 , I would like , as last year , to declare an interest in Parliament 's budget in relation to the pension fund of which I am a member .
I will , therefore , not be voting on this resolution .
Very good , Mr Ford , we take note of your statement .
Madam President , I could probably convince Mr Ford to vote in favour of the resolution if our amendment , which particularly draws attention to the problem of the pension fund , was adopted .
Mr de Vries , we can never condemn purity .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )

Mr President , I wish to withdraw Amendment No 1 to Article 9a - the only amendment - because the Commission made a statement during the debate yesterday evening that satisfied us .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , the European Parliament has not taken the opportunity offered by the Council , in its draft budget , to make economies and to vote for the first time for a budget which is not larger than for the previous year .
Firstly , it has adopted non-priority budget headings with no legal basis - I am thinking of the appropriations made to information and in particular to the Euro - or contrary to the principle of subsidiarity - I am thinking of the heading concerning tourism .
It did not hesitate to call into question the interinstitutional agreement of 1993 , doing so unilaterally .
It did not hesitate to emphasize the famous reserve , which is contrary to budget orthodoxy .
Finally our Parliament , following its Committee on Budgets on this matter , did not hesitate to envisage that the ceiling of financial prospects would be exceeded .
Even though we are now at 1.16 % , instead of the 1.24 % opened by the Edinburgh agreement , we want to go further in the future .
While so doing , Parliament rejected an amendment concerning reimbursement of expenses to Members of Parliament which , although it received 85 votes , went in the direction of the economies desired by citizens of the Member States of the European Union .
It is a missed opportunity , regretted by our group .
Mr President , I wish to make an oral explanation of vote in order to formally protest against Amendment No 1005 to the budget , which has just been voted and which provides for the creation of a new budget item entitled ' Contributions to European political parties ' - obviously to be understood as financial .
This heading provides for a Community public financing of certain parties , which are called European .
This initiative appears totally inopportune in a context of budget austerity .
Even if in 1997 no credit would yet be paid , the definitive adoption of this principle would be serious for the future as it would generate expenses not quantified in advance .
Moreover , political parties in several countries - including France - already receive public financing for all their activities , both national and European .
One cannot see why , in this context of austerity , they should receive public money from several different sources for these activities .
Finally , may I remind you that the concept of the European political party does not exist in the Treaty , which , in Article 138a , only mentions the action of political parties at European level , which is entirely different .
I regret that Parliament is failing to make the Council face up to its responsibilities relating to the financing of transEuropean networks .
Certain governments are refusing to honour the commitments undertaken in Essen , and are trying to make Parliament take the responsibility .
It is true that to accept the challenge would have had the effect of endangering the interinstitutional agreement and starting a budget dispute .
But the inter-institutional agreement , if it entails discipline on the part of Parliament in the exercise of its budget powers , involves in return the commitment of the Council to finance the policies formulated by mutual agreement .
In refusing to execute its part of the contract , the Council is in breach of the obligation of cooperation laid down by Article 5 of the Treaty , and obliges Parliament to fall back on Article 203 of the Treaty , which it is perfectly entitled to do .
In refusing to resist pressure from the Council , and in obliging Parliament to adopt a submissive stance , the right wing groups are preventing Parliament from assuming its budget responsibilities .
I voted for the 1997 budget at the first reading with mixed feelings , because there is no viable alternative .
Apart from the Council 's draft , and that is totally unacceptable primarily on account of the social policy .
Nevertheless I very much deplore the fact that the European Parliament , as an arm of the budgetary authority , has not fully exercised its budgetary powers to take more and concrete measures on employment .
The responsibility for this lies wholly with the EPP headed by Wilfried Martens ' Christian Democrats .
Their words on employment have once again been shown to be empty slogans , which meant that the majority needed for real action could not be achieved .
The signal given by setting aside ECU 300 million for TENs and research is not enough .
In this way the European Parliament is making itself culpable just like the Council in that we , like successive European Councils , consistently trumpet the creation of jobs as a priority but are not then prepared to carry out our promises when it comes to finding the money .
Brinkhorst report
Mr President , thank your for having given me the floor for this explanation of vote in which I wish to explain one or two votes and the position of the group to which I belong .
The first vote concerns the MEDA programme .
My group voted for the amendment adopted by a large majority by the House to place the funds earmarked for Turkey within the framework of the MEDA programme , in accordance with the principle that all projects should be scrutinized by the European Parliament before they are adopted .
We pointed out that this ambitious and certainly new procedure was helping make this House a kind of committee , one of those committees we are fighting against , but we suspended our judgment until second reading .
Given the nature of this vote , I intended to reserve the position of my group until second reading .
It is , however , a matter of very great regret to me that the rapporteur did not intend agreeing to my amendment on ECHO , approved by a slight majority .
As at 30 September , ECHO has a spending capacity , a rate of spending implementation of 120 % .
I learnt that there was no hope of greater attention being paid to those funds , including in terms of the rate of implementation .
I wish therefore to have it entered in the minutes that on Monday evening , in the Committee on Budgets , we decided to allocate ECU 100 million among a number of budget lines , the implementation rates of which I shall quote briefly : the elderly , 26 % ; refugees , 30 % ; South Africa , 30 % ; women and development , 22 % ; rehabilitation 22 % ; KEDO 0 % .
That is the response we got from Parliament .
Mr President , I think this budget once again demonstrates what we saw last year too , namely that international solidarity is being abandoned in favour of the implementation of a new Community foreign policy .
Year after year we see major development policy budget headings , cooperation with the NGOs , support for the peace process in southern Africa , new budget headings for the clearing of mines , being cut again and again .
If I am right in my view , we are facing a real cut of 3 % in development resources .
I think that is unacceptable .
New famines are already looming .
We are facing a situation of new wars breaking out , which is why it would be important to have a preventive foreign policy that enabled us to pursue a north / south policy in which in future we would no longer have to patch things up whenever we run out of money .
I would therefore call on Members to consider how we want to frame this policy in the next financial year , whether we want to close up the borders of these fifteen Member States , the borders of this Community even more tightly , whether we want to pursue a military policy that encourages this foreign policy based on the idea of further future conflict , or whether we want to pursue a preventive , civil foreign policy .
I believe that development policy can constitute a point of departure here .
A development policy aimed at independent regional development offers the chance and the condition for peaceful coexistence within the south / north framework , which is why we must not cut these scarce resources even more in future .
By doing so we would be giving the wrong signals in respect of international solidarity in a period of market globalization and deregulation , and then we should not be surprised to see even more wars and famines in future .
Mr President , I am extremely concerned about the anti-farmer vote expressed at this Assembly .
In refusing all the amendments of block 2 , in other words the measures for promoting the quality of meat , the actions for promoting beef and the very modest 77m for bee-keepers , the House demonstrated not only budgetary Calvinism and rapaciousness , but also distrust of the farming world .
Moreover , this confirms a position taken two years ago .
Our farming budget is below the bar of 50 % .
However , I should say that , while we are so doing - Mrs Theato is perhaps not there - we are granting each year ECU 1.9 billion customs benefits to the multinationals Chiquita , Dole and Castle in the banana sector .
There is at least one area in which the House has shown insight : it refused ECU 4m of aid for the production of hemp , doubtlessly so that a rope would not be braided to hang us !
Mr President , we have voted for budget heading B3-4100 on family aid involving ECU 2.5m , but it must be said that this is manifestly inadequate and a disgrace to the House , which is making a wrong decision in not offering the necessary support to the development of the family .
In fact , the fundamental problem of our societies , of our nations , is an age pyramid which is becoming increasingly top heavy .
In reality , we now have a clearly inadequate base of young people , a very large platform of elderly classes and , necessarily , we are moving in the direction of a logic which is shifting from voluntary termination of pregnancy to voluntary termination of old age .
That , dramatically , is what is in store for our societies if we cannot reverse the trend of family breakdown !
Mr President , like last year I am forced yet again to vote against the report drawn up by our Committee on Budgets .
I am voting against in protest at the way in which a majority of the Committee on Budgets has dealt with the Committee on Agriculture 's amendments to improve the report , which were not even put to the vote here .
The Committee on Agriculture voted by a large majority to accept the amendment I tabled as rapporteur on the question of bee-keeping in Europe in order to enter a budget heading and a small appropriation of ECU 67m ( ' peanuts ' in relation to the general Community budget ) for 1997 so that European bee-keepers would finally be granted the support which the European Parliament unanimously called for in the context of my report of 20 January 1995 showing the continuing economic difficulties facing them .
Probably no-one in this House is unaware of the indispensable ecological function of the honey bee in the natural environment or of the economic significance of the pollination carried out by bee colonies and therefore of the importance of bee-keeping .
Since an increasing number of bee-keepers are giving up because their production costs are far higher than the world market price for honey as a result of health and hygiene , social and weather conditions , these subsidies to support bee-keeping in Europe , which Parliament itself has repeatedly called for , are now overdue .
It is indeed schizophrenic for us to call for subsidies and then decide not to enter the few pennies required in the budget !
Mr President , I would like to thank this House for supporting and voting for the extra ECU 100m for Northern Ireland here today .
I would like to put on record that at no time during the last two weeks have any of the three Members from Northern Ireland ever believed that anything other than what happened in the vote today would take place .
The debate which has taken place outside this Parliament has been most unfortunate .
It did nothing to help us back in Northern Ireland , it does nothing to raise our standing within this Parliament .
It has been a very unfortunate debate that should never have taken place .
The arguments should be made within this Parliament .
I would like to place on record my thanks to Mr Elles and Mr Wynn for the work they have carried out and for the work that I have no doubt they will also carry out in the future .
I look forward to being able to come back again next year and not have this debate .
I thank those who played a constructive rather than a destructive role .
I hope that what happened over the last two weeks will not in any way be held against us or held against the people of Northern Ireland .
Mr President , the decision of the plenary to place the customs union allocations to Turkey in the reserve is , of course , a very positive step .
However , as Mr Dell 'Alba has said , there is a big problem with regard to the MEDA programme .
Whereas the Committee on Foreign Affairs decided almost unanimously to place Turkey 's share of the funding in the reserve and made specific reference to the issues of human rights , Cyprus and the territorial integrity of Turkey 's neighbours , the amendment of the Committee on Budgets , which came about via procedures which I would describe as far from transparent and of questionable legality , annuls that proposal of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
That , in my view , is extremely unhelpful , and I think that in the discussions with the chairman of the Committee on Budgets and Commissioner Van Den Broek the rapporteur fell into a sort of trap . That is one of the reasons why our group will vote against the Brinkhorst report .
We welcome the changes which the EU 's budgetary authority has proposed as regards the cut in the common agricultural policy .
It is a step in the right direction .
We are convinced that a far-reaching reform of the current common agricultural policy is essential if the EU is to meet the challenges of the next century successfully .
This is particularly true with a view to greater effectiveness and enlargement of the Union .
It will be very difficult for the EU to offer applicant countries the same agricultural support which Spain , Portugal and Greece could rely on receiving as they approached membership .
It is not at all likely that an unreformed common agricultural policy would be to the advantage of the Eastern European countries in question .
One immediate effect would be very high food prices , for example .
Our basic attitude towards the EU budget is largely the same as that of the Green Group but in certain respects our main concerns are different and this has caused us to vote differently as well .
Our view is that the total expenditure of the EU should be limited .
Unfortunately , there is no real way in which we can seriously influence the biggest items of expenditure , such as agricultural policy , which must be fundamentally changed and transformed if it is not to become a millstone to the EU budget and , moreover , an obstacle to enlargement .
We also consider that Sweden 's membership contribution constitutes a serious burden on Swedish state finances and so is partly to blame for the cuts in social expenditure which are causing unemployment and social division in our home country .
We are definitely against a development which will push up the membership contribution even more , according to certain calculations to 25 billion Swedish kronor in the next budget year .
Our attitude to the Structural Funds is that they should be restricted .
We have voted for proposals to make the EU greener and against proposals which enhance the EU 's statal character .
We consider that the EU must concentrate its activities rather than encroaching on new areas and trying to be involved in everything under the sun , especially when in many cases there are other international organisations which are already dealing with such matters , such as the UN , OSCE , the Council of Europe and so on .
We are particularly opposed to the various PR exercises promoting the EU federalist ideology .
We do not believe that the EU should try to gain people 's sympathy through propaganda ; that is an obsolete Soviet practice which displays little respect for public opinion .
If the EU does not succeed in winning popular support it must realise that this is because its activities are going in the wrong direction ; far too little effort is devoted to solving genuine and natural cross-border problems , such as in the environmental sphere , and far too much to theatrical PR campaigns aimed at creating a ' superpower ' .
We are particularly disappointed that only a small minority chose to support the proposals to reform travelling allowances and the pension system , proposals which we of course supported .
It does not say much for Parliament 's insight if it cannot see how vital it is to reform the many benefits Members enjoy if the public is ever to regard the European Parliament as anything other than a goldmine for political fortune-hunters .
We have naturally voted against support for the cultivation of tobacco , one of the most flagrant manifestations of hypocrisy in EU policy , since in other contexts the EU asserts that it wishes to combat smoking .
Large cuts are being made in the individual Member States , including Sweden , to meet the objectives set by the EU for EMU , the convergence criteria .
If this is to have any credibility the EU must also make savings in its own budget .
This should be done in the first instance in the major categories of expenditure : agriculture , the Structural Funds and administration .
This austere attitude has also typified my approach to the budget .
Every additional krona in the EU budget means three kronor in the Swedish budget .
Sweden already pays too much into the EU budget .
The figure for 1997 may be as much as 25 billion kronor ( 22 billion is reserved as the EU membership contribution ) .
As an opponent of a ' super-state ' and as an anti-federalist I believe that the EU should not have more money than is necessary .
The EU budget should therefore continue to be reduced .
As we are now Members , however , the cuts must take socially acceptable forms .
I have voted against increases in agriculture which are of a non-compulsory nature .
The same is true in the case of fisheries , with the exception of inshore fisheries , investment in the environment and rural development .
I have voted against production support for hemp , tobacco and the distillation of wine .
Cuts in the Structural Funds must also be made largely in line with the proposals from the Budget Committee , with the exception of objective 1 ( high unemployment ) , objective 5b ( archipelagos ) and objective 6 ( Norrland support ) .
The reason for accepting cuts is that the EU 's Structural Funds are draining money from the Swedish budget which could otherwise be used directly for the same purpose without making a detour via the EU .
Nor have the Structural Funds succeeded in evening out the differences between different regions and their role as equalisation instrument must therefore be reviewed .
The TEN projects can be cut primarily for environmentally reasons .
It ought nevertheless to be possible to support projects such as the Bothnia and Atlantic lines , which are based on regional and environmental considerations .
Many support programmes , such as Pesca ( fish ) , Leader 2 ( rural areas ) and others , are difficult to assess .
I have mainly voted for them .
I have voted for environmental investments , consumer projects and support for environmental organisations .
Nuclear safety is important but is it an issue for the EU ?
I have voted against all investment in ' information ' and propaganda for the EU , such as the campaigns in favour of EMU , the cultural programmes to create ' a European dimension ' , ' Let 's build Europe together ' and ' Citizens first ' .
I have voted for language support for minorities and for Swedish and Finnish to have the same status in the EU as the other languages .
I have voted for aid for employment , employment offices and equality , against racism and many of the health projects to counter AIDS , drugs , etc .
Both national and international efforts are required here .
I have largely supported projects for the Third World , despite the fact that in principle I am against the EU being involved in activities in these areas .
I am against all types of benefits for ' Eurocrats ' which appear in the administrative parts of the budget .
I am voting for proposals which would mean greater control over Members ' travelling allowances .
The Committee on Budgets is threatening to freeze money for the Commission 's some 300 committees if there is not greater openness in the committee system .
Of course I am voting for that .
I support measures to ensure greater control over Members ' allowances for the purpose of only reimbursing costs actually incurred .
The cheapest option should always be chosen .
The allowances systems should not be based on the highest possible level of costs as they are now .
I strongly regret that the Council of Ministers has proposed such a strict budget to the European Parliament .
Our capitals are quicker at investing in the economic and monetary aspects of the European Union than in social cohesion and the - shall we say - qualitative aspects .
The European representatives have a more human , more ' citizen-like ' , more solidary view of the European structure , and do not accept the reduction in financing of policies concerning young people , training , exchanges , cultural creation , local aspects and everything that this implies .
I also regret the reductions in appropriations for sectors we consider to be a priority , such as employment , support to European regions in difficulty and solidarity with developing countries .
By delaying the financing of transEuropean networks such as the East-Atlantic high-speed train , including the Aquitaine / Euskadi rail link , our governments are depriving themselves of thousands of jobs which these major works would have created .
In freezing , even reducing , structural funds - such as Objectives 2 and 5b intended for supporting industrial redevelopments and rural development - our governments are calling into question the huge effort the Union has made in favour of its Southern regions - and my region too is benefiting - for balanced development of European territory .
In limiting emergency food aid to developing countries , the victims of serious crises , the Council is shouldering a heavy responsibility .
This is why our Parliament , by its votes , has been bent on re-entering appropriations which do correspond to its priorities , including the research sector , as it wished to re-enter an appropriation of ECU 100m to support the peace process in Northern Ireland .
We will see how our fifteen capitals will react .
Of course I am taking into account the fact that 46 % of the ECU 89 thousand million of this budget involves supporting agriculture , which historically remains the first major common policy of Europe , but the so-called mad cow disease crisis is forcing us to take a new look at what must be the agriculture of tomorrow .
I also wish to emphasize with pleasure that the European Parliament has wished to reinforce actions which directly involve my region , such as support for non-industrial fishing , strengthening of sea control and the promotion of minority languages and cultures , initiatives of our institution tolerated by the Council .
Fabra Vallés report
We repeat our demand from the previous budget debate for the entire system of travelling allowances for MEPs and others to be reviewed .
It is appropriate that MEPs should receive a card which they could use only to buy tickets to Brussels and Strasbourg .
We support the Socialist Group 's demand for the President to establish a committee as soon as possible to conduct such a review .
The Member States of the EU are hard hit by cuts in the social sector , the care sector and in public services resulting from the implementation of the convergence programme .
At the same time it looks as if an overall unemployment figure of around 20 million has become a permanent feature of the 15 Member States .
I believe that the EU budget should now also be closely examined and questioned .
There are many activities being carried out in the EU which are of little significance in comparison with the areas of the social sector which are now being cut in the Member States and which should be discontinued first if priorities were to be established .
When long-stay wards are being closed in Swedish hospitals I consider it to be extremely regrettable that the EU pays institutions vast sums of money for their work when their results and even their very existence can seriously be called into question .
Now the EU budget is nevertheless being decided on in a lengthy and complicated process which allows me few opportunities to influence the House with my vote .
Some of the expenditure is laid down in treaties and old agreements .
By this I mean , among other things , the fact that we in the European Parliament have to meet in Strasbourg twelve times a year while also having the administration and other meetings in Brussels and Luxembourg .
This gives rise to major and unnecessary local costs .
However , nobody appears to have the power to take measures to solve this problem .
Agricultural and regional Structural Fund expenditure is compulsory expenditure and is decided on by the Council of Ministers , even though the President of Parliament ultimately signs the budget .
I believe that there are many aspects of EU expenditure in these two areas which can seriously be called into question .
Unfortunately I cannot use my vote to affect those parts of agricultural and regional policy expenditure that I do not agree with .
Other areas to which I object and which I should like to change are the following .
Travel allowances for MEPs can be cut if a travel card is introduced instead of generous general allowances being paid as they are at present without receipts having to be submitted.-The Members ' pension fund is being subsidised from general EU resources because it is not economically viable .
I believe this must stop as soon as possible .
Members of pension funds who receive dividends when things are going well must reckon on having to cover the costs of any losses that might be incurred.There are also a number of doubtful budget items , whose stated objectives are to propagate the idea of Europe and a common European consciousness .
Above all I object to the budget items concerning the celebration of the 40th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome but I am also against resources being earmarked for the campaign in favour of the implementation of EMU and given to the European Centre for Political Studies .
At present this centre is devoting its energies to political propaganda in favour of EMU in Sweden .
I consider it to be outrageous that money should be earmarked in the EU budget for various organisations aimed at conducting propaganda for the EU institutions and for greater political power for them .
It is also proposed that contributions should be earmarked for parties at Community level .
I do not think that the party ' organisations ' which have become established at EU level deserve such contributions .
It also looks bad for politicians to grant their own organisations additional advantages at a time of cut-backs .
Iivari recommendation
Mr President , no one more than we , who have done everything to help the people of the former Yugoslavia break free from the Communist federal yoke , rejoices in the peace and independence found by the Slovenian and Croatian nations .
It is also desirable for friendly relationships to be established between these old European nations and ours .
For all that , we do not want Slovenia to fall from Charybdis into Scylla .
We ourselves want to emerge from the yoke of Maastricht Europe which , far from assuring peace and harmony among our peoples , is consigning them to limitless immigration and unbridled competition .
It is subjugating our peoples . It does not wish to unite them , but to disintegrate them .
We love Slovenia !
Like all other peoples freed from Communism , we do not want them to join our prison , and I would like to express now , on this fortieth anniversary of the Budapest rising , my indignation at the words stated yesterday by the President of Parliament , Mr Hänsch , denouncing the misdeeds of nationalism , because the misdeeds which should have been denounced were those , perhaps , of exacerbated nationalisms , but even more so those of national socialism , or international socialism , those of Marxism , Leninism , Stalinism , Maoism and others , which have massacred 200 million people throughout the world and for which President Hänsch does not call for the Nuremberg trial which is imperative . !
That is the true shame of this Parliament !
Posselt report
Mr President , I wish to explain my vote against the Posselt report , as I have already done throughout this part-session , by further condemning the scandal of a session document that contains an explanatory statement unacceptable to this House , denying the true history of the tragic post-war period in that region , and in Istria in particular .
As I have already said , in its explanatory statement , the Posselt report makes no mention of what happened to the Italian community .
That is a very serious matter , including because it goes on to put its own construction on the events leading to the signing of the association agreement .
I have recently been assured that that section will be withdrawn and will no longer appear in the document and the official acts of this House .
I hope this has been done , but the very fact that this report was able to be tabled certainly shows negligence , so to speak , on the part of the rapporteur who should not , in an economic report , have dwelt on what is , I repeat , a misleading and wildly inaccurate reconstruction of what happened in the region .
I hope that the matter can thus be closed by removing from the explanatory statement the sections concerning that issue .
Theonas report
Unemployment in Europe remains the main scourge that we must fight .
The unemployment rate remains particularly high , with an average of 10.7 % in the middle of 1996 .
Moreover , long-term unemployment and youth unemployment are still rising .
In this critical context we must combine our efforts to eradicate this harm which is eroding us .
It is now a matter of the credibility of European institutions .
The proposal for a Council decision concerning the setting up of a committee on employment policy and the labour market is a step in the right direction .
A real tool to assist the decision , this committee should make it possible to remedy the absence of a stable employment structure .
One of the challenges we face is to put in place instruments intended to promote a European employment strategy , coordinating the policies of Member States in their battle against unemployment .
In its amendments , the European Parliament has tried to reinforce not only transparency , but also coordination between European institutions , the committee on employment policy and the labour market and all employers and labour .
We will therefore have to be vigilant , as contradictory measures are being taken simultaneously .
The budget reduction in funds allocated to transEuropean networks and structural funds is not a step in the direction of the fight against unemployment .
Unemployment in the Union is unacceptably high .
The proposed employment and labour market policy committee can help increase exchanges of experience between the Member States , draw up reports , elaborate ideas and recommend measures .
The employment committee should not be allowed to take over the Member States ' powers and responsibilities ; above all , it should not lead to a common employment and labour market policy for the Union .
Theato report
Energetic measures are needed to counter fraud involving EU resources .
As it is as a rule always associated with national co-financing it is equally a national issue .
The EU should not have police supervision or other ways of exercising control in the Member States .
All such activities should be carried out jointly and in consultation with the respective Member State .
Tourism
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0298 / 96 by Mrs Bennasar Tous , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Decision on a first multiannual programme to assist European tourism ' Philoxenia ' ( 1997-2000 ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0168 - C4-0356 / 96-96 / 0127 ( CNS ) ) ; -A4-0297 / 96 by Mr Parodi , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the report from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on Community measures affecting tourism ( Council Decision 92 / 421 / EEC ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0029 - C40125 / 96 ) ; -A4-0299 / 96 by Mr Harrison , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the Commission report on the evaluation of the Community action plan to assist tourism 1993-95 ( Council Decision 92 / 421 / EEC ) ( COM ( 96 ) 0166 - C4-0266 / 96 ) .
Mr President , when we talk about tourism we are fighting unemployment . And that is the main economic and social challenge Europe is facing today .
At this moment , there are 18 million people out of work in the 15 Member States , and the situation is especially difficult for women and young people -one in five cannot find a job .
The tourism industry offers European citizens the best opportunities to create new jobs .
Tourism generates jobs rapidly , assists economic and social cohesion , contributes to awareness and improvement of the cultural heritage .
Tourism breaks down barriers , reduces regional differences and helps form the European identity .
Tourism as an economic , social and cultural phenomenon affects the majority of European citizens , either as users or providers of services geared to satisfying the multiple needs of the tourist .
About 200 million Europeans are tourists at some time in every year .
The definition of a tourism policy at the European level has been one of the objectives of the Community since 1980 and the debate has highlighted a great variety of views on how to introduce tourism into the treaty .
We need a legal basis and good horizontal coordination of tourism with other Community policies .
There is a great lack of transnational cooperation between those who take the decisions affecting this activity and local government , economic agents , trade and consumer associations .
This Parliament has already demonstrated its support for a place for tourism in the treaty on many occasions .
The whole European Union is conscious that tourism is the number one world economic activity .
Therefore , in the absolute conviction that it is necessary to identify clearly which aspects of this activity should be managed at European level and at the instance of the Council , the Commission has taken the initiative to present and design the Philoxenia programme to assist tourism , intended to stimulate the quality and competitiveness of European tourism , given the fierce competition we have faced in recent years with the appearance of new destinations , and emphasizing balanced and sustainable development of the tourist sector , the satisfaction of the needs of the tourist and the rational use of natural , cultural and infrastructure resources .
It is also necessary to promote alternative forms of tourism , like rural tourism , cultural tourism , social tourism , conference tourism , sports-based tourism and so many others .
Given the complexity and variety of the sector , the broad objectives are to improve knowledge in the area of tourism , make information more accessible , improve the legislative and financial framework for tourism , strengthen cooperation with Member States , industry and other responsible agencies , look at ways of simplifying regulations and reducing taxes , raising quality in tourism and boosting the number of intra- and extra-Community tourists .
The Philoxenia programme is exclusively devoted to tourism and largely targeted at managers and authorities in the sector , with the aim of organizing it and achieving the necessary complementarity with other programmes which also have incidence on tourism .
Given that the majority of tourism businesses are SMEs , we call for Philoxenia and its business aspects to be linked to the Third Multiannual Programme for SMEs , geared to supporting small and medium-sized European enterprises , which represent 99.9 % of all firms , 66 % of total employment and 65 % of turnover in the Union .
Tourism covers a complex system of activities involving thousands of SMEs and many small family businesses .
The priority objectives and measures are intended to simplify and improve the administrative and regulatory framework , guarantee the interests of the SMEs in the various policies , improve transnational cooperation for tourist SMEs , facilitate loans and the development of specific financial instruments for tourist SMEs , stimulate the creation of capital markets for rapidly growing SMEs , help the tourism sector and the SMEs to Europeanize and internationalize their strategies , especially through better information services , extended to the already existing business information centres .
We call for a small ' Euro-counter ' specializing in tourism to help promote measures for tourist SMEs , direct contacts between cooperation and collaboration programmes , entry into new markets and internationalization of European tourist SMEs .
It is impossible to increase the competitiveness and quality of tourism without the SMEs , and their access to research , innovation and training must be facilitated , to increase their potential for innovation , stimulate training in management techniques and implement adaptation to the required environmental techniques .
It is also necessary to promote the entrepreneurial spirit .
It is impossible to talk about quality in European tourism without talking about training .
There is an urgent need to identify and recognize the various professional categories in tourism , give them higher social status and promote training .
Mr President , once again we have to express disappointment at the fact that , even within this House , tourism has not been acknowledged as having the crucial role that most of us have been hoping to see attributed to it for many years .
A crucial role in terms of gross domestic product and employment in our continent which is more than ever in need of fresh incentives as a result of the objectives laid down by the treaties establishing the European Communities and confirmed and enlarged upon with the Maastricht revision .
Viewing tourism as a strategic industry for employment , development , growth , competitiveness , economic and social cohesion and as a contribution to the spread of the different national cultures and the strengthening of the European identity , should be the basis of every policy , whatever the decision-taking level within the European Union .
If we are to contribute to the sustainable development of tourism in Europe and of the sectors closely linked with it , we have , in my view , to give it institutional legitimacy both at a European and at a national and regional level .
It is thus necessary , as an essential prerequisite , that a specific chapter on tourism be inserted into the treaty as part of the revision process , creating that added value that will ensure the sustainability of the sector and its ability to continue to create permanent jobs in an increasingly open and competitive market , in which Europe 's share is in constant decline .
Starting with the completion of the single market , we ought , in other words , to promote all of those initiatives which make it possible to guarantee the quality and competitiveness of the Community tourist industry , as well as to promote Europe as a tourist destination .
The added value - be it historical , architectural , cultural or landscape-based - of Europe , as a tourist destination , can no longer be neglected .
We therefore need to diversify what is on offer and give Europe a stronger profile in terms of its image and as a product : it is currently excessively fragmented and its potential has not been sufficiently exploited from the economic , health and artistic points of view and in regard to nature .
What I have just said demonstrates the need to set in place a legal and financial context beneficial to the tourist industry and employment and based on the following : firstly , the completion of the internal market ; secondly , the development of the tourist industry ; and , thirdly , the promotion of European tourism in third countries .
As regards the completion of the single market : starting from an analysis which allows us to identify the different forms of tourism , we need , in my view , to promote those measures which can make a valid contribution to increasing supply , by attaching priority to those best suited to the region and the promotion of new tourist itineraries , such as real alternatives to the mass tourism with which many cities with an artistic heritage are no longer able to cope , and which encourage a break with seasonal tourism .
If better exploited , spas , for example , would be an important source of economic and social development , particularly for therapeutic reasons and by rehabilitating the elderly , enabling them to continue to live their lives in society .
The single market needs to be completed by drawing up a European Charter of Tourism governing the rights and obligations of the latter and of the providers of tourist services ; by creating a European tourist quality mark for the classification of Community services and products in the sector ; by setting up a joint system of tourist signs to make it easy and quick to identify the special environmental and cultural features of the services and opportunities offered by the various localities ; by establishing the trans-European Transport Networks that will make it possible to travel in a short time from north to south and east to west .
Turning now to development of the tourist industry : if we are to guarantee the quality and competitiveness of the European tourist industry , we shall have also to develop new forms of synergy with other Community policies , bringing in all of the interested parties in an effort to establish the conditions favourable to the development of the Union 's tourist enterprises , particularly its small- and medium-sized enterprises . We need to undertake initiatives to improve and harmonize working conditions and workforce skills and to increase jobs ; we need to safeguard and make the most of landscape , historical and cultural values as well as all those forms of craft industry that underpin the tourist industry ; we need to create the conditions for sustainable growth in the less-favoured regions , in the industrial zones in decline , in rural areas , in peripheral regions and in those regions of the Union in which tourism represents the most important if not the only source of income .
Finally , it is my belief that tourism opens up great future prospects for third countries and that it is therefore our duty to encourage it .
We should continue with the ' Philoxenia ' programme .
I hope that the House will ensure that tourism is respected and given priority in the same way as all other policies and does not suffer the humiliation of being discussed at odd moments .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Parodi on his report .
My opinion , drafted on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy concentrates on making some complementary points .
Firstly , tourism should be recognized as an industry .
Its job-generating powers are well known , it is also an industry which is well represented by SMEs , a target group for development , as mentioned yet again by President Santer this week in the 1997 Commission programme .
There are also many job opportunities for young people and women in this sector .
We should be zealous in ensuring that such jobs are high quality , well-paid and rewarding , thereby promoting the competitiveness of Europe 's tourism industry .
Secondly , the industry thus encouraged can help less-favoured , rural and peripheral areas of the Union , areas often suffering job losses .
Thirdly , the Parodi 94 report shows tourism growing worldwide , whilst Europe 's share has shrunk .
Anything we can do to sharpen Europe 's tourism industry will help us defend the European Union as the world 's favourite tourist destination .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs repeats Parliament 's long-held view that specific provision should be made for tourism within the revision of the IGC which will be concluded by the Dutch presidency .
The main motivation for this belief is the recognition of tourism as a quintessentially single-market activity .
The determination to complete the single market is the best and fastest route for helping Europe 's industries as a whole and the tourism industry in particular .
In this respect I am very pleased that the UK Labour Party leader , Tony Blair , has indicated his intention - when assuming the presidency of the Council in 1998 - to drive through the completion of Europe 's single market .
My conviction is that not only can we then create the conditions for a successful European tourism industry ; not only give enormous benefit to Europe 's citizens when they take their annual holidays ; not only motivate and encourage the workers and entrepreneurs who are the ' meat and veg ' of this vast industry ; not only and importantly promote the general European ideal of creating a dynamic European Union celebrating the diversity of its cultures , traditions and citizens but also make a reality of a Europe that is free , open and democratic for all its 370 million citizens .
Mr President , I turn to my own report .
Tourism means jobs .
Tourism is Europe 's biggest industry and it is still growing .
Nine million of our citizens are directly employed in tourism and a further nine million jobs are affected indirectly .
Such numbers are a tidal wave on which we should surf in search of decent jobs for our 20 million jobless citizens .
Let me go further : tourism , along with telecommunications and information technology , will represent the major industries for the world of the 21st century .
According to the World Travel and Tourism Council tourism is currently worth $ 1.2 trillion .
In 2006 it is forecast that such mind-boggling figures will have swelled to $ 2.1 trillion , a doubling of spending which , if we are canny , can translate into a doubling of jobs .
But how do we in the European Union react to this challenge ?
Not with a bang but with a whimper .
Tourism is not even mentioned in the Delors White Paper .
This morning in the budget we haggled over according the Philoxenia programme ECU 8m , ECU 4m or ECU zero .
Fortunately we got the ECU 4m .
With regard to the unfinished business of Maastricht - the question of whether we should give tourism a legal base and competence in the Treaties - we have acted like timid bathers at the seaside , worried that we would get our toes cold by taking an early morning dip .
But getting up early to beat the world competition in tourism is exactly what we want to do if our ambitions to provide jobs for our people are not to be beached and abandoned .
The Commission 's review of its 1993 / 95 programme favouring tourism can help point the way .
More specifically , this review is the building-block for the Commission 's Philoxenia programme .
I pause to congratulate Mrs Bennasar Tous on her excellent report .
The 93 / 95 programme was certainly problematic as was exemplified by the probing consultant 's report divining its entrails .
The eleven policy areas were unevenly dealt with .
Five of them together absorbed less than 5 % of the ECU 18m budget .
Thus vital issues like the staggering of holidays , rural tourism , social tourism and youth tourism were almost wholly ignored .
More successful was work done for the disabled tourist and the vital collection of statistics revealing the true state and nature of the tourism industry .
Such work needs to be continued .
But PriceWaterhouse 's conclusion that there needs to be clearer focus in the tourism programmes makes clear sense .
Indeed , Philoxenia , which rises phoenix-like from the 1993 / 95 programme contains fewer priorities , better targeted funding and a concentration on projects with a higher average value .
The Harrison report goes on to make other recommendations which need to be absorbed .
Thus we need to establish a coherent European tourism policy which adds value above and beyond Member State level and against which we can judge and monitor the very considerable sums of money which are spent through other EU funds , most notably the structural and cohesion funds .
In order to implement this comprehensive policy and monitor funds , we need to strengthen the tourism unit in DG XXIII .
Despite the trials and tribulations of DG XXIII in the past , we must now ask them to take on the vital role of coordinating EU policy as it affects tourism across all the Directorates General of the Commission .
This restructuring of how we deal with and fund tourism would also help us be more effective at shaping world policy and practice as it affects tourism and tourists .
We in Europe can no longer stand silent in the face of the sex tourism industry which so besmirches our standing in the world .
Finally , we should appreciate that tourism is an activity of the single European market .
Thus all the flanking measures supporting SEM should be supported and we should note those measures that directly bear on the prosperity of the tourist and the tourism industry : the single currency , for instance - the elimination of exchange rates will put more money in the pockets of Europe 's citizens travelling cross-border as tourists ; even more vital , the transparency brought to tourism costs will drive down holiday prices as will the better business environment brought about by lower interest rates and lower inflation .
In conclusion , a golden opportunity awaits us to ensure that tourism means jobs for our European people .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am intervening on behalf of Mr Baggioni who , following a change in the agenda , is currently on an aircraft .
The tourism industry is going to occupy an increasingly important place in the European economy . Europe has major assets in this sector , provided it can become more competitive in the face of international competition .
This is why a European strategy to relaunch tourism now appears to be of the greatest importance .
Firstly , emphasis should be given to the decisive role that tourism could play in favour of economic and social cohesion and especially employment in late-developing regions , namely the ultra-peripheral and insular regions , whose assets are indisputable .
However , uncontrolled mass tourism , characterized among other things by geographical overconcentration , or the imbalance of the internal coast , can lead to serious negative effects for the regions concerned .
On the other hand , well thought-out quality tourism can contribute to protecting the environment and reinforce the cultural identity of these regions .
This is why it is essential , before anything else , to begin by strengthening the tourism component of existing regional development Community initiative programmes , whether it be tourism in border regions , INTERREG II , rural tourism LEADER , the renovation of declining industrial zones RECHAR , RESIDER , CONVER , urban zones in difficulty URBAN , or others .
Moreover , such a policy of relaunching tourism in the Union has no real chance of success unless better representation of the regional authorities is assured in the competent higher authorities and a proper partnership culture is established at all levels .
To be fully effective , the relaunch of tourism in Europe must figure in an effort to achieve cohesion of all Community policies linked with tourism .
It seems unavoidable that we will have to set up large European transport networks that are so delayed , and generally improve the quality of all the modes of transport , a sine qua non condition of the development of tourism in all the regions concerned , especially the most remote .
The relaunch must also be able to depend on appropriate economic measures , including increased support for small- and medium-sized companies , which are very numerous in this sector and are often very interested in proposing innovative forms of tourism .
One must not overlook geographically-handicapped regions either , for which it is essential to grant compensation in the form of subsidies or tax relief in order to re-establish conditions of fair competition .
Finally , a boom in tourism is inextricably linked to a sustained policy of protection of the environment .
It is becoming a matter of urgency to define clear objectives and put together the necessary means , without which our regions risk permanently compromising their tourist potential .
Bearing in mind these observations , which have received the unanimous support of the Committee on Regional Policy , the proposal for the first multiannual programme in favour of European tourism is very encouraging and deserves our support , although the amount of the appropriations is still insufficient .
Mr President , previous speakers have already emphasized the importance of tourism to the European Union , by both intra-Community tourists and visitors from third countries .
Mr Harrison was very explicit , stressing that tourism creates jobs .
In my country , Catalonia , tourism represents 15 % of gross domestic product and every year we welcome 17 million tourists .
But the industry cannot avoid the effects of the globalization of all economic activity .
European tourism must be competitive tourism and must develop a new dimension of tourism which is in demand amongst tourists : the cultural dimension .
A cultural dimension which can strengthen mutual understanding between the different nations and peoples of Europe , improve our knowledge of other peoples , their languages , cultures and traditions and also of their heritage of culture and history .
All this can contribute to the strengthening of the European dimension that the citizens of Europe need .
Nor must we forget the potential of cultural tourism , youth tourism , social tourism and an especially important area , rural tourism , which can improve the position of farmers by providing additional income , enabling them to stay or get established on the land .
Mrs Bennasar has highlighted the fact that to be competitive we need to strengthen education and training in the tourism sector .
There is a constantly growing need to ensure that people employed in tourism have the necessary scientific and technical background .
I think it is also important to establish efficient cooperation with regional and local authorities with responsibilities relating to tourism .
Finally , I believe the Commission should strengthen cooperation with UNESCO and the Council of Europe as regards cultural tourism .
Commissioner , the Socialist Group is supporting your initiative .
It recently had occasion to demonstrate this during the vote on the budget .
It supports your initiative because we are persuaded that you are committed to an initiative to relaunch tourist activities , taking account of the prime objective - which is also the objective of my group - the pact for employment .
We have identified new opportunities in tourism , new employment possibilities , but above all , we have understood that tourism is not just an issue of institutional relations .
Tourism also involves human relations in a network comprising reciprocity between peoples , and the European Union must take on board that aspect and bring forward specific measures .
As far as the institutional issues are concern , I agree absolutely on the need for institutional legitimacy .
We therefore firmly believe that the time has come to declare tourism to be a common interest : the task is not an easy one , given that this has to be done in full compliance with subsidiarity , appreciating that tourist measures at local level should be brought forward by the regions , the communes , by entrepreneurs and by the economic and social forces which constitute the main point of reference for the activities of the European institutions .
We cannot set a European and a national concept of tourist activity against each other .
We have rather to ensure that Europe perfects its programming objective and guides tourist activity increasingly in the direction of uniformity , particularly in two crucial sectors : consumer protection and protection of the environment .
Annexed to the reports are numerous petitions , Commissioner , revealing the conflicts the persist between the individual states of the European Union and which are damaging to consumers .
We must provide a solution to those conflicts and , of course , common management and a uniform steer at a European level can only help that objective .
We realize that at a time when we are identifying tourism as an activity that promotes employment , we have also to make progress in terms of social guarantees .
Tourism creates jobs but there is also the underpaid labour , the workers who are exploited in many areas of tourist activity , often representing a further competitive element in the international supply market .
We must prevent the kinds of social dumping which may also affect tourist supply , protecting workers therefore with specific guarantees and ensuring that fundamental rights , particularly the fiscal and social rights of workers in the tourist industry , are safeguarded .
In addition to that , we have also to work for the environment .
The environment is a crucial resource .
The attempt to increase economic activity may undermine environmental protection .
In those circumstances therefore , the ability to fund European programmes and , of course , programmes requiring the resources of the European Union , should be determined on the basis of environmental impact assessments , that is to say when it has been shown that the projects to be implemented do not pose a threat to a fundamental resource such as the environment .
Clearly , these environmental impact assessments must involve more than the traditional cost assessment and take in geological aspects , the flora and vegetation which are , so to speak , a global resource about which we have all to be concerned .
From that point of view , I believe that our action may come at the right time if the PHILOXENIA programme is made subject to proper checks .
We have made an effort to increase the financial resources and encountered problems even within Parliament itself .
But we realize that the PHILOXENIA programme is an important programme which also breaks with the principle of experimentation supported by the Commission .
The Commission in fact lays down specific terms for the use of resources but , most importantly , it also tries to contain administrative spending which is based on percentages equal to those of the other sectors of the Commission .
That being the case , we firmly believe that we should still cooperate , as we are quite prepared for the House to be involved with the project work and the debate which you , Commissioner , will be able to bring forward .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for the excellent work done on their respective reports .
Having said that , I want to concentrate on a form of tourism which has been little mentioned : I refer to rural tourism .
Despite great potential demand , Europe does not even have a precise definition of the ' rural tourism product ' which needs to go beyond the ' agricultural tourism ' it is frequently confused with .
In general that is limited to providing board and lodging , whereas rural tourism ought to offer the tourist a package including socio-cultural and sporting services , but with a common feature : the development of the products must always respect and enhance the environment .
I think it is worth making an effort to develop rural tourism , because at present there are thousands of middle income families who cannot afford de luxe holidays and want to look at holiday options other than mass tourism destinations , where they do not find the relaxation , peace and quiet , and enjoyment of nature that they seek .
They tend to find the complete opposite - but we will not get into that now .
We do need to discuss and think about what has to be done to create and develop the whole range of rural tourism .
First we need to determine the potential demand and then make this known in order to stimulate the creation and development of rural tourism products in the various regions of the Union .
Secondly , every region should introduce measures to make information available on access to Community grants for rural tourism , and assist the tourism projects of rural local authorities , with the participation and cooperation of all the local agents , so that diversified rural tourism products can be designed and offered under coherent local management .
Mr President , allow me , too , to compliment the rapporteurs on their reports , but also to commiserate with them . I say ' commiserate ' because while they have produced splendid reports , while Parliament 's Committee on Tourism has adopted their positions and while the Commissioner is doing everything possible to further those positions , we almost had to thank our lucky stars today for having accepted half the money that we had requested , that being what the Committee on Budgets wanted and , unfortunately , what Parliament saw fit to approve .

You know , when I look at the Committee on Budgets , at the members and , especially , the chairman of that committee , I get the feeling that the money they are managing belongs to them personally rather than to the European Union .
That is the impression I get .
So while we pontificate about the great importance of tourism and its potential for the stimulation of growth in Europe , and about its importance as a means of recreation and as a vehicle for other activities which Members have very eloquently drawn attention to , we seem to be doing our best to prevent that growth , and the new jobs for young people that it can generate , becoming a reality .
My second point - and it is a familiar one but one that must be heard by those in the gallery - is this : which countries will , in essence , be hit by this policy that the Council and the Committee on Budgets are pursuing ?
The southern countries .
So have I got it right : the rich get richer and the poor get poorer - is that the game ?
If so , we should be honest with the peoples of Europe and tell it to them straight out , so that they can know what we get up to here - what we vote for , and who the people are who put things that Parliament has approved back on the shelf .
We cannot keep on talking about youth unemployment and then obstruct programmes on tourism , in which jobgeneration chiefly benefits young people .
It is sheer hypocrisy and the sooner it stops the better .
Mr President , despite all the good intentions of the committee and rapporteurs this is a typical case of high expectations and meagre results .
It is certainly too ambitious to speak of any kind of coordinated policy on tourism in Europe .
Of course we agree that there should be joint publicity in third countries .
But policy on tourism contains so much diversity and there are so many aspects to it that it will take more than a Philoxenia programme to achieve concrete results .
My Group is not opposed to honest efforts to bring about a policy on tourism .
We broadly support what the rapporteurs have written , but we do need to realize what a comprehensive field tourism is and how significant its consequences are .
Primarily for jobs in Europe , but also for the construction industry , transport , farming , food supply , the regions versus the centre , arts , museums - I could go on and on .
We also need to appreciate how many different forms of tourism there are , from an all-in package from here to the other side of the world to a simple stroll through the municipal park .
Do not take it amiss when I say that I think that rather too much attention is paid in the reports to sex tourism , doubtless as a result of the deplorable events we have been hearing about .
We should be clear about the fact that of the hundreds of millions of tourists who travel every year , learning and relaxing at their destinations and bringing prosperity and friendship , it is only a very small , insignificant minority who travel with evil intentions .
The Harrison report quite rightly presses for improvements within DG XXIII , which are long overdue and greatly needed .
For the rest we shall be voting for the reports .
Mr President , first I want to thank the rapporteurs for their excellent reports which considerably improve the Commission 's proposal .
But as someone from a region like Murcia - where tourism is very important too - there are four contradictions I would like to mention in connection with the future of tourism .
The first contradiction concerns the fact that Europe is a welfare state , but the fundamentalist monetary policy of Maastricht is threatening welfare in Europe and that is having negative repercussions on tourism .
The second is the need to defend jobs and , hence , protect the workers .
The same threat as mentioned earlier also affects the position of the workers .
The third relates to the environment and a proposal for sustainable development because the current model , with its logic of irreversible economic growth , is endangering environments of great tourist attraction for the whole of Europe .
And the final contradiction is cultural and social in the sense of fighting xenophobia , which is increasing in Europe , and account should therefore be taken of these considerations .
Mr President , I think Mr Wijsenbeek has since left us , but I wanted just to challenge his concluding remark that sex tourism is only an insignificant part of all tourism .
Possibly so , in monetary terms , but not in terms of the harm caused .
Because often that harm is done directly to people and often to very young people .
So I should like to thank all those who have helped to get sex tourism placed firmly on the agenda and I am not saying that the events in Belgium are responsible for that , tourism played no part in those .
We have been trying for years to get this item on to the agenda and at last we have succeeded .
Because we are expecting a communication from Mr Papoutsis on this very shortly and I look forward to it with great interest .
This is not how I had intended to begin , but I felt obliged to react to what Mr Wijsenbeek said .
I shall endeavour to devote the rest of my speaking time to the contradictions which I perceive in the debate and in the reports .
I do not think we can say on the one hand that tourism must be sustainably developed and that we must above all seek ways of promoting ' gentle tourism ' whilst saying on the other hand that we must encourage more tourism from third countries to Europe , that the peripheral and remote regions must be opened up to tourism , because that simply means more airports , more flights and the price paid for all this remains too low .
No excise duties and VAT are levied on air travel and Europe is still not minded to press for that although it has been necessary for years .
Tourism leads to more road building , more hotel beds , and whole coastlines are ruined together with their ecological wealth .
This is not to say that I am against the further development of tourism , but I do want to point to the contradiction inherent in the questions raised in this report .
On the one hand more , more , ever more economic growth , more growth of tourism , which in fact means less sustainability , whilst on the other hand we argue that everything must be sustainable .
If we are serious about this we need to discuss what we really mean by sustainable tourism .
We shall then reach the conclusion that it will be a very difficult business making tourism sustainable but that it may indeed bring great benefits in the end .
But I think we are not being careful enough about the various concepts involved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are constantly repeating how important tourism is to the European economy in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , but that really does not seem enough .
We must point out , for example , that in some island or coastal regions of Spain , like the Community of Valencia , tourism accounts for as much as 70 % of gross domestic product .
Nor does it seem enough to keep on stressing the contribution the tourist industry makes to employment in Europe , through being mainly a service industry .
Nor does it seem enough to emphasize that tourism is a growth industry which can contribute even more to both the economy and employment .
Nor indeed does it seem enough to recognize , as the report does , that tourism has social , economic and cultural effects on the majority of European citizens , either as users or providers of the services in the sector .
Why is it not given the importance it deserves in this hemicycle and beyond ?
I refer to our colleagues on the Committee on Budgets who have actually supported cancelling all allocations to tourism in the next financial year .
How can we maintain our credibility in the eyes of our citizens when we debate measures to create employment and develop the economies of the less favoured regions ad infinitum , but fail to support programmes like Philoxenia , which specifically respond to those very needs ?
Of course , there are some scattered measures to benefit tourism , like the collection of statistics , the measures in the context of the structural funds , the environmental and nature conservation measures .
But nowhere in the work of the Commission is there a global , multiannual programme which offers positive and sustained support at European level to all the various national and regional efforts .
We cannot go on like this .
We need to improve the quality and increase the competitiveness of this sector , protect the environment better , offer safer infrastructure and facilities to the consumer , improve access to tourism for disabled people and senior citizens .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not a question of trying to undermine the principle of subsidiarity .
It is not a question of appropriating the prerogatives of Member States , but of improving cooperation between them , the regional and local authorities , and the tourist industry itself .
To conclude I would like to recall the philosophy of Philoxenia , which means hospitality and respect for foreigners .
Precisely at a time when political parties with definite racist connotations are gaining ground in Europe , the best thing we could possibly do is echo the sentiments and firmly support the recommendations contained in Mrs Bennasar Tous ' report .
I end , Mr President , by congratulating the rapporteurs and expressing our moderate support for the amendment approved today to allocate ECU four million to this programme .
We do not think it is enough and we must hope that perhaps the text of our treaty will recognize the paramount importance of this sector .
The debate will be resumed at 6 p.m. this evening .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1106 / 96 by Mr Bertens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on Afghanistan ; -B4-1127 / 96 by Mrs d 'Ancona and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Afghanistan ; -B4-1136 / 96 by Mrs Maij-Weggen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the coup d 'état and repression in Afghanistan ; -B4-1150 / 96 by Mrs Lalumière and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on violations of human rights in Afghanistan ; -B4-1161 / 96 by Mrs Aglietta and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Afghanistan ; -B4-1169 / 96 by Mr Ligabue and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the situation in Afghanistan ; -B4-1202 / 96 by Mrs Sornosa Martínez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the situation in Afghanistan .
Madam President , Afghanistan is the theatre of a complete reversal of situation , which could change the geopolitical playing cards in central Asia .
The capital Kabul had scarcely been taken when the Taliban began by imposing Koran law on everyone : compulsory wearing of the chador and prohibition of any form of education and work for women .
Henceforth , amputations , stoning and executions are the lot of those who do not submit to these messengers of purity .
Through the voice of its spokesman Mr Boutros-Boutros Ghali , the international community has condemned the discriminatory treatment inflicted by Talibans on Afghan women .
It should also condemn all violations of human rights committed by the Talibans in the name of the Sharia .
The European Union demands that Pakistan cease all forms of military aid and logistical support to the Taliban .
Finally , the European Union must come to the aid of the civilian population , again hit by fundamentalist madness .
Madam President , once again the importance of resolutions on urgency , customarily debated here on Thursday afternoon , is being challenged .
There are those who mock the multiplicity of horrors , wars and disasters , violations of human rights we get through here in a period of just a few hours .
There are those who worry that the background to all these dismal situations is not investigated thoroughly enough .
There are those who are afraid of offending regimes with which contacts have painstakingly been built up , and so on .
There may be a grain of truth in all that , Madam President , but if Parliament , at its plenary part-sessions here in Strasbourg , had to keep quiet about all the dreadful things occurring in the intervening weeks , if we were not able to speak out on persecution and oppression , on the denial of the rights of minorities , of women , children , democracy , if we did not protest here at what is done to innocent people and did not name the guilty parties , we would be unworthy to call ourselves a Parliament .
We as Parliament must do more than merely drawing up lists of victims and perpetrators .
We must also use instruments which lend force to our protests : arms embargoes , economic and diplomatic sanctions , the halting of cooperation programmes with undemocratic regimes .
It seems to me , Madam President , that we need to use all these to lend force to our protest at the take-over of much of Afghanistan by the Taliban .
The suffering endured by the people of Afghanistan has been going on for a long time and has now , regrettably , deepened still further .
In the provinces , 20 out of the 29 under Taliban control , all normal forms of justice ceased from the moment the President and his brother were summarily executed .
The imposition of Islamic law goes hand in hand with the most brutal and savage punishments .
Women have been stripped of their most basic rights , and the countless women widowed by the fighting are no longer allowed to earn an income for their families .
Culture is being exterminated .
Book burning is a commonplace .
Many people have fled this brutal violence and are living in desperate circumstances in the northern provinces .
Madam President , we should think about how , in addition to expressing our disapproval , we might help to improve the situation in Afghanistan and we should continue both as the EU and as individual Member States to offer support to all those who have been displaced from their homes both in Afghanistan and elsewhere .
Madam President , I particularly welcome the fact that the European Parliament has decided to place at the head of the list of urgencies the intolerable issue of the repressive and reactionary regime foisted upon a country already tragically devastated by more than 15 years of civil war .
This is a situation which calls for the international community but one to which the international community has yet to give a real response .
We in fact know that in addition to the dramatic inter-factional conflict that masks deep-seated interests linked to drug-trafficking which , in some instances , is best not curbed but perhaps encouraged , there is in practice another tragic situation affecting Afghan women who are currently at risk of slow but inexorable extermination , since they are deprived of medical attention from male doctors and in view of all the other forms of oppression inflicted on them by the Taliban regime .
Aware of all of this , we are concerned and bewildered to note the apathy , indolence and cowardice with which the international community and , if the truth be told , the Union also is responding .
That being so , we have to applaud and give credit to the Commission , and Commissioner Bonino in particular , who was bold enough to ask , with the subsequent approval of the Commission as a whole , that a courageous stance be adopted to lift the veil of silence .
Given that the regime has the support , for reasons that are not clear to me , of a major power friendly to us , it seems that human rights , democracy and respect for rules are being given a back seat and nothing is being said about a tragedy that is in fact becoming increasingly serious and dramatic .
Madam President , on behalf of my Group I must first express my horror at events in Afghanistan , where the Taliban regime sees fit to stamp on human rights in a truly appalling way by carrying out summary executions and to strip women of every right imaginable .
I think we need to form a clear picture of what the European Union can do in seeking to save what can be saved , or rather to try to help work towards an acceptable peace in the future .
I think we can only achieve this by exerting considerable pressure on the Taliban government , though I think they have yet to learn how to deal with international organizations .
All they have done so far is show a total disregard for them .
So I am very pleased that the joint resolution calls on international donors , the Union and Member States not to launch any new aid programmes or cooperation programmes , with the exception of course of emergency aid and initiatives amongst the civilian population aimed at securing peace in a different way .
I think it is excellent that we should try to avoid diplomatic links with this regime and , where such ties exist , to sever them immediately .
It is also important to impose an immediate arms embargo as one way of bringing about a speedy end to the war .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are horrified by the violence and climate of terror afflicting Afghanistan and the worsening civil war caused by the Taliban forces which have compelled the government to leave the city and committed atrocities by torturing and hanging their opponents and then exhibiting them publicly .
The violations of human rights that are continually perpetrated and the incomplete information we receive from various sources concerning the terrible clashes between the factions leave us completely helpless . We are similarly appalled at the segregation of and discrimination against women who are excluded from work and education , deprived of all freedoms and of the most basic rights accorded to every human being , such as the freedoms to move freely , to be educated and to work .
In that context , there have been many appeals to and requests for help from the various women 's associations in the world .
It is unbelievable how the extremist Islamic guerrillas have established a reign of terror in Kabul which is paralysing the whole of the country , which is why the women who have neither the right to leave their homes nor to work are segregated in a way that prevents any institution in which they play an active role , such as , for example , the public authorities , schools and hospitals , from functioning .
It is in fact the women of Kabul themselves who have denounced to the whole world the scandalous and precarious conditions in which hospitals which , clearly , no longer have nurses or female doctors , now find themselves .
It is vital at this point that we establish diplomatic relations and therefore a dialogue with the current Kabul authorities , supporting all political and diplomatic initiatives designed to find a peaceful solution to the various problems of the region , against the background of respect for human rights , seeking to defeat Islamic fundamentalism and paying particular attention to the still very fluid situation which is likely to jeopardize the return of the kind of strong individuals who could accelerate the peace process .
Finally , the European Union must continue to give its own support and assistance to the civilian population seeking refuge in other parts of the country and continue with all diplomatic efforts to bring an end to this dreadful conflict .
Madam President , the tragic situation in Afghanistan absolutely must come to an end , and we must take determined action to achieve a ceasefire as a basis for establishing democracy and full respect for the human rights of the men and women of that country .
Let us start by calling those now controlling Kabul - the Taliban - what they really are : an extremely violent group which wants to drag Afghanistan back into the Middle Ages , trampling human dignity underfoot and disregarding every rule of civilized existence .
But we should not forget that the Taliban did not arise spontaneously .
On the contrary , it is the ultimate product of a situation which began with the defeated Soviet invasion of 1980 and continued with an American political adventure in the region , resulting in total chaos and very serious destabilizing consequences .
The United States and Pakistan have openly supported the Taliban and therefore bear a large share of responsibility for the current situation .
They gave them political protection and also armed them so that they could overthrow those they had protected previously .
The trouble is Europe is getting there late again .
It is time the Union acted firmly , taking account of UN Security Council resolutions and the proposals of Central Asian countries .
Full respect for human rights and an end to armed confrontation must be demanded .
Here we must demand absolute respect for the freedom and dignity for Afghan women , savagely trampled underfoot by unacceptable measures like the obligation to wear humiliating clothes , the barbaric suppression of rights to education and work or actual and sustained sexual aggression .
Diplomatic relations must not be established .
The European Union must suspend any cooperation that is not strictly humanitarian and there must be a total embargo on the sale of arms as long as the fundamentalists remain in power , while assistance to refugees must be maintained .
Madam President , Afghanistan cannot continue to be the cruellest victim of the last vestiges of the cold war and of unscrupulous strategies , like those of Washington and Karachi , which have caused a veritable disaster .
Madam President , in the last month the world has been bombarded with bloody images from Afghanistan .
It has been ravished by war since December 1979 and today we are witnessing a new and terrifying violence as the Taliban militia attempt to implement a fundamentalist Islamic regime .
The Taliban have now begun their own fanatical religious crackdown and as the country emerges from the rubble of war , it wakes to a different terror .
We hear stories of Afghan women and girls who have been banned from working , from attending school , from leaving their houses unless accompanied by a male relative .
Many Afghan women are war widows and without their earnings their families starve .
Strict rules governing status and dress have been enforced , and I am sure we have all seen images of how the Taliban so-called religious police have brutally enforced these rules .
In one recent incident in Kabul these police actually beat nurses in a hospital who were arriving to help the injured and the dying .
Women doctors , as Mrs Baldi has said , are also being forcibly stopped from attending the sick and sick women are being told they cannot be examined by male doctors .
We have also had distressing reports of public executions , torture , stoning , decapitation and amputation .
These fanatical militiamen try to intimidate the country into submission by these means .
As a woman , a socialist and a Member of this Parliament , I believe we in the European Parliament must show our utter condemnation of these atrocities and make it clear that the international community will not tolerate these atrocities , that action must be taken and that women 's rights are human rights .
This must involve a coherent political approach to Afghanistan by the European Council and the Member States .
It must also mean an arms embargo and an embargo on any equipment that can be used by the Taliban in their bloody war .
In conclusion , if we do not act there could be even more terrifying consequences for the Afghan people and for the whole of south-west Asia .
Madam President , these men who call themselves the Taliban , these men whom we noted a year ago in the southern provinces of Afghanistan as they imposed their self-righteous insolence in the name of religious freedom and gloried in their power , these men who totally disregard the unique and essential presence of women in life , who go so far as to stop women caring for children in orphanages and to restrict the activities of female doctors , these men who ban women from teaching and stop them working outside the home , who deny girls the right to education and prevent them developing their minds , these men - men like them - will come to the fore elsewhere in the future unless we do something to stop them .
To impose economic sanctions against them may not be very democratic .
But it is very human to request them to respect minimum basic rights and to halt their appalling and hideous use of all sorts of physical punishment against those who do not follow their particular interpretation of Islamic law .
The time has come for us to stand up to fanaticism and to make it clear that each freedom , even religious freedom , must also entail showing respect for humanity and for the freedoms that are its as of right .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I think that what is now happening in Afghanistan is not something that concerns only Central Asia which is to some extent generally affected by the rumblings of war .
I actually believe what is happening there to be in the nature of a clear signal that the western countries , with their consolidated democracies and perception that the basic principles of human rights have in all cases and in all circumstances to be safeguarded , have dropped their guard .
I am firmly persuaded that it is the fact that western countries with their consolidated democracies have dropped their guard that is the primary cause of what is happening in Afghanistan .
I shall not repeat what has already been said by colleagues about the beheadings , the exhibiting of the body of the former president , the house-to-house searches , the segregation of women and all the things that the Koranic law , the Sharia , brings with it when given a reactionary interpretation , as fundamentalist instead of open and tolerant law .
I consider that international public opinion reacted very belatedly and very hesitantly to those actions , until the Taliban began its massacres ; in some cases , there has actually been complicity on the part of the international community !
I do not know what the role of Pakistan has been but it has certainly fanned the flames of war .
The issue of Afghanistan emerged long since without anyone intervening .
I am calling upon the Commission and the European Parliament to give a firm response to these events .
The rights of men and women have to be safeguarded everywhere , particularly when , as in this case , they are being cruelly and flagrantly violated .
Madam President , the after-effects of the Monroe doctrine are coming inexorably to the fore in Afghanistan .
Kabul , devastated by years of war and delivered up - as a result of yet another error of United States foreign policy - to the Taliban extremists who have compounded the horrors of the massacres with their interpretation of Islamic law , is now seeing the now chronic suffering of the defenceless civilian population .
Fanaticism , as we described it , culminating in the ban on and discrimination against women and plunging the whole region back into the dark ages .
From Pakistan to Uzbekistan , Tajikistan and Russia , Europe is yet again absent .
Now it is seeking to make amends by calling for the cooperation relationship to be broken off and for Afghanistan to be isolated , thereby adding to the suffering of the civilian population which is living through the atrocities of war .
We say that enough is enough ; Europe says the time has come for an end to the inconsistencies within it .
It must put an end to the inconsistencies and finally establish a clear and independent foreign policy , at last shouldering its responsibilities , without hesitation and avoiding inconsistencies .
Madam President , throughout the world more and more voices are being raised against what is happening in Afghanistan .
The taking of Kabul by the Taliban has resulted in a wave of dreadful crimes against the whole population and the imposition of barbarian and medieval rules of conduct as a result of a fanatical and extremist interpretation of Islamic law .
The main victims - and other colleagues have mentioned this - are women , excluded from all forms of employment and public activity , driven out of schools and hospitals and compelled to cover their whole body when outside the home .
It is , however , important that positive signals are coming from Afghan women themselves .
Just yesterday , in the city of Mazar-i Sharif , thousands of women protested against the Taliban , calling for support from the international community .
That is the point of what we are doing here today .
The European Parliament is today expressing its full support for the Afghan women and all of those who wish , finally , to build a democratic and secular Afghan state .
We need first of all to guarantee effective humanitarian aid to the thousands of refugees who have fled the country in recent weeks and , where possible , to the very many refugees living in Afghanistan itself .
But there will then have to be a more decisive political and diplomatic initiative , either from the European Union or from other international players , to bring an immediate end to the fighting in the country and begin to trace out new foundations for Afghanistan , based on respect for human rights and all ethnic and religious groups .
It is also vital that the United States and Pakistan should put an end to all political and material support for the Taliban , without which the Taliban would not have acquired the strength we today deplore .
We need to avoid at this time any gesture of recognition towards the new rulers of Kabul , and a very strict embargo on the supply of arms and other equipment must be imposed and enforced by the international community .
The Group of the European Socialist Party wishes therefore to reaffirm its own commitment to a positive solution to the Afghan conflict and particularly to support the struggle of millions of Afghan men and women against the fanatical fundamentalism of the Taliban .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission , like Parliament , is very concerned about the situation in Afghanistan , the dramatic nature of which has been highlighted by many of you .
The Commission regrets the recent events and that these events have further increased the distress of the inhabitants and aggravated the situation of Afghan women .
The Commission immediately reacted to the human rights violations perpetrated by the Talibans after the taking of Kabul .
Thus Mrs Bonino - and Mr dell 'Alba referred to it a few moments ago - denounced on behalf of the Commission , as long ago as 2 October , the unacceptable extortions committed by the Talibans and their behaviour , which marks a return to the barbarism of the blackest centuries of history .
The European Commission also made public , on 9 October , a statement deploring the violations of human rights , and especially the rights of women , in the regions in the hands of the Taliban .
We cannot be accomplices to such actions .
The Commission considers that the attitude of the new masters of Kabul , with regard to the basic principles of international law , is highly condemnable , whether it be the invasion of the UN building in Kabul , or the hanging of the former President Nadjibullah .
In May 1996 , the European Union , in a statement on Afghanistan , already expressed its concern .
More recently , the United Nations ' Security Council adopted , on 22 October last , a resolution demanding an immediate cease-fire , demanding the opening of negotiations under the auspices of the United Nations , in order to reach a lasting political solution , and demanding the cessation of all foreign intervention and the interruption of supplies of arms and weapons to all parties in the conflict .
Concerning the Commission , I remind you that the only aid given is humanitarian : health and food . On the subject of such aid , the Commission intends to continue its action in order to better meet the requirements of a very vulnerable population .
These requirements will increase with the onset of winter , which is particularly harsh in this part of the world .
Aid will be supplied fairly , without discrimination between men and women , giving help first to those who need it most .
We are not sparing any effort to define a common position to all donors , which can only facilitate the work of the NGOs in their contacts with local authorities .
Finally , the Commission is still very concerned by the increase in the production of narcotics on Afghan territory , whose main destination , as you may imagine , is Europe .
The Commission is also giving its support to the activities carried out as part of the United Nations ' programme of international drug control in Afghanistan .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1108 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Group , on the situation in Columbia ; -B4-1125 / 96 by Mr Howitt and Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on Colombia ; -B4-1135 / 96 by Mr Galeote Quecedo and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Colombia ; -B4-1160 / 96 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on Colombia ; -B4-1184 / 96 by Mr Carnero González and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the political situation in Colombia .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in Colombia is deteriorating fast .
The violence is escalating .
Total civil war threatens .
There are of course wide-scale human rights abuses , both by the government troops , the paramilitaries and the guerilla fighters .
The result of the Government 's strategy to contain dissent is that the rule of law is being undermined and of course that press freedom is being curtailed .
The Attorney-General , an upholder of human rights , has had his powers restricted by the Government .
This spiral of violence and oppression has to be broken .
The only way to achieve a lasting solution to this situation is through dialogue and the respecting by all parties of the rule of law and human rights .
I deplore the part which European firms appear to be playing in human rights violations and damage to the environment .
These firms should place themselves above reproach , observing the highest standards when it comes to human rights and protection of the environment .
European firms are after all the visible face of Europe in third countries .
The truth or otherwise of certain allegations needs to be verified quickly .
I thus call on the President of Colombia to publish the report of the Colombian Human Rights Commission so that we can conduct a serious review of all the facts .
Madam President , I wish to begin by joining colleagues in condemning all human rights violations in Colombia , in expressing solidarity with the peasant farmers and indigenous peoples denied access to making a living off the land and to repeat the call we made in Colombia for justice for the 120 families forcibly evicted from their land at Bellacruz .
However , in the time available I want to concentrate on just one issue .
When this Parliament convened its hearings on Shell 's inhuman exploitation of the Ogoni peoples in Nigeria last year , little did we think that we would so soon revisit shockingly equivalent allegations against other European oil companies - British Petroleum and Total of France in the Casanare region of Colombia from where our delegation has just returned : weekly oil spills , water contamination , chemical overflows , illegal sites and the invasion of protected forest - all admitted by local BP officials ; and where eyewitnesses describe fish floating dead in polluted rivers and livestock blinded from grazing on polluted fields and where the government 's Environment Minister admits that he prefers the oil revenues to fight a war to the environmental improvements to build a peace .
Everyone in Colombia agrees that the military is guilty of massive human rights violations , while , in the interests of securing their own profits , the European oil companies are said to acquiesce .
When the military is directly linked to threats , deaths and disappearances , how can BP come to an $ 11.6m voluntary agreement of collaboration with those same commanders ?
How can BP deny that it has passed photographs of protesters into the hands of the military , only to see those same people arrested or murdered when this leaked Human Rights Commission report , signed by four key Colombian Government officials , appears to show and confirm those same allegations ?
How can BP argue that it is not compromised when strike action against them is directly broken up by the military forces , including the documented murder of Carlos Mesías Arrigui and at least three further killings reported directly to us in the last month ?
Just two nights ago a prominent community leader , Virginia Oballer , and her son were murdered in the middle of the night .
In Colombia I was told that BP 's two-year-old social agreement with the local community remains unfulfilled and that Ramón Marino is one of a number of ex- and current BP employees now working in the government to smooth the agreement of environmental permits .
BP denies those allegations , it blames local people for inflicting environmental damage - so did Shell in Nigeria .
Perhaps today , most of all , we should listen to the local man who told me that to speak out for the community , for the environment or for human rights is suicide .
These are European oil companies .
Let us in Europe say to those local people today : you shall no longer choose between speaking out in fear or dying in silence .
Madam President , we support the great majority of the paragraphs in this joint motion for a resolution on Colombia because that country is going through a difficult situation characterized by widespread crimes against human rights .
But there are some specific aspects of the motion which we do not entirely share .
For instance , there is no proof that the Colombian government is responsible for the problems .
It is one thing that certain events are occurring under a government and quite another that it is causing them .
Nor can deaths be assumed to be murders without definite proof .
This Parliament cannot set itself up as supreme judge , condemning a government as an assassin , without a process of careful investigation of the facts to discover the truth without a shadow of a doubt .
Nor can European oil companies like BP or Total be condemned when there are official documents actually from the Human Rights Commission to the Colombian President , specifically stating that the incriminating reports should not be considered valid and that they are not definite proof , leading the companies involved to describe them as a campaign of defamation naturally damaging to world expansion of European companies .
We shall vote accordingly in a few moments .
Madam President , four weeks ago I visited Colombia as a member of the South America delegation .
The media have recently reported in depth about the increasingly serious conflicts about land there , in particular on the case of Hacienda Bellacruz .
This year , the murders and evictions by para-military units have escalated .
During our visit we were able to speak with representatives of the evicted peasant farmers and offer our assistance as Members .
But two days after we left , another two farmers were murdered .
One was a member of the negotiating committee for talks with the government .
Unfortunately Bellacruz is not an isolated case , rather it is the tip of the iceberg .
But Bellacruz has achieved a sad notoriety because the hacienda is owned by the Marulanda family .
Mr Carlos Arturo Marulanda is Colombia 's ambassador to the European Union .
Unfortunately he has not yet expressed a single word of regret about the murders and evictions .
We have given President Samper to understand that the reputation of his country will suffer if its ambassadors are not beyond reproach about violations of human rights .
We made it clear that those responsible for the murders and evictions in Bellacruz must be called to account and the peasant farmers ' families must be given their land back .
In the interests of its own development , Colombia urgently needs agricultural reform .
Unfortunately the trend in Colombia offers little cause for hope .
The involvement of the military , the guerillas but also the leadership of the country in the drugs trade , the omnipresent corruption , the government 's plans to further dismantle democratic rights such as freedom of the press , seem to be dragging this important Latin American country ever deeper into the abyss .
Only ten days ago Josué Giraldo , Chairman of the Human Rights Committee of Meta , was murdered .
In March last year he was our guest speaker at a human rights conference in Brussels supported by the EP .
Some of us knew Josué Giraldo personally .
We cannot allow the state to merely stand by and watch the activities of the bands of killers .
I expect all the parties in Parliament to take a resolute stand on this .
Nor must the EU cease supporting the democratic forces of civilian society in Colombia , which without doubt exist at every level , even in the government .
That is why we also call for the UN human rights office in Bogota cofinanced by the EU to be opened immediately .
It is quite incomprehensible why it has not opened yet .
I do not agree at all with the objections by the previous speaker , for anyone who travels the country with eyes to see and ears to hear is aware of what is happening there .
Madam President , Commissioner , over the last few months groups in this Parliament have been trying to move resolutions on what is going on in Colombia and unfortunately no progress could be made because they were minority groups .
Since the attempt to move these resolutions began , a chairman of a human rights committee has been assassinated in his doorway in front of his daughters , as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler just mentioned .
Two farm workers on the Bellacruz Estate , Eliseo and Eder Narváez , were also assassinated .
And I read out their names because hearing the names makes us remember they are people .
Another trade unionist in the oil industry has also been assassinated as well as - and we do not forget it - conservatives . I mean conservative candidates , like Álvaro Gómez Hurtado .
So it is not just people on the left who are being killed , anyone who defends democracy in Colombia is being killed .
In recent resolutions we have called for the immediate establishment of a human rights office in Colombia , as Mr Kreissl-Dörfler said , because that is essential .
We have stated that there were alternative crops to the drug traffic , which accounts for world movements of 500 , 000 million dollars .
The business is rich and powerful enough to pull a lot of strings and assassinate a lot of people .
And we have said so on many occasions here in the plenary of this Parliament .
I do not know if Parliament 's resolutions can prevent more deaths , but I think they should have been passed and I am delighted that such a resolution is going to be passed here today , because 316 people have disappeared since the Samper government took over and just as many have been assassinated . This Parliament cannot let this go on .
So I call on the plenary to support this resolution , especially in view of the fact that a colleague who works in my group has been threatened after denouncing the involvement of the Marulanda family in certain murders .
The situation is grave and the European Union must act .
Madam President , there are many points in the resolution which I do not dispute , but I very much regret that it only contains half-truths .
It takes up isolated cases but in no way describes the highly complex situation in that country .
I also regret the fact that after its return the delegation did not have any time at all to summarize its experiences and draw on them in order to draft a resolution , and not just on Colombia but on all three of the countries we visited which , apart from Colombia , were also Venezuela and Peru .
That is my first comment .
My second comment is this : fortunately you mention in recital D that the guerillas also violate human rights , but you should also refer to that in recital M and paragraph 7 , where you do not mention that people have been murdered by the guerillas too .
That needs to be said too .
Nor should we just name individual oil companies but tackle the problem as a whole .
Like you , we mourn the death of the human rights campaigner Giraldo , about which you express dismay in recital F. Incidentally he also worked with the Misereor campaign , which gives a great deal of money for Colombia .
People who make such statements should make rather more effort to look at the overall situation and also to say that there is simply not enough political will in the Colombian Parliament .
Corruption and a lack of willingness to tackle these things at their roots are to be found there too .
As the Latin America delegation we should take a much clearer stand vis à vis our colleagues .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission fully shares Parliament 's concern about the worrying deterioration in the human rights situation in Colombia .
The European Parliament 's mission , led by Mr Galeote at the end of September , was able to make its own judgement on this matter .
The Commission in particular wishes to pay tribute to the memory of Mr Josué Giraldo , and it would like the circumstances of his assassination to be quickly clarified .
Mr Howitt , as regards the families of Bellacruz , I would like to remind you that it is a problem which is the responsibility of the Colombian authorities .
However , the Commission emphasizes that this matter is being followed up closely in Bogota by its delegation , in collaboration with the ambassadors of the Member States .
The Commission is also perfectly aware of the current problems concerning the environment , and our delegation in Bogota , in cooperation with the ambassadors , it also following the matter .
But , more generally and , I would say more fundamentally , the weakening of State law in Colombia is linked to the size of the drug traffic in the country and the financial resources that this traffic generates .
In fact , and this is no secret to anyone , these financial resources permit widespread corruption at all levels and especially in the State apparatus .
To reinforce State law , it is therefore essential to put a stop to the drug traffic .
The Commission is fully committed to this fight .
In particular , it finances projects on the land aimed at promoting income-generating crops to replace coca and poppy .
Moreover , the European Union has just granted , with the new Generalized Preferences System , the GPS , increased ease of access to the European market for Andean countries engaged in the fight against drugs , in order to encourage them to continue their efforts .
Furthermore , Colombia benefits from priority treatment in the allocation of budget appropriations for democratization and human rights in Latin America .
In this respect , a large number of initiatives are in the course of being implemented with the help of local NGOs .
Finally , with regard to the human rights office , which was mentioned in particular by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mrs González Álvarez , the Commission is ready to send to Colombia , during the next few weeks , five observers who will be responsible for an on-site verification of the human rights situation .
These observers will be placed under the hierarchical authority of the office of the High Commissioner for human rights which is being installed in Bogota under the auspices of the United Nations .
However , the deployment of observers on site can only take place when Colombia and the United Nations have signed the convention governing the rules and terms of reference of this office .
We are willing to finance this action , but it has to be said - and for my part regrettably so - that discussions between the United Nations and Colombia are not yet formalized , despite several months of discussion .
It is clear that the Commission 's contribution can only materialize once this formality has been fulfilled .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I call Mr Kreissl-Dörfler on a point of order .
Just a brief clarification following what Mrs Lenz said .
I agree with her on many points .
We would indeed have liked to include more things in the resolution .
But , Mrs Lenz , would you just compare the various drafts that were tabled .
Then you will find that the present outcome really is the most one could expect and is excellent .
In particular , I would ask you to take a look at the resolution drafted by your own group .
I very much regret that we have not yet had an opportunity to sit down together following this truly important visit .
That too should be criticized in the strongest terms .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Cyprus
B4-1111 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Cyprus ; -B4-1131 / 96 by Mrs Green and Mrs Rothe , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the coldblooded murder of the Greek Cypriot Petros Kakoulis , aged 50 ; -B4-1164 / 96 by Mrs Daskalaki and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the tense situation in Cyprus and the murder of a third civilian by the Turks ; -B4-1167 / 96 by Mr Hatzidakis and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the murder of a middle-aged Greek Cypriot by the Turkish occupation army ; -B4-1171 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Orlando , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Cyprus ; -B4-1199 / 96 by Mr Papayannakis and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the killing of Petros Kakoulis , a Greek Cypriot citizen ; Sudan
B4-1140 / 96 by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-1152 / 96 by Mr Macartney , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the infringement of human rights in Sudan ; -B4-1155 / 96 by Mr Souchet , on behalf of the Europe of Nations Group , on the situation in Sudan ; -B4-1159 / 96 by Mr Telkämper and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on human rights violations in Sudan ; -B4-1200 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on human rights infringements in Sudan ; Attack on St George 's Cathedral in Istanbul
B4-1132 / 96 by Mr Avgerinos and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the attack upon the Cathedral Church of St George in the Ecumenical Partriarchate - Constantinople ; -B4-1134 / 96 by Mr Martens and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the bombing of the Cathedral Church of St George in the Ecumenical Patriarchate - Constantinople ; -B4-1156 / 96 by Mrs Roth and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the bomb attack against the Orthodox Cathedral of St George in Istanbul ; -B4-1163 / 96 by Mrs Daskalaki and others , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , on the bomb attack on the Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople ; -B4-1179 / 96 by Mr Alavanos and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on religious freedom in Turkey ; Bangladesh
B4-1109 / 96 by Mrs André-Léonard and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Bangladesh ; -B4-1151 / 96 by Mrs Leperre-Verrier and Mr Dupuis , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the rights of the indigenous peoples of Bangladesh and the disappearance of Mrs Kalpana Chakma ; -B4-1176 / 96 by Mr Moorhouse and Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the Chittagong Hill People in Bangladesh ; -B4-1185 / 96 by Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation in Bangladesh ; -B4-1201 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on minority rights in Bangladesh and the disappearance of Mrs Kalpana Chakma ; Venezuela
B4-1133 / 96 by Mrs Pollack on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the mining in the Amazon ( Venezuela ) ; -B4-1141 / 96 by Mr Eisma and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the mining in the Amazon ( Venezuela ) ; -B4-1162 / 96 by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mrs Schroedter , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on mining in the Amazon ; Bulgaria
B4-1128 / 96 by Mrs Hoff , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the grain shortage in Bulgaria ; -B4-1174 / 96 by Mr Christodoulou and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the food crisis in Bulgaria ; Zaire
B4-1157 / 96 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the situation of refugees in eastern Zaire ; Croatia
B4-1110 / 96 by Mr Cars and Mr La Malfa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Croatia.Cyprus
Madam President , not all that long ago yet another murder was committed in Cyprus by the Turkish occupying power and this naturally calls for a thorough investigation .
I wish to take this opportunity of saying that I challenge the growing idea that population groups in Cyprus are becoming increasingly violent towards one another .
No , what we have is a policy of intimidation and manipulation by the Turkish army of occupation designed precisely to create an impression of increasing mutual hatred .
The two populations are heartily sick of the conflict and want nothing more than a solution to the dispute .
Consequently we Europeans must focus our attention more on the population itself .
More avenues for exchange must be created by the Union without recognition being given to the occupying Denktash regime .
We must be pragmatic in encouraging more reciprocal contacts on the part of the civil society .
It is in the interest of a resolution to the conflict in the island and of Cyprus 's accession to the Union that these contacts should be stepped up .
This is the only real way of ensuring that the engineered spiral of attacks does not indeed become a spiral of hatred .
I can assure you that every move by Turkey to block Cyprus 's membership of the Union will mean a step backwards for Turkey herself .
Madam President , yet once more in this House we are debating the Cyprus problem and the unlawful and criminal conduct of Turkey .
The resolution that we have tabled condemns the Turkish military occupation forces in Cyprus for the cold-blooded murder of yet another unarmed civilian .
These incidents are a ploy by the occupation army and the illegal regime in northern Cyprus to create the impression that Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots cannot live peacefully together , which is utterly inaccurate and unsupported by history .
What they are really seeking to do , in disregard of every precept of law , is to somehow vindicate the occupation and the illegality .
But it is patently obvious that the irregularity in Cyprus is rooted in the illegal occupation by Turkey and in that country 's policy of intransigence .
I think that we in Europe , in the European Parliament , have a duty now , at this time , to maintain and intensify the pressure on Turkey , as we did this morning with our vote to freeze the funding .
Only in that way can Turkey be made to understand that if it wishes to have normal relations with us it will have to conform to our common principles and values .
Madam President , having to raise complaints about Turkish atrocities is becoming almost tedious .
In recent months , in Cyprus , on the acclaimed Green Line , the last wall of shame on the European continent , four unarmed Greek Cypriots have lost their lives .
All four were murdered in the most brutal manner by the Turkish occupation army .
The last of them , Petros Kakoulis , an unarmed pensioner , was arrested and murdered while collecting snails .
He was killed , in fact , in territory controlled by the British military base at Dhekelia .
The base police and officials of the United Nations peace-keeping force were not even permitted to approach .
All of this is part of a specific strategy of the occupation regime in northern Cyprus and the government in Ankara which , in reality , pulls the strings .
The ultimate objective is to create the impression that the two communities in Cyprus cannot peacefully co-exist .
The Turkish Cypriots , persecuted as they are by the settlers and the occupation army , are themselves also victims of this policy .
The most tragic victims of all are the few remaining Greek Cypriots and Maronites in the enclave who are being denied basic human rights and living lives of constant fear .
They have no right of communication , no health care facilities and have been refused permission to replace a teacher who is retiring .
Turkey must understand that it cannot expect an improvement in its relations with the European Union until it changes its ways .
Furthermore , the commitment by Europe not to allow Cyprus to be a hostage of Turkey must now be emphasized more than ever , given that the timetable for the negotiations leading to the accession of Cyprus has been established and commonly agreed .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are officially debating Cyprus , but the real issue is once again the illiberal conduct of the Turkish Government , both in Turkey and in Cyprus .
The joint motion for a resolution was prompted by the murder in Cyprus , by the Turkish army , of citizen Petros Kakoulis .
Yet again , the organs of a state - Turkey - which has relations with the European Union , are committing murder .
The situation is all the more serious in that officials from the United Nations peace-keeping force were prevented from visiting the scene of the killing .
Turkey is thus continuing to maintain occupying troops in Cyprus in complete disregard for United Nations resolutions .


I wish to make three points : firstly , to condemn the murder of Petros Kakoulis and express my condolences to his relatives ; secondly , to underline the need for a proper investigation to identify those responsible and bring them to justice ; and , thirdly , to remind the Turkish Government that it must respect human rights and that it cannot expect to enjoy the advantages - including the economic advantages - of the international community if it rides roughshod over human rights and fundamental freedoms .
It is in fact not tolerable that there should continue to be two separate approaches , one to economic issues and the other to human rights .
Finally , I call upon the states and the European Institutions to speed up the accession of Cyprus to the European Union , as this is a crucial step in moving towards a real solution to the Cyprus problem .
Madam President , the successive murders of unarmed citizens of Cyprus by the army of occupation or the forces of Mr Denktash cannot , of course , be attributed to any weakness of the latter , to an incapacity of his to react in a proportionate manner to things that he objects to - by having demonstrators arrested rather than killed in cold blood , for example .
The supposed Turkish Cypriot state certainly does have that capacity .
However , Madam President , the political problem is that these murders were planned and carried out deliberately with the aim of creating the impression that the two communities in Cyprus are incapable of living together in harmony and , therefore , of justifying the ethnic cleansing and the absolute separation of the two populations , precisely at this time when initiatives are in the offing for the commencement of processes that can lead to a solution of the Cyprus problem .
We must not fall for this ploy .
The only weakness is ours in brooking such perceptions , such goings-on and such leaders .
The people of Cyprus are , indeed , capable of living together again in a unified and democratically organized country ; in a country of the very sort that the organizers of the recent murders are striving to prevent emerging .
Mr President , on behalf of the PSE Group I condemn in the strongest possible terms the killing of yet another individual at the demarcation line in Cyprus .
This is the third unarmed Greek Cypriot to have been murdered at the illegal border in Cyprus in the space of a few months .
Turkey , the occupying regime , wants to give the impression that the two ethnic groups cannot coexist , that the ' green line ' is a state border .
That is a cruel , scandalous and , in my view , unsuccessful strategy .
Wrong remains wrong .
A flagrant violation of international law remains a flagrant violation of international law - even after 22 years .
The world at large knows that .
We have made it clear here in the European Parliament this morning that Turkey will not receive any more financial support .
Turkey knows now that we are no longer prepared to accept the daily infringements of human rights in Turkey and in Cyprus .
And we in the European Parliament also expect the Commission and especially the Member States to put greater pressure on Turkey to withdraw its occupying forces , support the demilitarization proposal and make it possible to find a just and peaceful solution in Cyprus .
Madam President , Parliament should know that the four murders in Cyprus did not occur as the result of conspiracies by Taliban-style fanatics or by hit men in the pay of drug traffickers .
They were carried out by forces assembled from an occupying army representing an organized state , namely Turkey , with which this Community and this Parliament have relations and various dealings .
These criminal actions must be seen in that light , as must the regime of suffering imposed on the people in the enclave , specifically in Karpassia , where out of 20 , 000 Greek Cypriots and Maronites only 700 now remain . They have had no choice but to leave because the conventions and international law regarding human rights have counted for nothing and have been violated in every respect .
This and what Turkey is seeking with its pillaging of the archaeological , religious and cultural heritage in Cyprus and its threat to convert the church of St. Sophia in Constantinople into a mosque are all of a piece .
Therefore , if this Parliament and this Community are serious about ending this international crime they must jettison calculations about investments and military aspirations and stop the dealings with Turkey , at least to the extent of imposing specific economic sanctions to secure the restoration of normality in Cyprus and to enable the two communities there to live in peace together .
Mr President , in December last year Parliament voted by a large majority to approve the customs union with Turkey , together with billions in financial aid from Europe to Turkey .
Nevertheless we already knew at that point , last year , that Turkey had since 1974 been holding a piece of European territory , the northern part of the island of Cyprus , under military occupation , and that it was pursuing a policy of cultural and indeed literal genocide there against the Greek Cypriots .
Obviously that knowledge counted for little compared with the nice little gifts and supposed study tours being dished out by the Turkish Government at the time .
So I have very grave reservations concerning the honesty of at least some of the authors of today 's resolution .
We could really have flexed our muscles last December but all we have now is a protest on paper .
It is certainly not a partial freezing of MEDA funds which will cause the Turkish Government to have a change of heart .
Secondly , I would point out that Cyprus 's accession to the European Union is made very awkward by the Turkish occupation because a Turkish invasion bridgehead via Cyprus is unacceptable to us , but I would also remind you that the Turkish foreign minister is on record as saying in so many words that if Cyprus becomes a member of the European Union Turkey will annex the northern part of Cyprus .
So , and it has been said many times already , we need to tell Turkey some home truths .
Yes , we want the best possible relations with this neighbour and partner in NATO , but Turkey needs to fulfil a number of conditions first , the first of them being the withdrawal of the Turkish occupying forces from Cyprus .
Sudan

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there has been civil war in Sudan for years and its neighbours are getting into difficulties because of the influx of refugees and the Sudanese attempts at destabilization .
Other results are human rights violations such as massacres , torture and enslavement .
As ever , non-Muslim religious sects are being persecuted and excluded from humanitarian and other vital aid .
Against the will of the majority of the people , the government is trying to turn Sudan into an Islamic state .
That is why the sanctions imposed by the international community must be maintained .
The EU may only resume its development activities when the government of Sudan observes the EU and ACP resolutions and the resolutions of the UN Security Council , of which we have been reminding them for years .
Unfortunately there is as yet no visible sign of success .
In the interests of the suffering people of Sudan , visible signs of success are , however , urgently needed and I hope we will obtain them .
Mr President , the Sudanese situation is one of these on-going situations where one keeps feeling that this regime cannot last .
It is one of several in the world which seem inherently unstable , where the condemnation , as has been said by Mr Schiedermeier , from the United Nations has been strong and consistent .
Our own European Parliament , in joint assembly with the African , Caribbean and Pacific countries , has condemned the situation in Sudan .
We must maintain the pressure on this regime because I am quite convinced its days are numbered .
In supporting the resolution , let me focus on two points in particular : one is that the right of self-determination for the southern peoples has to be part of a peace settlement .
This is something to which the authorities in Khartoum have been particularly deaf .
And yet if we look next door to what happened in Ethiopia , they had the wisdom to accept the Eritrean right of self-determination and there is now a peaceful regime in Eritrea which is , I think , an inspiration to its neighbour and which has , in turn , been suffering from the export of revolution from Sudan .
It is a classic example of a dictatorship which is more interested in foreign adventures than in the well-being of its own subjects .
The final point I would like to make concerns sanctions .
The European Union and its Member States are not very good at applying sanctions .
Arguably , they should have been applying them in many cases where they have shied away from them .
But certainly as far as the application of aid sanctions is concerned from the European Union , our position has been a consistent and honourable one .
We have to say to the Sudanese that this will continue to be the situation of the European Union collectively and severally through its Member States as long as that regime does not respect democracy , civil rights and the right to self-determination .
In conclusion , I feel that in the longer or even the medium-run we should be optimistic , but meantime , in the present , we have to be very vigilant and very consistent .
Mr President , the human rights situation in Sudan has been very serious for a long time now and is clearly getting even worse .
In the civil war in the south between the fundamentalist Islamic government and the insurgents the civilian population too is being showered with fragmentation bombs .
At the same time the insurgents are falling out amongst themselves .
The dismal upshot of this civil war is millions of refugees and total deaths estimated at over a million .
At the same time forced Islamization is being imposed in the north controlled by the Khartoum Government .
Non-Muslims , not least Christians , are increasingly the victims of human rights abuses .
But those made to suffer most by the Khartoum Government are manifestly the children of Sudan .
Many children are seized , subjected to savage acts , forced to convert to Islam and in some cases trained for deployment in the civil war in the south .
The Sudanese Government is becoming increasingly isolated as a result of the activities of the resistance movement within the country but also isolated from the rest of the world community .
Only Iran continues openly to give aid .
Nevertheless there seems for the moment to be no end in sight to this Islamic regime of terror .
Regrettably we have to concede that the ability of the European Union to exert pressure on the Sudanese Government is limited .
Precisely because the country is so isolated it is not very sensitive to economic and political pressure .
It is probably the neighbouring countries of Eritrea , Ethiopia , Kenya and Uganda which are best placed to find a solution to the troublesome situation in Sudan .
We must ask the Union to establish whether the proposals made by these countries under the aegis of IGADD will be able to bring about a solution and if so to give them our support .
Mr President , I agree with everything that has been said about human rights violations in Sudan and the terrible civil war which is raging there . On behalf of my Group too I also deplore the violence shown by both sides , not only by the Islamic fundamentalists but the rebels as well , with constant abuses of human rights and constant abuses of young children drafted into the army .
I also endorse the use of sanctions , though I wonder if that is enough .
I recently read an article about a women 's group operating out of Nairobi , Women 's Voice for Peace . These are Sudanese women from the south who cautiously made contact with women from the north , taking advantage of the Beijing conference to do so , in order to call on the belligerents to lay down their arms .
Perhaps we ought to think about giving more support to similar , small European initiatives as a way of helping to bring about an end to the violence .
Mr President , we have to understand that the Sudanese government is committed to a strategy of destabilization affecting the whole of the Horn of Africa .
The infiltrations of Sudanese Islamic extremists into Eritrea and the attempt to undermine the Addis Abeba and Asmara governments reveal the antidemocratic nature of the Khartoum government , demonstrated also by the very serious violations of human rights and democratic freedoms already condemned by other honourable Members .
The authorities in Khartoum are also continuing their military offensive in southern Sudan , thereby causing hundreds of victims and preventing the necessary humanitarian aid from reaching the non-Muslim population .
The IGADD negotiations , that is to say the only genuine forum in which an effort has been made to find a solution to the devastating war being waged in southern Sudan , have also reached a dangerous impasse .
In other words , we are seeing a systematic boycott of the work of that body and it seems clear that Sudan is not now seeking to find a way out of the war to which it has committed itself .
That being the case , the Union must compel the authorities in Khartoum to negotiate with the parties to the conflict , the only way of restoring the fundamental human freedoms that are currently being seriously violated .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are situations where one can lose hope .
Resolution after resolution , we must clearly acknowledge that the situation in Sudan is one of these .
I believe nevertheless that we should pursue our efforts in two directions .
The first , naturally , is on the humanitarian side , which the European Union is doing very well . We provide the largest support for non-government organizations which operate in southern Sudan from the countries which have been mentioned .
There is still a vast amount to do .
Relief should be sent , and the Khartoum government does not let us do so .
Efforts should be multiplied so that the children , the first victims of the conflicts , can be taken into care .
I have mentioned children : yes , in the two camps children are made use of in Sudan , to reduce them to slavery , or to turn them into soldiers or , simply , cannon fodder .
And then there is a second direction in which the European Union must continue its efforts : the political direction .
Everything has been said about this government that wishes to impose Sharia on the Christian and Animistic populations of the south .
Everything has been said about this government which spreads terror and terrorism in neighbouring countries .
But not enough has been said about the fact that within this country and in Khartoum , there are also demonstrations by civil society .
There are women who rebel .
There are student and trade union demonstrations .
They must be given support .
International organizations - the monetary Fund , all possible organizations - must side with us and under European pressure do their duty to prevent this government from going further in human rights violations , oppression and terrorism .
Finally , we must not forget the people , because if we understand rightly , there have been two successive wars .
This situation has lasted for over thirty years .
Over thirty years !
Do you realize the dozens of thousands , hundreds of thousands of victims this represents ?
One tends to get used to it and resolutions are not sufficient .
Each one of us must also be aware that this is one of the last fights against barbarism in the world , and that it is necessary to persist , continue and then , perhaps also , adopt a new resolution which we all support .
Mr President , what we have in Sudan is a stable regime in a stable situation which will ensure a stable future for the Sharia government in Khartoum .
Forget it , things are not going to change .
Perhaps we can do something else , perhaps we can give food and aid to organizations which , I have the charter here in my hand , have actually concluded an agreement with the Khartoum Government , which have peace proposals from the south aimed at trying to get the Sudanese Government in the north to recognize Southern Sudan , Bahr al-Ghazal , as a kind of autonomous republic .
This is ultimately what happened with Abyssinia or Ethiopia and Eritrea .
I think that is the only way to stop the civil war which has been going on since 1965 from claiming more than two and a half million lives .
Attack on St George 's Cathedral in Istanbul
Mr President , the attack on the Patriarchate Cathedral Church of St. George in Constantinople by Turkish Islamist extremists will , of course , be condemned by every decent and liberal person , regardless of political persuasion or religious conviction .
What causes questions , however , is the failure of the Turkish Government to condemn this terrorist outrage , coupled with its reluctance to give an undertaking to restore the damage caused to the cathedral - plus the fact of its further provocation in announcing its intention , through its minister with responsibility for cultural affairs , to convert the church of Saint Sophia into a mosque , in blatant disregard of fundamental principles relating to freedom of religious expression and basic rules on the protection of cultural monuments of international importance .
The Turkish Government should be compelled to give concrete proof of its opposition to actions such as the attack on St. George 's Cathedral and to state unequivocally that it has no intention of converting the church of Saint Sophia into a mosque .
Mr President , I rise to join the previous speaker in condemning the outrage of someone tossing a hand grenade into the courtyard of the Patriarchate .
I have been there and it really is a restricted area .
Mercifully , no one was hurt .
I welcome the condemnation which was issued by the Turkish ambassador in Washington but it is a matter of words , words , words .
I receive many letters from Turkish ambassadors round the world .
What we need is action .
The real position of the Turkish authorities can be illustrated by the fact that last month the President had authorized that the Orthodox school on an island opposite Istanbul should be allowed to open .
It has been in readiness for years but it did not happen .
I was at a lunch in a private room in a restaurant in Istanbul where a bishop was frightened of pronouncing grace because it was a risky procedure .
What we need is not words .
We have a series of these sort of incidents and very little condemnation within Turkey .
The condemnation I received was from the Turkish ambassador in Washington .
Mr President , anyone who turns Christian churches into mosques is committing an attack on the freedom of worship and freedom of conscience !
Anyone who tries to Islamicize Hagia Sophia in Istanbul is committing a cardinal falsification of European history and anyone who commits or countenances violence against the Ecumenical Patriarchate should know that all the Christians in the world regard that as an attack on their freedom of worship and of conscience !
I therefore declare on behalf of my group that disassociation from the declaration that Hagia Sophia is a Muslim church , an assurance that the Ecumenical Patriarchate can continue to work undisturbed , the restoration of the Cathedral of St George and the reopening of the theological school in Chalki - these are not requests to the Turkish Government , these are requirements , on the basis of which it will be decided in what direction Turkey and its government intend to go , whether in the direction of a Europe based on human rights and democracy , or in the direction of exclusion from it .
The European Parliament has a duty to make this either / or situation categorically clear .
Mr President , everyone is familiar with the status of Constantinople as a treasure house of the European cultural heritage over the centuries .
For more than a thousand years it was the capital of a great Christian empire . It has always been the headquarters of the Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarchate , which makes it a special and profoundly important place for millions of Orthodox Christians throughout the world .
At the end of September a hand grenade was exploded in the Patriarchate by Muslim extremists , and that was not the first outrage that has occurred .
The Christian monuments and graveyards - not to mention other , private , Christian properties - in Turkey have been handy targets for vandals .
The people responsible are , of course , extremists .
But does not the failure of the Turkish Government even to express regret serve , perhaps , as a commendation and encouragement to the extremists ?
And are they not heartened by the closure of the theological college at Chalki , which is directly linked to the fortunes of the Patriarchate ?
Add the official threats to convert the church of Saint Sophia , which is a monument of the greatest importance for European Christianity , into a mosque , and the picture becomes clear .
However , our warning to Turkey must be even clearer - to the effect that if it really wants to draw near to Europe it must show respect for European monuments and institutions which very much pre-date its own emergence in the region .
Mr President , I think that it should be the Turkish Government itself , as much as the European Parliament , which ought to be showing interest in preserving and promoting the rich heritage handed down from the depths of history in Constantinople by the various cultures and religions .
Sadly , however , the Turkish Government is in the business of stoking up fanaticism and malevolence , and these have attained their culmination , one might say , in the statement by the Minister for the presidency on the conversion of the church of Saint Sophia into a mosque .
The fact that this resolution on religious freedom in Turkey has the support of all the political groups is very encouraging , and it is pleasing that all of the groups have on this occasion accepted our resolution calling on the Turkish Government to respect the character of the church of Saint Sophia . The proposal in one of the final paragraphs of the resolution stating the requirement for an integrated initiative by the European Union - when funding to Turkey is given the green light - and UNESCO and the Turkish Government to draw up an inventory of Christian and other cultural monuments in Constantinople and to put forward proposals for their restoration and maintenance is also very constructive .
Mr President , the bomb attack perpetrated in Istanbul against St George 's Cathedral is deplorable as it reveals a dangerous religious extremism in Turkey .
Unfortunately , Turkey does not have a monopoly on such events : the profaning of religious monuments and cemeteries also exists in countries in the European Union .
The Christian denominations in Turkey are religious minorities ; for this reason they are particularly vulnerable and require particular solicitude from the authorities .
I am not known for preaching indulgence towards Turkey , because of the abominable human rights situation , which clearly includes religious freedoms .
In this specific case , I feel , however , that the joint resolution goes beyond what is necessary .
It proceeds by amalgamation and , for this reason , tends to suggest that the incriminated contracts benefit from a passive and cunning complicity of the Turkish authorities .
Thus , although motions for resolutions made in the name of the PPE Group and the Green Group specifically state a condemnation in due and proper form , by the Turkish authorities , of the attack on St George 's cathedral , the joint resolution nevertheless deplores the absence of such condemnation .
To remain credible , and before setting ourselves up as public arraigner , we must , without fail , base ourselves on established facts .
One can certainly heap all evils on Turkey , but to do so by making affirmations which can easily be contradicted especially weakens the cause we are defending .
Bangladesh
Mr President , we are remembering the disappearance , on 12 June last , of Mrs Kalpana Chakma , the secretary-general of the Hill Women 's Federation , who battled vigorously against the repression of women and for their emancipation .
Mrs Kalpana Chakma has always fought for the recognition of fundamental rights of the Chakma population and also other ethnic groups present in the Chittagong Hill Tracts .
Her disappearance , in which elements of the Bangladeshi army may be implicated , is at the least worrying .
We strongly request that a solution be sought for the conflict which is raging between all the parties involved in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and call upon responsible politicians to do everything possible to halt the colonization and militarization of this region .
We insist that humanitarian aid be provided without impediment .
Finally , it is a matter of urgency that a committee of inquiry be set up so that the persons responsible for taking Mrs Kalpana Chakma be denounced and sent to trial .
Mr President , Commissioner , the existence of entire indigenous population groups in the southeast of Bangladesh is under threat from the political and economic colonization decided upon by the Dacca government .
Daily , in Bangladesh , the rights of 700 , 000 tribespeople are trampled upon , as they are compelled to live within the unyielding region of the Chittagong Hill Tracts under the watchful eye of the Bangladeshi army .
Political repression has also been stepped up in the name of the struggle against a terrorism that simply does not exist , as demonstrated by the case already mentioned of the disappearance of Kalpana Chakma , the young leader of the Chakma movement , whom the army literally caused to vanish .
We need to make strong representations to the Bangladeshi government of Mrs Sheena to change the policy hitherto applied to the Chittagong area and undertake to strike at those responsible for the abduction of Kalpana Chakma .
Europe has also to secure the immediate opening-up of the area controlled by the army to journalists and the NGOs in an effort to prevent the rights of the people living there continuing to be disregarded .
Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group in support of the joint motion for a resolution on human rights in Bangladesh .
I am aware of the multiple problems facing that poor country - one of the world 's poorest - but nevertheless , I think we can expect from the government of Bangladesh the same respect for human rights that we expect from the rest of the countries in the world .
We are aware of the involvement of the Bangladeshi army in repressing the hill tribes in the Chittagong Hill Tracts and we are concerned about the fact that the army is preventing freedom of movement and freedom of political and cultural expression .
There are rumours that at least a section within the army was involved in the disappearance on 12 June 1996 of Mrs Kalpana Chakma , the secretary-general of the Hill Women 's Federation .
What we are urging is the early release of this lady , a condemnation of the repressive policies being pursued , some commitment by the new government in Bangladesh to commit itself to a peaceful solution of the problem and unrestricted visits by human rights organizations to that part of the country .
Mr President , I too speak on this particular resolution on Bangladesh and can but confirm what the two previous speakers have said .
It is yet another difficult human rights situation in the world .
There is great concern about the Chakma people , the Chittagong Hill Tracts People and the disappearance of Mrs Kalpana Chakma .
We must hope that by drawing attention to this in the European Parliament and the European Union , the military will desist from some of its operations because , without a doubt , fundamental rights of expression are at risk , there is restriction of movement and cultural rights .
It is not a pretty picture .
We look to the Commission for its views .
Mr President , please allow me to say something which is certainly out of order , but correct in my view , given the way the situation is developing at the moment .
It says on our screens that we are going to discuss Venezuela .
Unfortunately it was too late to incorporate a last minute development into our resolution .
As you know , dozens and dozens of prisoners have died in a Venezuelan prison in truly dreadful circumstances .
Some governments of the Union , including the Spanish government , have demanded immediate clarification of this tragedy and punishment of those responsible .
Mr President , I think this should be noted so that Parliament can also concern itself with this situation .
Venezuela
Mr President , the threat posed by mining and logging to the rainforest , the indigenous peoples who inhabit them and to the environment in South America is sadly nothing new .
Over recent years the devastation caused has been immense , particularly in Venezuela .
According to the FAO , between 1981 and 1990 deforestation there reached an average of 600 , 000 hectares a year - an area larger than Costa Rica or Switzerland - double the rate of the 1970s .
The rate in the 1980s was treble that of Peru and double that of Brazil and of all the tropical countries in South America taken together .
Bolivar State in Venezuela has already been the scene of new concessions for timber extraction and has suffered the impact of uncontrolled alluvial gold-mining .
Now the Venezuelan Government is proposing to abrogate the laws which prevent similar activities in Amazonas State , which was previously an area for conservationist policies .
In fact , it is here in Amazonas that the Commission is financing a project , along with the government , to promote conservation .
It is difficult to avoid cynicism if the government now opens the doors to environmental destruction in the same state .
There is , of course , severe economic pressure on Venezuela at the present time .
Extreme poverty has increased from 25 % to nearly 50 % in the last 15 years and the external debt absorbs 20 to 30 % of all foreign earnings .
However , it appears there is considerable opposition to the proposals in Venezuela itself and we must speak out strongly and ask the Commission and the World Bank also to oppose these proposals .
Deforestation cannot resolve the long-term economic problems of Venezuela but it will cause more deaths of the indigenous peoples and destroy valuable resources .
The European Parliament must speak out strongly on this issue .
Mr President , the issue here is human rights and protection of the natural environment .
Protection of the natural environment because before the month is out the Government of Venezuela will be giving the go-ahead for large-scale mining and logging in the Amazonas Territory .
That is of course very bad news for this unique area of tropical rainforest which will be destroyed .
But the proposed mining and logging is also an immediate disaster for the thousands of indigenous people living there .
Diseases introduced from outside their environment and groundwater polluted by mining operations present a serious threat to the health of these local inhabitants .
But this resolution also reflects a direct interest of the European Union since an environmental project funded by the European Union is very close to the area now being threatened by mining .
That project may even be seriously undermined .
We thus think it essential that the European Commission , which has some responsibility in the region because of this project , should make representations to the Venezuelan authorities and the World Bank .
Mr President , the Government of Venezuela is intending to abrogate two laws , which will allow mining and logging to resume in the Amazonas rainforest .
Surely it should have come to their ears by now that such activities lead to irreparable ecological damage to the rainforest !
The illegal digging by Venezuelan miners and Brazilian diamond and gold-hunters is already posing a huge risk for the region , which the authorities are unable to handle .
At the same time the natural environment of the indigenous inhabitants is being further destroyed and thus condemned to death .
We are not trying to prescribe to Venezuela whether it may or may not use its natural resources , but if this sensitive region of Amazonas is destroyed , the Venezuelans and their future generations will be the first to have to pay for it , quite apart from the rest of mankind .
The EU must support alternatives in Venezuela as in all the other Amazonas states .
In fact Venezuela is already partly on the right road , as we recently discovered from talks in situ .
I am convinced that if the ecological problems are not resolved or become exacerbated , the social problems will also become exacerbated , and if the social problems are not resolved , that will exacerbate the ecological problems .
This vicious circle must finally be broken , and here the European Union must offer its support , as it must also do in Europe .
Bulgaria
Mr President , Bulgaria , which is one of six countries in eastern and central Europe with an association agreement with the European Union , is facing an economic and social crisis of great complexity .
Our resolution relates specifically to the critical grain shortage which the country is facing this year .
The shortage is made even more grave by the approach of winter and threatens to have a serious effect on Bulgaria 's population .
I believe that there should be an emergency support programme to help Bulgaria overcome this serious nutritional crisis .
I believe even more fervently , however , that the most important things that we can do now are to make it abundantly clear to the government and people of Bulgaria that the European Union will honour its moral obligation under the association agreement and support the Bulgarian population during the current difficulties and to assure them that their country 's relations with the European Union will not be cast into question or jeopardized as a result of these difficulties .
Mr President , much as I respect the humanitarian sensibilities which Mr Papakyriazis demonstrates in the Socialist Group 's resolution , I must say I was disappointed by it because I certainly never expected to see a lack of political insight on the part of the Socialists .
In the case of Bulgaria , unfortunately , not only do we have a humanitarian problem but one which has very largely been caused by government policies .
The policies of a Government which allowed far too much grain to be sold abroad , by exporters who possibly included friends of the Government , without overall consideration of the interests of the population and the food supply to that population .
It was then found that there was a shortage .
So grain prices are rising , there are likely to be bread queues outside the bakers ' shops , things are getting expensive and the same friends are now successfully importing cereals .
Nice little killings are being made from both operations and I think it is particularly bad that we do not refer to this in our resolution , that we do not criticize the Government 's policy on imports and exports because this is of course the main point at issue .
The Christian Democrats thus put down an alternative resolution which says that we should indeed do something , but we should criticize the Government for its policy which has to be changed , we should work through NGOs , on a decentralized but carefully monitored basis , but we should not allow the friends of the Government to profit once again from the humanitarian assistance we are rushing to provide .
I think this subject needs to be addressed primarily from the political point of view and I very much regret , I tried to get the Socialist resolution taken as a basis , but there was not in the end any agreement on this and so we do not have a compromise resolution .
I would say we are better off having no resolution from Parliament than a resolution which , wrongly , is purely humanitarian because this will not help the people of Bulgaria in the long term .
If the politics are not right nobody benefits .
We should make that point very forcibly in this instance .
Mr President , unfavourable weather conditions can certainly explain the poor harvest in Bulgaria .
Nevertheless , they do not suffice to explain the unfortunately chronic weakness in the Bulgarian economy in general , and in agriculture in particular !
A severe shortage of cereals , with an economic crisis in the background : this is what can aggravate a social situation which is already sufficiently explosive .
The action to which the Commission is invited by Parliament firstly aims to fill the immediate gaps in supplies .
Very good !
As for the impact of the urgent measures recommended in the resolution , we realize that they are well-founded , but they are also transitory .
In a more distant future , Bulgaria will not be able to make the economy of reforms worthy of this name and even bring the country out of economic slump , with its fate of exclusions and social destitution .
Zaire
Mr President , the situation in Zaire has hotted up somewhat due to the violent confrontation between the Zairean army and the Banyamulenge militias .
As you know , all manner of different refugee groups , both Tutsis and Hutus , are in Zaire in the most miserable of circumstances .
Things have reached such a point that the United Nations and international aid agencies have decided on a partial suspension of their aid .
So it is vital to find ways of ensuring that humanitarian aid gets through to the refugees in Zaire who after all are not there for the fun of it .
I would ask the European Commission to do everything in its power to ensure that the Zairean Government meets its obligations towards the refugees and that those refugees receive help .
Of course we in Europe must also seek ways of getting humanitarian aid to these refugees .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has already been said repeatedly in this House that the problem of the Rwandan refugees within Zairean territory has to be resolved if we want to avoid a serious conflict .
We have now reached that point .
The situation is very worrying .
Mrs van Dijk has just made that point .
At the end of September , the motion for a resolution alludes to it , there was a confrontation between army units of Rwanda and Zaire , humanitarian food aid is being blocked in a bid to starve the population and a serious threat hangs over this region , not least because of the level of tension apparent in the last few weeks in Zaire .
Now is the time for a major initiative of preventive diplomacy , if there was ever a right time then it is now .
For the benefit of Mr Kouchner who has already argued convincingly in favour of preventive diplomacy , I would say that it is now or never .
Until such time as the refugee problem has been resolved the international community should insist that army units , whether from Zaire , Rwanda or anywhere else , should be banned from the territory of Kivu province .
Because otherwise there would be no end to the conflict and we would have a bloodbath with enormous tribal repercussions .
We cannot at the present time predict how far this conflict may spread and what may happen .
We like the draft put down by Mrs Aelvoet on behalf of the Greens .
But we think it is rather too short , I would say rather too mild , at this precise and dramatic juncture .
This is why we tried , unfortunately too late , to liaise with the various groups .
It transpired that Mrs Aelvoet was ill , and so was unable to be here either yesterday or today .
But these contacts produced a small text , a brief paragraph .
We now have signatures from all the groups , I say again from all the groups here , to the effect that this should be added as an oral amendment when we come to vote , to give the resolution a lot more force , a lot more muscle , if you like .
I will say it again .
The text has been signed by members of all the groups .
If that text is now approved we will , we think , have a very good text .
That is not to say that we should not , in a few weeks ' time , as part of our discussion of the position of countries in the Great Lakes Region , hold an in-depth debate on the subject . But just for now , since we want to make our wishes known , we need a text which will be taken note of by the Commission , the Council and , I repeat , the international community and one which may perhaps save hundreds of lives .
Let me read it out to you .
It was drafted in French for easier consideration by the various groups .
It goes like this :
' request that a final attempt at preventive diplomacy be made and , if necessary , request that the international community do everything to prevent the presence of military forces on Kivu territory . Pending a solution to the refugee problem , the territory will be placed under the authority of the United Nations . '
( NL ) I repeat , all the groups have put their names to this .
If we could accept this as an oral amendment we could vote on it .
I repeat , it may have a considerable influence .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union must be concerned at what is happening in the area of the Great Lakes .
The violent clashes of last September between the Rwandan and Zairean armies , the clashes between the Tutsi Banyamulenge militias of Zairean origin and the Zairean army itself and the heightened tension that exists in Rwanda and Burundi leave me greatly concerned for the future .
The deep-seated instability that prevails in the region of the Great Lakes makes the situation delicate and worrying because there is a risk of more general war .
The some 250 , 000 refugees who have taken refuge in eastern Zaire , and more precisely in the region of Ulvira , have been left totally isolated because the staff of the international humanitarian relief organizations have left the zone for safety reasons and the voluntary repatriation programmes have collapsed because of the tensions that still exist in the region and mean that the people cannot have confidence in the local authorities or in the sudden re-establishment of a civilian status quo that respects human rights and democracy .
We must put pressure on the Zairean government and on neighbouring countries to protect the refugees , and the whole of the international community should mobilize so that the fate of those people is not merely a concern expressed in words and demagogy but finds expression and takes the form of specific action , working alongside the Organization for African Unity .
I agree completely with Mr Tindemans when he said that we need to make every effort to bring into effect preventive diplomacy so that we finally achieve a peace process which we all hope will safeguard fundamental freedoms and human rights .
Mr President , it has been said , that for some days an explosive situation has prevailed in north Kivu .
The ethnic battles that have steeped this region in blood have thrown a human tide of 250 , 000 refugees onto the roads .
In less than one week , the twelve refugee camps of Uvira have been emptied .
The few humanitarian NGOs still on site have recorded 78 civilians killed in the confrontations between the Zairean army and the Banyamulenge , who are Tutsis of Rwandan origin , established for generations in Zaire .
Time is pressing , as the battles have extended to all the border provinces of Rwanda , Burundi and Uganda .
This is why we are asking the Commission to examine , with the countries in the region , the creation of corridors for the transport of humanitarian aid to the refugees : unfortunately there are only , alas , three days ' supplies left .
We have learned today that Belgium would agree to adopt a role to facilitate negotiations between Zaire and Rwanda .
In this respect , Kengo Wadondo is expected to meet General Kagamé shortly in Brussels to avoid , if possible , a further blood bath in Zaire and a humanitarian disaster throughout the region .
I naturally support Mr Tindemans ' proposal .
Mr President , I want to speak along the same lines as Mr Tindemans .
There is no doubt that the crisis that has broken in Kivu in the last few days - or rather the worsening of the crisis - will only be finally solved if the United Nations , with the support of the European Union , for example , can find an overall solution for the Great Lakes region in the context of an international conference and that has not yet been set up .
Obviously the European Commission must keep trying .
It must seek the best ways of getting humanitarian aid to the refugees there so that it is not snatched from their hands by the Zairean army to be used as a kind of food weapon , as has happened on too many occasions .
But I also want to say that it is impossible to forget who is governing Zaire during this crisis : General Mobuto , who is not exactly a democrat and who is trying to use the worsening of this crisis to cover himself with glory again in his own country and keep himself in power for many years to come .
And we obviously cannot forget that certain European countries , particularly France , are giving diplomatic support to keep General Mobuto in power in Zaire .
In this respect I naturally want to support the initiatives that have already been taken .
Croatia
Mr President , criticism is permissible in any democracy .
This fundamental principle appears not to apply in Croatia .
Yet Croatia was recently admitted to membership of the Council of Europe . And that decision is to my mind premature , to say the least .
The Council of Europe should at least have waited until the country had satisfied the requirements which the Council itself had set earlier this year .
The curtailment of media freedom is another reason which ought to have precluded Croatia from being admitted .
Because the situation in Croatia is far from democratic .
A new defamation law does more than just place the President and four top state officials above criticism .
It is also an instrument which will make life very difficult for the independent press .
There are numerous trials in progress against the free media , whose economic survival is thus threatened .
A lot of studies by influential organizations also say that Croatia is violating the Dayton Agreement in many respects .
Blockades are put up to halt the return of refugees and there are numerous reports of looting , arson , murder and harassment of Croatian Serbs .
By its actions , Croatia is also undermining the peace process in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
This new member of the Council of Europe must be expected and required to comply with the terms of Dayton and show respect for democracy and human rights .
Mr President , concerning the resolution of the Liberal Group I should say that it contains a number of points which reflect the views of our Group too .
But there are two things I would like to pick up on in connection with what Mr Bertens has said .
First of all there were objections in our Group to recital E since this refers to the closing down of Radio 101 in Zagreb and it is not certain whether the wording of this accurately reflects the true situation .
The radio station in question has repeatedly been allowed to get away with not fulfilling its obligations , and it has been again , and I think that this matter should be concluded satisfactorily because pressure is being brought to bear on Croatia in other ways .
Another point is Paragraph 4 of the resolution which says we had not expected the Council of Europe to admit Croatia .
The expectation in my Group was different .
When Russia was admitted our feeling was that now there would be no reason to exclude Croatia .
The Council of Europe really fell into bad ways a long time ago and we feel that if you admit a big country for very dubious reasons and exclude a small country whose sins are less heinous , then your arguments are no longer really tenable .
So we are very keen to keep a close eye on things , as Paragraph 5 suggests .
We would stress that .
But it was not our expectation that the Council of Europe would refuse admission to Croatia .
Concerning the resolution , I myself put down a number of amendments on behalf of the Group of the EPP , aimed at providing a rather more balanced picture of the subject and making it clear to those we are addressing that we also take their feelings seriously in view of the discoveries of mass graves near Vukovar , that we take full account of that in our deliberations , and I would really like to pay slightly less attention to the situation within Croatia and look rather more at the effects outside the country produced by the actions of the Zagreb Government .
These points are made in the two other amendments .
It is a challenge , Mr President , in a few minutes to review eight countries , of which four are in Europe , if I have counted well , two in Africa , one in Asia and one in Latin America .
This at least proves one thing , and I think it is distressing , that human rights violations are not the prerogative or privilege of a region , country , regime or even handful of generals or dictators , but unfortunately the problem increasingly concerns countries .
I begin Cyprus .
The tragedies suffered by Cyprus during the last few weeks are the most serious it has known since 1974 ; they are the consequence of the tension which has not ceased to increase along the 180 kilometres of the demarcation line .
The death of Mr Kakoulis brings to five the number of persons killed along the buffer zone since June .
I am not now going to re-open the debate on relations with Turkey .
The Commission has expressed an opinion on the state of its relations in its report on the application of the customs union and the human rights situation in this country , and it has taken note of your decision of this morning .
The European Union has condemned this new outburst of violence in a statement made in its name , on 17 October last , by the Irish presidency .
The European Union deplores this tragic death , as it deplores all the deaths which have recently occurred in Cyprus .
The European Union has , moreover , exhorted the two parties to take urgent measures to remove the ammunition at the stations situated on the front line and to widen the demilitarized zone , in accordance with the request of the resolutions of the United Nations Security Council .
The European Union encourages the efforts taken with a view to rapidly re-opening dialogue between the two communities , in order to find a global political solution to the Cyprus question under the aegis of the United Nations .
Finally , I remind you that the strategy of Cyprus ' pre-membership of the European Union is being continued .
The European Commission , anxious to contribute to efforts of dialogue between the two communities on the island , will keep the Turkish Cypriot community regularly informed of the progress made by Cyprus in its membership of the Union .
Such a membership prospect should facilitate dialogue between the communities and , at all events , it should discourage all acts of violence .
Secondly , Sudan .
The Commission can only denounce the situation prevailing in Sudan and , of course , it supports the resolution submitted for your approval .
I remind you that the Commission suspended its cooperation for development under the Lomé IV Convention with Sudan in March 1990 .
This decision has not affected projects in progress relating to the Lomé II and Lomé III Conventions , which have continued for their full term .
Furthermore the Commission confirms that humanitarian aid routed through ECHO has been continuing since 1993 , as has food aid .
The Commission has no intention of resuming aid for development in the immediate future and - I am answering the political questions that have been put forward - has supported the IGADD initiative , i.e. this intergovernmental development organization which groups together the governments of Sudan , Eritrea , Ethiopia , Uganda and Djibouti and which is aiming to end the civil war in southern Sudan .
IGADD is trying to promote negotiations between the parties in conflict in south Sudan .
The Commission has financially supported one of these meetings , although it was not very successful .
I think that this is not sufficient reason to lose hope and weaken our efforts .
Third , the attack against the Ecumenical Patriarchate in Istanbul .
The Commission deplores the attack against the Ecumenical Patriarchate which took place in the night of 28 and 29 September last .
Fortunately , there were no victims .
The results of the inquiry launched by the Turkish police are not yet known .
A terrorist organization has claimed responsibility for this action , but this has not been confirmed by the inquiry in progress .
Concerning the repair of the damage caused by the attack , the Community budget does not offer the possibility of financing these repairs .
However , according to the latest information we have received , the repair work has already started .
Fourth subject , Bangladesh .
The Commission has been informed of the removal of Mrs Kalpana Chakma in the night of 11 and 12 June 1996 by a group of unidentified armed men .
Acts of violence have frequently occurred in the People 's Republic of Bangladesh , in the Chittagong hills between , on the one side , the Bangladeshi security forces and Bengali-speaking Muslim settlers , and on the other side local tribes consisting mainly of Buddhist Chakmas .
The most recent major incident is the massacre of 30 Bengali-speaking settlers .
Among the many cases of human rights violations perpetrated against the tribal population , several have been attributed to the Bangladeshi security force during the last twenty years .
Following these dealings , a large number of tribal populations have sought refuge in the nearby Indian state of Tripura .
India still has 50 , 000 persons living in refugee camps .
The international community has asked the Bangladeshi government several times to pursue the peace process and prolong the cease-fire .
The Bangladeshi government is continuing to prohibit access to the Chittagong hills for aid provided by donor countries .
On the 10th March 1996 , at the aid group meeting in Paris with the bilateral and multilateral donors , the German delegation and the Commission delegation have put pressure on Bangladesh to respect human rights and speed up the peace process in the Chittagong hills , In response , the Bangladeshi delegation declared that the new government in office since July 1996 has decided to settle the matter by negotiations , involving tribal chiefs and also the Indian government .
In addition , it decided on the 30th September 1996 to form a national committee responsible for finding a political settlement to the situation in the Chittagong hills .
The orientation of this new government , under the guidance of the Prime Minister , Mrs Cheik Azina , offers new hope for finding a peaceful political settlement .
The European Commission , through its delegation in Dhaka , is closely watching the development of the situation in the Chittagong hills .
It will support the peace process by aiding development intended for local communities , as soon as security conditions allow external aid to pass through .
Fifth , Venezuela .
The Commission shares the concern of the European Parliament .
Thus , as many of you remember , the Commission actually decided in December 1993 to contribute to the efforts deployed by the Venezuelan authorities , under the aegis of the Ministry of Renewable Natural Resources , to set up the Alto Orinoco-Cassiquiare biosphere reserve in the south of the country .
This biosphere reserve was created in June 1991 .
It covers an area of 84 , 000 km2 in the Amazon state and comprises , in addition to the national parks , indigenous areas and natural monuments .
In this Amazon state mining deposits are worked , especially by gold diggers , ' Garimpeiros ' who are insufficiently monitored .
The forestry work in this state is carried out by the forestry department of the Venezuelan Ministry of Renewable Natural Resources .
According to information received by the Commission , a proposal for the revocation of decrees approved by the resolutions of your House has been submitted by the Venezuelan Ministry of Energy and Mines .
But the Ministry of Natural Resources opposes it ; in particular mention should be made of the existence of the biosphere reserve in the Alto Orinoco .
An inter-ministerial meeting will be held today , 24th October , in Venezuela on this matter in the presence of the President of the Republic .
Of course the Commission will not fail to keep the House informed of the results of this meeting as soon as they come to its knowledge .
Sixth and finally , Bulgaria .
The Commission shares the fears expressed by Parliament on the expected cereal shortage in Bulgaria .
This shortage has been caused by the slowness of the agricultural reform process , especially with regard to right of ownership and liberalization of markets .
The problem has been accentuated by a very serious general macroeconomic crisis and by the unfavourable weather conditions of last winter and spring .
Bulgaria has asked the European Commission and the Member States for food aid .
The President , Santer , recently recalled that the Bulgarian government first had to made decisive progress in the implementation of the programme of macroeconomic and structural reforms .
In the agricultural sector , these measures should aim to re-establish operator confidence and reverse the falling production trend .
If there is no conclusive decision from the government , cereal production will deteriorate further in 1997 and 1998 .
The Association Committee between the Union and Bulgaria met on 22 October last .
On this occasion , Bulgaria confirmed that it was ready to speed up the reforms and it emphasized that it would shortly need cereals to correct the serious cereal imbalance .
To support Bulgaria 's efforts in this direction , the Commission has now and henceforth agreed to relax the agricultural conditions permitted under the PHARE programme - ECU 7m - in order to increase sowing for the 1997 harvest .
This will certainly help remedy the causes of the current situation .
Seventh file : Zaire .
The Commission expresses its deep concern for the worsening situation in Zaire , on the Rwanda-Burundi border and can only share the preoccupations expressed by Mr Tindemans , Mrs Léonard and other persons who have just spoken .
Apart from the serious humanitarian problems which continue to strike innocent populations who have already suffered so much , all ethnic groups and nationalities without distinction , the risk of a regional conflict is now particularly worrying .
The Commission is convinced that only a political solution , within the framework of preventive diplomacy , can settle the problems in the region .
In this respect , the Commission and Member States support the action of the European Union 's special envoy to the Great Lakes region , Mr Ajello , and the efforts actively deployed by the African leaders to renew dialogue between the parties .
Mr Ajello is responsible in particular for strengthening his contacts with Zaire and Rwanda .
The Commission has also called on the OAU to make its contribution to the settlement of this conflict .
As regards the creation of corridors for channelling humanitarian aid to the refugees who have abandoned the Uvira camps , which has been demanded by your Parliament , the Commission reminds you that the international mandate for protecting refugees in the Great Lakes region has been entrusted to the Office of the High Commissioner for refugees .
Since the start of the crisis , the Office High Commissioner has been responsible for supporting all the refugees in the region , with the help of the Member States and the Commission , and I can assure you that we will not spare our efforts and we will do what is necessary to provide all the necessary support .
The Commission has also tackled the subject of Kivu at its last sitting on Tuesday in Strasbourg , and it is closely following the development of the situation .
At the request of the President , Mrs Bonino and Mr Pinheiro , a crisis cell has been set up since Wednesday , 23rd October , at the European Community Humanitarian Office , ECHO .
This cell 's task is to monitor the daily development of the Kivu situation , and to propose to the Commission measures intended for avoiding any further humanitarian drama .
Finally , the last subject , Croatia .
The European Commission shares the concern of the honourable Members I have heard , regarding the safety of Croatian Serbs in the old north and south Krajina sectors and also the possibility of Croatian Serb refugees returning to their place of origin .
The amnesty law recently adopted is an important step forward in this respect .
The Croatian authorities could nevertheless do more to create the necessary confidence in Serbs who are likely to return .
It must assure them safety in Croatia and total respect for human rights and the rights of minorities .
The European Union and Council of Europe are closely monitoring political developments in Croatia , and are giving particular attention to the refugee situation .
If there is no satisfactory solution to this question , it will be difficult for durable peace to be possible between the States in the region .
The granting of economic aid and also the establishment of closer links between the European Union and Croatia clearly depend on three factors of which I will remind you : firstly , total respect by Croatia of its obligations under the Dayton and Paris peace agreements .
Secondly , respect for the principles of democracy , human rights and rights of minorities .
And thirdly , the creation of actual possibilities of return for the refugees .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I must state that you have carried out this difficult task well , although it has taken rather a long time , which does not make my task any easier .
I cannot even raise this complaint against you as I clearly understand your problems .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1129 / 96 by Mrs Hoff and others , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-1144 / 96 by Mr Boogerd-Quaak and Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the situation in Belarus ; -B4-1177 / 96 by Mr Robles Piquer and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the referendum on plenipotentiary powers for the President of Belarus ; -B4-1191 / 96 by Mrs Schroedter and Mrs Aelvoet , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the danger of an authoritarian regime in Belarus ; -B4-1197 / 96 by Mr Pettinari and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the political situation in Belarus .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have before us a joint motion for a resolution which , I believe , reflects our concern about the political and social situation in Belarus in a most comprehensible form .
Incidentally , if I may make a brief comment , the Greens are not in it .
They are not mentioned , but they were present during the discussions and endorse the motion for a resolution in its present form .
Belarus finds itself in a difficult economic , political and social situation .
The main cause lies in the absence of a credible reform policy .
In Belarus we have a president who does not understand the signs of the times , who wants to leads Belarus back into a structural conservatism that no longer exists and I hope will never again exist in that form , by government control of industry and banking , by intervening in the democratic constitutional system , by questioning national independence and by restricting freedom of opinion , freedom of the press and the rights of the unions .
We know that nearly all the forces in Belarus are in favour of the partnership and cooperation agreement and of the interim agreement with the European Union , with a view to obtaining a stable contractual framework for their economic activity and their general relations with the European Union .
We definitely welcome that and greatly regret that in the joint resolution we finally decided to request that for the time being Parliament does not welcome or sign the interim agreement but should call for a postponement .
For the rest , Belarus does not have to decide between Europe and Russia , as people keep saying .
But it must at last formulate a direct and open policy and it must make it clear what it wants .
We have bilateral agreements in many forms and we take that as a matter of course , but the wishes of the people must be respected .
The Socialist Group , as I pointed out , regrets the fact that we cannot agree to the interim agreement at the moment in its present form .
But we are very much in favour of it .
And we definitely welcome the fact that the government is prepared to recognize the importance of safeguarding the entire spectrum of human rights .
There are indications that it is doing so , but as I keep having to repeat , they are only indications and they are not clear enough .
We need more specific signs and we need clearer evidence that the Belarus Government does indeed want to establish a free and more democratic society .
At present there are indications that the referendum will be held on 24 November and we know that there were some conflicts beforehand .
Mr Lukashenko , the President of Belarus , pleaded for it to be held on 7 November .
We are very pleased to see these indications , but of course as they stand they are not sufficient and we would like to wait for the referendum in order to see clearer indications , simply so that the European Parliament can take a more definite decision , so that we can support the interim agreement and , at a later date , also the partnership and cooperation agreement .
We are very alarmed by the serious constitutional crisis in Belarus , Mr President .
President Lukashenko is increasingly showing himself to be an authoritarian leader who pays scant regard for democratic rules of press freedom , freedom of assembly and freedom of expression .
The tensions caused by the holding of two conflicting referenda have fortunately been resolved , at least it seems so .
Agreement has been reached between president and parliament that just one referendum will be held .
This seems to me a good thing .
We shall , however , have to remain extremely vigilant as regards the question asked in that referendum .
We ought also to ensure that the circumstances in which referendum is held on 24 November are as democratic as possible .
This , Mr President , requires that president and parliament should be committed to democracy and human rights .
There must be free access to the media .
Freedom of assembly must be guaranteed , otherwise I think one cannot possibly talk of a democratic referendum .
Mr President , I agree with the previous speaker ; unfortunately it is easy to see in the case of Belarus what the legacy of the Soviet Union still means today .
But at the moment this state , in which there are certainly also democrats who are trying to set up a free democracy there , is indeed suffering under the Lukashenko government , under an authoritarian and truly repressive form of government , as stated in the resolution .
We know what efforts the opposition is making and we call on the president genuinely to abandon his previous position and to tackle the necessary democratic and economic reforms , as well as respecting freedom of the press , the rule of law and human rights .
I agree with my colleagues : we would like to have the cooperation agreement but we also have to be consistent now about the policy we in this Parliament keep reminding the Council and the Commission to pursue .
For the point is that we must indeed apply the requirement we inscribe in the human rights and democracy clauses of the Treaties .
And unfortunately we must also do so in this case , which is why my group will support the conclusion set out in this resolution , namely that at the moment we will not take any further steps and will wait and see whether the Belarus authorities decide on a change of course .
Then I am sure we will be glad to sign and also to implement a cooperation agreement with the democratic forces in Belarus , as we are trying to do with the other reform states .
Thank you , Mr President .
Once again Belarus is on the urgent debate agenda .
In fact that reflects the dramatic worsening of the situation in this country .
President Lukashenko is systematically dividing the inhabitants of that country by suppressing any signs of opposition .
By constantly increasing his personal power he is trying to conceal his own inactivity in the transformation process .
After trying to stifle the opposition press and banning the unions and also making various attempts to exert pressure on the constitutional court , in August the president began to attack the constitution itself and now wants to transfer legislative power to himself by referendum .
The parliament is standing up to this massive attack on its existence by applying a perfect counter-strategy and using the many opportunities inherent in its democratic rules of play .
I take my hat off to this young parliament !
By summoning the union assembly of non-elected representatives last week , Lukashenko launched a frontal attack on the elected parliament , but it failed !
Nobody wants civil war in Belarus , but the country 's problems cannot be resolved by a presidential dictatorship either .
The democratic forces in the country are courageous and in spite of all the attacks they are not allowing themselves to be diverted from their endeavours to bring about a democratic process of reform .
But they do not have the slightest chance of spreading their ideas throughout the country .
The parliament does not even have the chance to appear on television for the referendum .
That would be the least one could expect in any kind of democratic referendum !
The fact that we are suspending the agreement procedures does not mean that we want to isolate Belarus .
Rather , it is our last chance finally to ensure the success of the democratic forces and see an end to the old structures of the Soviet system .
I would like to send out greetings from here to all the people in Belarus who are fighting selflessly for democratic reforms and once again to express our feelings of solidarity .
At the same time I call on President Lukashenko finally to give up his lust for power and to restore freedom of the press and critical opposition in order to promote the process of transformation .
Mr President , our group , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , is immensely concerned about the development of the political situation in Belarus .
We are aware that the western world shares overall responsibility for the worsening of the crisis that many of these countries are suffering .
However , we think the European Union can and must pursue a firm policy towards these countries and specifically towards Belarus .

This European policy must be based on three principles : first , demanding full recognition of democratic rights - namely , referendums , elections and freedom to join a trade union ; secondly , economic and social aid and strategic collaboration in the solution of inherited problems ; thirdly , stepping up the mechanism of association with the European Union , linked to the democratic freedoms , as a positive stake on a Europe of freedom and democracy in the 21st Century .
Mr President , as in many other republics of the former Soviet Union the process of reform in Belarus is proving difficult .
President Lukashenko 's authoritarian style of government gives cause for alarm .
The main problem is not his wish to strengthen the power of the president by means of constitutional change to be put to the people in a referendum .
Western countries too have strong presidential systems .
The cause for concern is Lukashenko 's desire to increase his power at the expense of parliament and the Constitutional Court and that he is thus violating the principle of checks and balances .
The President of Belarus has also curtailed press freedom and freedom of expression .
Lukashenko has isolated Belarus by his unilateral focus on Russia and his conservative economic policy .
He was unable , because of the costs of reintegration , to win over Russia to his cause , but at the same time he kept the West at arm 's length .
And this at a time when the country 's great economic problems cry out for support from other countries and international lenders .
The difficult question facing the European Union is how to react to these developments .
Further isolation of Belarus and destabilization of the region must be avoided .
At the same time it has to be made clear to Belarus that the constitutional developments there are causing concern and that its ties with the European Union can only be expended if the fundamental principles of democracy and the rule of law are upheld .
And that was quite properly the thrust of what Commissioner van den Broek told the foreign minister of Belarus when they met on the occasion of the recent General Assembly of the United Nations .
Although we appreciate that Parliament has in the past approved agreements between the Union and countries in which the rule of law functioned only imperfectly , we think that the various agreements between the Union and Belarus ought not to be ratified for the time being .
A principal criterion for us in this is not so much whether developments in a country proceed fast or slowly , but whether , despite existing imperfections , they are proceeding along the right lines .
That cannot be said of developments in Belarus at present .
We shall thus support the joint resolution .
Mr President , the Commission fully shares the concern of Parliament on the situation in Belarus where violations of human rights , the legal State and democracy have multiplied .
The most recent information in the possession of the Commission on the date of the constitutional referendum decided by President Lukashenko shows a compromise reached between the Belarus government and parliament .
The date of this referendum has been postponed from the 7th to the 24th November , as wished by parliament .
Progress has also been made , especially by the creation of a joint committee between government and parliament to examine the content of the questions submitted for referendum .
The latest steps by the European Union and the recent meeting between President Elstine and President Loukachenko have most probably played a positive role .
If these new developments are confirmed , the situation in Belarus could improve .
The European Commission is making sure to monitor the daily situation in Belarus and , naturally , it will inform the appropriate committees of the European Parliament of any new developments in the situation .
The partnership and cooperation agreement and the interim agreement signed by the European Union with Belarus will only be ratified when the House has issued a concurring opinion for the former and a simple assent for the latter .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-1145 / 96 by Mr Bertens , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reformist Party , on the ban on anti-personnel mines ; -B4-1153 / 96 by Mr Macartney and Mrs Taubira-Delannon , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the Ottawa Conference on anti-personnel mines ; -B4-1175 / 96 by Mr Oostlander and Mr Fabra Vallés , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the Ottawa Conference on the banning of landmines ; -B4-1198 / 96 by Mr Piquet and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , on the failure of the Ottawa Conference on anti-personnel mines .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is years since the European Parliament started its initiatives , hearings , reports and actions in a campaign to halt the hidden terror of anti-personnel mines , which are not so much anti-personnel as ' anti-people ' .
There are 100 million and more of them on the planet and every year there are two million new ones .
Two weeks ago a strategy conference was held in Ottawa at the instigation and invitation of the Canadian Government .
It was attended by 50 countries , keen to sign a treaty to ban these antipeople mines altogether . Twenty five observers were also present , more than 80 NGOs , the Red Cross , you name it .
This resolution talks of a failed conference .
I find that regrettable because it was not a failure .
It was a conference on strategy .
The strategy was this , that the efforts of those present culminated in a decision to hold a second Ottawa conference in Brussels , in June of next year , to prepare the ground for a treaty banning land-mines , not in the year 2001 but in December 1997 .
This report , brought to us by the Canadian foreign minister , was warmly welcomed .
I hope that the Commission , which though not sufficiently energetic was nevertheless energetic enough to announce a joint measure prior to the start of this Ottawa conference , will in any event show the necessary will to get all 15 Member States to speak with a single voice so that there is not one of the 15 Member States reluctant to sign the treaty banning these anti-personnel mines .
Mr President , we debate these subjects under the general heading of urgencies and some people would argue that land mines are not exactly an urgent problem because they will be with us for many years .
I take the opposite view because , for somebody who goes out to the fields in Mozambique or goes outside the village in Cambodia , it is an urgent matter of survival .
Will they survive that day ?
That is why the initiative , which has been taken by a cross-party group , including Mr Bertens who has just spoken and people from every group in this Parliament , is so important .
We have been giving moral leadership to the European Union to say there must be a complete ban on land mines .
It has to have the same sort of force as the crusade against nuclear weapons .
We cannot live with land mines because they destroy and maim in the most horrible fashion the innocent civilians they target .
I have great pleasure in supporting this resolution .
Mr President , the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party are committed to achieving a legally binding international agreement to ban anti-personnel mines .
This ban should cover production , storage , transfer , sale and export , as well as the use of such weapons , of course .
The fact is that in practice anti-personnel mines primarily affect the civilian population .
Regrettably that has been demonstrated in Angola , Cambodia and Mozambique .
And we are conscious that even assuming total and immediate prohibition , it would take ten years to clear the millions of mines already deployed on the ground .
The PPE Group wants the European Union and the Member States to make a significant increase in their efforts to clear the mines and help the victims .
Thanks to the initiative of the Canadian government , a meeting took place which led to the Ottawa Conference , another attempt to make progress towards a world ban .
Another unsuccessful attempt , whether Mr Bertens likes it or not .
And that is a heavy responsibility , especially for Russia and China .
The PPE Group is pleased that on 1 October the European Union was able to decide on joint action committing the Union and its Member States to work together for the conclusion of the desired international agreement .
In this context I want to express our willingness to support any initiative by the Union and its Member States with a view to banning such manufacture unilaterally .
Mr President , despite what the honourable Member has said , the Ottawa Conference on anti-personnel mines has been a failure .
It has failed because no agreement was reached on banning the manufacture and use of anti-personnel mines .
A positive step is , however , the new joint action decided upon by the European Council .
On the basis of that joint action , we are awaiting a robust initiative from the European Union to secure the banning of mines .
If it proves not to be possible to obtain the necessary agreement at international level to secure a total ban on the manufacture and use of mines , then the Union should make this issue a precondition in its economic and commercial relations with third countries .
I also consider it a tragic mistake to dwell , and there are many who do so , on the so-called intelligent mines which automatically deactivate themselves after a certain number of years .
I think that the proper goal is to work towards stopping the production of such weapons .
Any lesser objective fails to take account of the gravity of the problem .
Mr President , anti-personnel mines are one of the worst scourges afflicting many regions of the world .
They have proved to be of absolutely no use for the military purposes for which they were designed .
But they are a terrible weapon when it comes to striking at the civilian population , making entire regions uninhabitable and unusable , causing death or disability even decades after they have been laid .
The mines are therefore a terrorist weapon , used against defenceless people ; they are not very expensive and are widespread , whereas the removal of mines and mine-clearing is hugely expensive operation , and the political , human and economic costs of their use are intolerable .
Although the Ottawa Conference , held at the beginning of this month , showed that international awareness of this issue is growing , no substantial outcome was able to be achieved .
We have said that it is Russia and China , but other countries too , that are responsible for this situation .
It is therefore necessary that the European Union should launch a political and diplomatic offensive , including on the basis of the ' joint action ' adopted on 1 October of this year , designed to secure a total ban on the manufacture , stockpiling , trade in and use of all anti-personnel mines .
And I stress all anti-personnel mines , including therefore the so-called ' intelligent mines ' which are not intelligent at all and neither are those who promote their use .
They should be considered on a par with other mines and should therefore be banned too .
But if our strategy is to be credible , we must start by setting a good example and thus proceeding unilaterally , as countries of the European Union , to dismantle the arsenals of mines that exist in Europe and stopping the manufacture of mines , including those not intended for export .
We need then to strengthen international cooperation and direct action for mine-clearance and also to identify measures to assist the victims of mines .
Mr President , the Commission considers that the result of the Ottawa conference is promising .
In fact , the final declaration of this conference invites participants ' to cooperate with a view to concluding , as soon as possible , a legally binding international agreement banning anti-personnel acts ' .
It is a very ambitious objective , which will be pursued during the next few months with the active participation of the European Union .
The conference also adopted the ' Agenda for action against anti-personnel landmines ' .
This determines the actions to be undertaken at world , national , regional and even sub-regional level .
It was agreed that a follow-up conference would be organized by Belgium , in June 1977 , to examine the progress made towards general prohibition .
As you know , the European Union played and active and decisive role at the conference , going way beyond ordinary moral leadership , thanks to the common action adopted on this subject on the 1st October . This constitutes a global and ambitious platform .
It was very useful to the European Union representatives for influencing the outcome of the conference .
It provided the Union with means of action enabling it to contribute effectively and without discrimination to putting an end to the use of anti-personnel landmines .
This joint action also reinforces the moratorium on exports .
Finally , it strengthens the Union 's desire to take part in demining efforts at international level .
In this respect , I would like to remind you of the action taken by the Commission with regard to demining , whether in relation to humanitarian aid or in relation to cooperation with reconstruction and development .
This year , the Commission should allot approximately ECU 22m to demining .
The Commission is grateful to the European Parliament for making , for the first time , in its 1996 budget , a specific heading of ECU 10m allotted to demining .
I should state that these appropriations have mainly been used for financing demining operations in Bosnia .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The joint debate is closed .
That concludes the topical and urgent debate on subjects of major importance .
We will now proceed to the vote .
On Venezuela :
Mr President , you are aware of the terrible tragedy that occurred yesterday in Venezuela with the death of dozens of inmates of a prison .
The circumstances which produced this catastrophe are not clear and nor have those responsible been identified .
Considering that one of the dead was also a Spanish citizen , governments like mine have asked for immediate explanations and for those responsible to be brought to justice .
I ask that the Presidency take note of this because the resolution we are going to pass on Venezuela is obviously not just a matter of urgency , it is also a matter of principle .
Thank you , Mr Carnero .
I am sure the whole house shares your feelings .
I will pass on what you have said to the President of the European Parliament and I recognize that because of the timing of this deeply regrettable catastrophe , it could not be included in this motion for a resolution .
So we must find some way to express the unanimous feeling of this Parliament .
On Zaire :
Mr President , you have indeed listened carefully and understood correctly .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is no airy-fairy initiative .
We read the text of the motion for a resolution put down by the Green Group and we were happy with that text , but it was our belief that in the present dramatic circumstances , and given the risk of outright war between Rwanda and Zaire involving not just skirmishes but the armed forces , that Parliament should propose something rather more concrete , something more forceful .
We tried to contact Mrs Aelvoet who had tabled the resolution but she is ill and we were unable to reach her either yesterday or today .
Then a number of contacts took place and ultimately an amendment was signed , unfortunately an oral amendment since the time limit had passed , by the following Members of this House : Mrs Lalumière , Mr Rocard , Mr Pasty , Mr Lannoye , Mr Bertens , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , Mr Wurtz and myself .





The amendment involves the following two sentences to be added to Paragraph 2a .
We worked with a French text which reads as follows :
' requests that a final attempt at preventive diplomacy ' - between you and me , ' preventive diplomacy ' is understood in the spirit which has reigned in our Parliament , for example at the time when Mr Kouchner defended this policy - , so to continue ' requests that a final attempt at preventive diplomacy be made and , if necessary , requests that the international community do everything so that the presence of military forces is prohibited on Kivu territory .
Pending a solution to the refugee problem , the territory would be placed under the authority of the United Nations . '
( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , if this can be done it may save hundreds or even thousands of lives .
That is the aim of this oral amendment and I think that Parliament 's standing will be enhanced by it .
The Commissioner who is with us today has just told us that yesterday the European Commission set up a unit on Central Africa .
Well , this text could be the first document to be seriously addressed by this European Commission unit .
My thanks in advance .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Mr Tindemans .
Under the rules I have to ask the house if anyone is opposed to your oral amendment .
I do not see any opposition .
Ladies and gentlemen , I therefore propose that you vote on the whole resolution , incorporating Mr Tindemans ' oral amendment .
Tourism ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on tourism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as is clear from all the reports , tourism is indisputably not only one of the most important economic branches of the European Union but also offers a great potential for the creation of new jobs .
So it is absolutely incomprehensible why tourism is not specifically mentioned in the Treaty .
It is impossible to understand why countries whose prosperity also depends largely on tourism , such as Austria , for instance , or at least the current Austrian Government , are against the creation of a legal base for this sector .
Of course the principle of subsidiarity is not disputed in this particular case .
If we took industrial policy in the specific sense of Article 130 as our guide , which would seem appropriate and sensible , that would help dispel any doubts , for that Article does not infringe the principle of subsidiarity nor does it imply any major financial commitments .
By using this article we would be sure of being able to tackle the question of tourism globally , at European level , without infringing the principle of subsidiarity , as in the case of industry .
When we remember that the coal and steel industry still occupies a place of its own in the EU Treaty , although relatively fewer people are now employed in it , it really is absurd that tourism , which is so important to the future of Europe , should be underestimated to such an extent .
The right approach would be to be to take as a basis programmes such as those developed by industrial policy in order to make industry more competitive .
European tourism needs massive support in relation both to the development of supply and to joint marketing .
Anyone who wants to make cuts even to a well-meant but more than modest programme such as PHILOXENIA is obviously still unaware of the economic and social importance of tourism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to start by supporting what was said in the tourism debate - interrupted , unfortunately , at one o 'clock .
It would be tedious to repeat what other colleagues have already said , although I do want to mention that I find it difficult to fathom the European Commission 's failure to include in its original text Parliament 's request , twice approved by a majority , in the December 1994 and February 1996 plenaries , to promote the creation of a European Tourist Agency - necessary from every point of view .
The Members of Parliament across the whole spectrum therefore present that request again , Commissioner .
As there is a democratic difficulty about justifying such a deaf ear to the repeated request of this Parliament , the Commission is offering a tourism research and documentation centre in exchange and admits in the seventh amendment the importance of a European tourism policy which does not give rise to more bureaucracy , regulations , and so on , thus subliminally contributing to wrecking said agency .
This has led us - myself and other colleagues from various groups across the parliamentary spectrum , as I said just now - to present Amendment No 28 , resubmitting to this Parliament the development and implementation of that agency .
We trust the Commission will listen this time , given its new composition ( the point is easy to hear in the Balearic key , so the good people of Menorca will appreciate it ) .
Having emphasized that point , it only remains for me to congratulate the rapporteurs , and especially Mrs Bennasar , for these very positive reports which reaffirm the need to establish and define a new Community tourism policy now that we have managed to obtain a little money , Mr President .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in spite of some setbacks tourism is still a growth sector of the economy .
If the forecasts are correct , tourism will become the most important economic activity worldwide in a few years ' time , ahead even of heavy industry or the motor industry .
At the present time , more than 9 million people are directly employed in this sector , and the numbers are rising .
The fact that the vast majority of firms involved are SMEs does , of course , create major problems .
On the other hand , the variety of firms involved guarantees the individualism that is particularly necessary in tourism .
Of the 1.2 million tourist firms , 95 % are very small with fewer than 9 employees .
It is this individualism and the regional differences and special features that we must strongly support .
Only then can the consumers be offered a wide spectrum of choices .
And only then can the individual regions emphasize their own special features in a context of fair competition .
We should therefore give special support to tourism as a sector in which great hopes can be placed .
I am thinking in particular of assistance for the small and medium-sized enterprises I mentioned earlier , of targeted tax measures to support the tourist infrastructure , of provision of the appropriate regional aid , and so forth .
But most particularly I am thinking of the need to improve the quality of European tourism ; in order to do so it is quite vital to improve the training level in this sector .
Adequate knowledge of this sector with its manifold differences is most important if effective measures are to be introduced . PHILOXENIA follows the right direction , especially in the fields of information and coordination .
Europe 's great power of attraction resides in its cultural , geographical , historical and ethnic variety .
The consumer wants to continue being able to choose among the widest range of offers .
Let me therefore emphatically repeat the call for tourism to be incorporated in the EU Treaty .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are fully in favour of the first multiannual programme to assist European tourism ' Philoxenia ' , and feel that the timely and judicious amendments tabled by Mrs Bennasar Tous should be introduced into it .
Tourism of European interest must be given greater support by the European Union and win all of the enthusiasm of Community countries , given the positive effect which it produces , especially on jobs and by disseminating the very social and cultural values which Europe wishes to promulgate .
However , so far we have not really done enough to take advantage of Europe 's enormous tourist potential , whichever aspect we take .
Everything must therefore be done to promote more tourists in Europe , whether from within the Community or third countries , and we should therefore add to our knowledge in the area of tourism , improve legislative and financial frameworks and raise the quality of tourism , making sure that respect for the environment prevails and tourists ' security is considered .
I should also mention the overriding need for budgetary cover and efforts to cover actions which fall within this programme 's scope .
Of those actions we should emphasise those which are of trans-national or trans-regional character , which call for cooperation between Member States or regions , which above all require a significant improvement in quality , regularity and transport costs .
Examples of this cooperation , Mr President , are joint projects between Portugal and Spain , aimed at giving better publicity to large numbers of cultural events which take place in the Iberian Peninsula , or between Madeira , the Azores and the Canary Islands , to increase knowledge of the natural and cultural heritage resources of the biogeographical region of Macaronesia .
From this point of view , we are also pleased that it should have been pointed out with great emphasis in the Bennasar Tous report that tourism is of growing importance for the less developed and the ultra-peripheral island regions , enabling them to receive special or priority treatment , even the adoption of proper economic and taxation measures designed to help the tourist sector .
Mr President , coming from a tourist area myself , one of the things I want to emphasize is that although tourism can be of great importance to the local economy , particularly to small and medium-sized enterprises , it has to be carried out in the right way .
There are many examples of the peaking of tourism over a small number of months leading to increased environmental damage and strains on infrastructure in certain countries .
That makes it necessary for any tourist plan to have tourism that operates throughout the year .
Otherwise you have a situation of seasonal employment , low wages , low security in jobs .
There are all those areas that have to be taken into consideration and not least - as has already been mentioned in the previous speech - the environment .
But a particular thing I want to come back to this afternoon is a point that I was very interested to read about in the Commission 's report on Community measures affecting tourism and that is the health and physical safety of tourists .
I note that on page 34 of the English version it emphasizes fire safety in hotels , and presumably in hostels as well .
As was mentioned in Question Time to the Commission , I have constituents whose daughter was attacked and murdered in a youth hostel earlier this year .
I feel very strongly that it is now even more in the remit of Europe to ensure that , with increased travel , particularly by young people , we take responsibility to care for their safety and security .
That needs to be taken into consideration in all Commission actions for the future .
Mr President , in addition to being an important engine for economic growth , tourism , by virtue of the cultural exchange and solidarity between peoples that it engenders , is a very important social and cultural activity .
That multi-dimensional character of tourism should make it the focus of unwavering attention and wide-ranging support in Community policy .
But the question is : how can the genuinely ambitious Philoxenia programme be supported by the meagre allocations for tourism in the Community budget ?
The Commissioner 's endeavours are very laudable , but holding this debate now is akin to closing the stable door after the horse has bolted , since just a short while ago the 1997 budget was adopted and the support that it gives to tourism is enough to make one weep .
Mr President , there is a need to identify and develop solutions to special problems in the sector , such as the seasonal character of tourism , investment security and the requirements to cater for special categories of tourist and to promote tourism of various types .
In parallel with that , a central position in tourism policy must be accorded to the protection of employees , support for SMEs , health and safety and protection of the environment .
Mr President , the European Parliament has always worked for the creation of specific policies for tourism .
Back in the 1993 Green Paper , on the issue of the role of the Union in the tourist sector , the Commission invited Parliament to provide for the inclusion into the draft Treaty of a specific chapter on tourism , furnishing it with a legal basis which , while respecting the principle of subsidiarity also makes it possible for the Commission to take supplementary measures .
The Philoxenia proposal has four objectives .
The first is to develop information on Community tourism , drawing on the most diverse sources , with the specific aim of establishing its effect on European legislation . The second is to improve the legislative and financial bases of Community tourism , by strengthening the cooperation between the Member States , the industry and private individuals .
The third is quantitatively to expand European tourism , by removing the obstacles to any development .
And the fourth is to increase the interest and numbers of visitors from third countries .
We have to endorse this and therefore applaud the attempt to devise a consistent framework encompassing the issues of tourism as well as the determination shown by the Commission to integrate the tourist element into other Community policies .
From that point of view , we also consider the rapporteur 's amendments to be of interest , particularly the one providing for the inclusion of small- and medium-sized tourist enterprises into the third multiannual programme for Community SMEs .
Mr President , it was a happy coincidence that the debate on tourism on today 's agenda should have taken place at this time because , by voting overwhelmingly this morning for Community funding for actions in the tourism sector , the European Parliament has defeated those who do not believe in a Community tourism policy and has cast a vote of confidence in the political action of Commissioner Papoutsis . Having taken over an administration suffering a lack of confidence , he is now showing signs of a new dynamic , involvement and determination .
There was a time in the past when we were assessing , for example , the plan for Community action for 1993-1995 and looking towards the future and talking about the Philoxenia multiannual programme .
After all , speaking about tourism means , above anything else , speaking about jobs , 6 , 5 % of the European Union 's GDP and more than 9 million direct jobs and 1.2 million tour companies , most of which are very small .
An industry which worldwide , in the year 2006 , in other words in ten years ' time , will account for 385 million direct and indirect jobs and already today provides more than 250 million direct and indirect jobs .
Speaking of tourism means in particular sustainable development , respect for the environment , the cultural heritage and wildlife of the European regions ; it also means integrating a policy of consumer protection into trade .
Because tourism , environment and consumers are three corners of the same triangle and they cannot be separated .
The stance taken by the European Parliament is a position which calls for our support .
Re-orientating the tourist industry towards a perspective of sustainability , linking tourism , environment and consumers , and integrating small and medium-sized undertakings , are all positive steps in the right direction which all deserve emphasis .
I would also like to end on one idea .
Only the existence of a legal basis included in the Treaty on the Union will , in the end , enable us to pursue and extend a European tourism policy .
Mr President , I think the Commissioner probably recognizes the fact that across the floor of this House there is a great deal of support for the development of tourism at European level .
The Commissioner has done a great deal to try to assist Members in this House in making that happen .
We can agree on most things right across the floor of this House except perhaps on the matter of a tourism agency which rears its head from time to time .
I am sure the Commissioner is aware that the trade itself is not particularly comfortable with the idea of developing such an agency .
The other problem is that we recognize the fact that the Member State governments do not actually want the European Community as such to take on a great role in this area .
That makes me work all the harder to try and make sure that we can do something at Community level .
I would hope that , in the simple steps we are taking at the beginning with the Philoxenia programme , we must recognize that this is only the start of the long road we have to travel if we are to achieve something for the tourism industry as such .
As has been pointed out by many speakers this morning and this afternoon , it is going to be a long haul actually to get more jobs , etc , etc. in the industry and make people recognize tourism as an industry as such .
However , it is also necessary for the Commissioner to strive in the Commission to ensure that we get proper coordination of all matters that affect tourism .
I regret greatly the fact that the structural funds are dispensed by regional committees and regional departments of the Commission rather than the tourism department , DG XXIII .
I hope the Commissioner will step up his resolve within the Commission to try and achieve that for the industry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the main subject of the Bennasar Tous report might make a significant contribution so that , in the near future , we can define , once and for all , a genuine European tourism policy .
It is our hope and our desire .
Since this industry must be a sector on its own , with its own common policy , we must improve the legislative and financial framework and strengthen the vital interlinks with other programmes , initiatives and policies which the Community might contribute to developing tourism .
Competitive and quality tourism must certainly contribute to the achievement of the Community 's objectives , in particular creating jobs , strengthening economic and social cohesion and promoting the European identity .
The report agrees with and accepts basically the fundamental material in the Commission programme , but many of the amendments proposed in it will add to and enrich it .
I would like to emphasise the amendment which will make the ultra-peripheral and island regions the main beneficiaries of measures aimed at growth and economic and social cohesion in this multiannual programme .
In this way , once again , we are seeing a concern and a laudable spirit of solidarity which should always be shown to the most heavily penalised regions of the European Union .
I would also like to point out , in respect of the environment , the effort to base tourist development on the criteria of sustainability and maintaining and enhancing the cultural and historical heritage , which have always been priority objectives and the subjects of much involvement in many of the ultra-peripheral and island regions of the European Union .
That is why they undoubtedly deserve the European Union 's support .
The Bennasar Tous report as a whole deserves our appreciation and our agreement .
Mr President , since at the beginning of the 21st century tourism is going to be the biggest sector of activity worldwide and since it is going to be the biggest industry in Europe , contributing directly with 3.5 % of the GDP and employing around 9 million people , the proposal for a Council Decision on the first multiannual programme to assist European tourism sets the tone for the need to pay greater attention to measures designed to revive tourism based on the criteria of sustainability , environment-friendliness and consumer rights .
The ultra-peripheral regions , in particular the autonomous region of Madeira , which has for a long time been wellknown as a high quality tourist destination , sees in tourism a very long-term source of income since :
its main policy is based on the environment , natural resources , the architectural heritage and traditional customs ; -it ensures the competitiveness of the tourist industry in a system of open markets , promoting intra-Community tourism , thereby enabling people to find out more about Europe and strengthen the identity of European citizens ; -it supports the development of small and medium tourist industries in order to improve the quality of tourism and promote jobs ; -it favours measures aimed at bringing down any obstacles preventing access to tourism by various groups of the community , in particular the young , the aged and the disabled.I would like to emphasise the recent measures taken by the Portuguese government to reduce air transport tariffs for the autonomous regions .
Although it is not enough it is a first step at facilitating domestic tourism , and is all part of bringing down the obstacles which currently exist in this sector .
Mr President , my compliments to the rapporteurs on their reports and my thanks to them , particularly Mr Bennasar Tous , for their continuing efforts .
When the Council of Ministers discusses Philoxenia shortly it will have a clear position before it on the table from the European Parliament .
Secondly , the terrible events in Belgium have caused attention to be focused currently on sex tourism .
Although of course it is a minority who are involved , there is every reason to work energetically to stop this abomination .
According to one press report , one in five tourists who visit Sri Lanka do so for paedophile sex .
That is alleged in a UNICEF report published this week .
The majority of sex tourists supposedly come from the Netherlands , Germany , Belgium , Switzerland and Italy .
According to UNICEF .
Will the Commissioner investigate this and come up with concrete proposals to thwart these vile people , with the cooperation of the bona fide tour operators ?
Thirdly , I do not need to convince anyone here of the great importance of tourism .
The question is how we can get tourism moved higher up the European political agenda .
We managed this morning to retain the budget line for tourism , but it was not easy .
But that is not the end of it .
It is important to get tourism covered by the Treaty .
Parliament has spoken out in favour of this strongly on a number of occasions .
I should like to ask the Commissioner if he is prepared to consider a programme of action to give tourism the place it deserves in European policies and also in the structure of the European Commission .
Subject to the subsidiarity principle , of course .
He can count on our support in that .
Lastly I should like to ask the Commissioner if he will , as far as possible , get the investigations of financial malpractice within DG XXIII completed as speedily as possible , because that puts a damper on tourism policy .
Mr President , the three reports on tourism once again force us to ask what place tourism should occupy within the common policies of the Union .
The aim in asking Price Waterhouse to conduct an evaluation of the first European action plan to assist tourism was not of course to provide an answer to this question .
But the sharp criticisms of the action plan in recent years undoubtedly offer some valuable pointers .
To take just two points of criticism : there is no coherence in the measures taken and the objectives are far too ambitious .
The Harrison reports falls down in virtually ignoring these criticisms .
In this report we once again see precisely the kind of over-ambitious objectives which Price Waterhouse criticizes .
The same is really true of the Bennasar Tous and Parodi reports .
Here too there are lofty ambitions and for the umpteenth time the argument that tourism should have a full place in the Treaty .
Unlike many of my colleagues I cannot endorse these positions .
For the sake of clarity I would stress that I am every bit as convinced as the rapporteurs of the great social and economic significance of tourism , particularly for jobs .
But that is far from proving that there is a need for a comprehensive European policy on tourism .
An opinion on the Philoxenia programme from the Committee on Budgets also points to the decentralized structure of this sector .
There is certainly a role for the European Union here , but a modest role .
I do not disagree with the rapporteurs on the importance of tourism , but much as I respect all the work they have done , I cannot share their views of the extensive responsibilities they think the Union ought to have in this area .
And I fully appreciate the Council 's reticence .
Thank you very much , Mr Papoutsis .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Community railways
The next item is the report ( A4-0293 / 96 ) by Mr Farthofer , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 91 / 440 / EEC on the development of the Community 's railways ( COM ( 95 ) 0337 - C4-0555 / 95-95 / 0205 ( SYN ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating the proposal to amend Directive 91 / 440 / EEC , which the Commission decided in July 1995 .
To make matters clearer : the four vital elements of Directive 91 / 440 are the independent management of the railways , a separate accounting system for railways infrastructure and rail transport services , redressing the financial situation of the former public railway undertakings and rights of access for railway undertakings in cross-frontier combined transport .
The Commission proposal we will be voting on tomorrow provides for a substantial expansion of access rights .
Under it , railway undertakings registered in the Union have the right to carry out cross-frontier passenger transport and goods transport with cabotage .
So we are concerned here with introducing almost total freedom to provide services in the railway sector .
What is the position of the Committee on Transport and Tourism ?
What is its view of the Commission 's amending proposal , which regards liberalization as the cure for the declining market share of the railways compared with other modes of transport ?
Well , a bare majority of the committee agreed with the Commission proposal that freedom to provide services should be granted within 18 months .
I take note of that but will not conceal my conviction that this is overhasty and not appropriate to the actual situation of the railways .
Why ?
In many countries this directive has still not been fully transposed into law and in particular the financial situation of railway undertakings has only been fully redressed in one country , Germany .
Other railway undertakings are still bearing the brunt of a public transport system that was very often not adequately supported by the state .
That is why the Group of the Party of European Socialists has ensured in the report that the Commission 's present proposal can only be implemented once the earlier directive has been transposed in full .
Secondly , the dividing line between national and cross-frontier passenger transport is fluid .
Cross-frontier passenger transport is very often an integral component of the national timetable system .
If undertakings begin to concentrate on profitable routes , that may lead to the breakdown of the system , which will in fact affect everyone .
We have just seen in the United Kingdom what happens when several railway undertakings have to set up an integrated passenger transport system .
It is precisely those passengers whom the railway undertakings have to attract in greater numbers who most seriously doubt this system .
Thirdly , the USA which the Commission often quotes as a model cannot be a model for Europe .
It is precisely in the USA that the liberalization of passenger transport has led to the monopoly of a single undertaking , namely Amtrak .
If undertakings make profits there , then it is only because the network is geared only to goods transport and simply makes long-distance goods transport cheaper .
In Europe , however , the network happens to be based on passenger transport , which makes rail transport immensely more expensive because of the safety technology required .
Other points concern measures relating to own-capital resources and considerations of principle .
If we talk of developing railway undertakings in the Community we will have to rectify the conditions of competition for the modes of transport .
We have to put it quite plainly : the railways can only be rescued if all modes of transport are assigned the costs they incur .
So long as we only impute a fraction of the costs incurred by lorries in road transport , so long as the rules on driving and rest periods are being circumvented almost at will , we can go on and on deciding whatever we want in relation to the railways . In the end it will remain meaningless .
That is why it is essential for the true costs to be assigned .
Let me just remind you of the external costs of ECU 250 000 million of transport by lorry .
To conclude , since this is my last statement here in plenary and I will be returning to my national parliament , I would ask you to inform your colleague , Commissioner Kinnock , that I warmly thank him and his colleagues for their very good cooperation .
I will continue this transport policy in the Austrian Parliament and I am very proud that Austrian ideas have been incorporated in the Commission 's work and also that of Parliament .
Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on a very good piece of work .
I also think that it is sad that the rapporteur is leaving the European Parliament but I hope that we will be able to work together in the future too , just as we have to date , and that we will remain in touch .
The report on which we are now to adopt a position is important , as it concerns future rail transport in the EU .
With the right policy rail transport can become an important instrument in tackling the environment in Europe successfully .
One way of facilitating movement and strengthening rail transport in Europe is the directive which the Commission has put forward and which is aimed at strengthening rail transport .
However , just as the rapporteur has pointed out in the report , any division between track management and service operation must be correctly made .
I come from Sweden , where we have made such a division and we have gained some important experience which I believe we can share in the work to come .
One could say that the division made in Sweden has been very successful .
It has resulted in greater effectiveness .
The two operations into which the previous joint operation was divided up now have clearer profiles and objectives .
One important experience gained in Sweden is that the division also solved the financial situation which the State Railways then found itself in , where it had considerable debts .
This is exactly what the rapporteur is saying , that is , that the financial situation must be resolved if we are to be able to create competition on equal terms .
It is important that we have strong railway operators in Europe if , as the rapporteur said earlier , they are to be able to compete with other means of transport .
It is this that is really the important investment in a better environment .
Madam President , railways must play an important part in any sustainable transport system .
We thus need modern railway companies which work as European-minded transport operators .
Healthy competition is both desirable and necessary here .
This Commission proposal is consistent with that and we shall support it .
I sympathize with the rapporteur when he talks about the internalization of external costs , but that naturally applies to all forms of transport and thus to railways too , in all honesty .
Lastly , we shall also be happy to support Mr van der Waal 's amendment which seeks primarily to secure honest and transparent charging for the use of infrastructure .
May I end , Madam President , by expressing my sadness at Mr Farthofer 's impending departure .
He knows that we do not always agree , but I have always particularly appreciated our discussions with him .
I am really sorry he did not make it , though of course I am not sorry that the political grouping closest to me has gained a seat , but I do think it is a shame he is leaving us .
I wish him the very best of luck and I look forward to thanking him again at the forthcoming meeting of our committee .
All the best to you , Sir .
I believe that when Mr Farthofer takes his seat in the Austrian Parliament that means there will be another European in that parliament too , which is also very important for the European Parliament .
Madam President , by adopting the Commission 's draft amendment of directive 91 / 440 CEE , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has given the go-ahead to the pursuit of liberalization of rail transport , without dealing with the social and economic consequences .
This Commission draft amendment in fact provides for a considerable increase in rights of access , resulting in fiercer competition .
In the lengthening of the breach opened by the 1991 directive , the Commission has just adopted a White Paper on the revitalization of the railways .
Revitalization !
Well frankly , the profound meaning of the term is really contradicted by the specific measures which accompany it !
In reality , the objective pursued is to speed up the liberalization and de-regulation process - right of access to rail infrastructures for all freight services and international travel services , to set up a European railways authority , and separate the management of the transport infrastructures and activities - which is summarized by the formula ' introduce even more market forces into railways ' .
Our group is truly opposed to these ultra-liberal orientations of the Commission .
The offensive which is in progress aims to wind up public companies as they constitute the most efficient poles of resistance to free competition , detrimental to the interest of staff and users .
The Commission is besides obliged to acknowledge that the restructuring of the European railway will go hand in hand with a high number of job losses .
I am glad that this White Paper was blocked at the last Council of Ministers for Transport , thanks to the mobilization of the trade union organizations which , in a joint statement , denounced the particularly evil aspects and confirmed their wish to combat them .
Our group is determined , in liaison with the trade union organizations and user associations , to thwart these orientations .
It wishes to work with everyone in order to attain real measures of revitalization of rail transport , so that the latter can fully assure its mission of providing a public service , in other words responding to the interests of staff and users , contributing to a harmonious arrangement of the territory and encouraging cooperation within the European Union .
Madam President , we as a Group shall not oppose further liberalization of the railways provided the right conditions for that are put in place .
My Group believes that the rapporteur , Mr Farthofer , represents that very well in his report by making it clear that the question of internalizing external costs is to be tackled seriously at last .
I would add , moreover , in contrast to what Mr Cornelissen said , that if you want serious and sustainable mobility the railways might conceivable be given more chances than other forms of transport for the simple reason that the railways have of course always lagged behind and have to work hard to catch up .
And they must be given the chance to do so .
If you are serious about sustainable mobility you will also have to make choices in that area and then you cannot just say that costs have to be internalized and if the railways then collapse in the longer term , well , it was bad luck , because if that happens the environment and sustainability will automatically collapse too .
Given the declining use of the railways we have been seeing for years now it is high time we made sure that more than just lip service is paid to supporting the railways but that vigorous action is taken too in the interests of a sustainable future .
Madam President , the real debate on how railways in the Community should develop is yet to take place following the recent communication from the Commission .
But it is obvious that the railways will have to be geared far better to the needs of the market if they are not to continue losing market share .
Directive 91 / 440 was introduced with that aim in mind .
Unfortunately the slowness of some Member States in translating this directive into their national legislation meant that there was very little improvement , but the liberalization process has to be progressively carried through .
I am thus able to support the proposed amendment opening up the railways to all freight transport and to international passenger traffic .
The Farthofer report rightly urges Member States to get on with clearing the railways ' debts .
I also agree with the desirability of having the various forms of transport internalize the effects of their external costs , though I am not yet confident that this will strengthen the market position of the railways vis à vis the other transport operators .
My warmest thanks to Mr Farthofer .
I am sorry to see this highly respected colleague leaving Parliament and I wish him all the best .
Madam President , I too wish to thank Mr Farthofer and I hope that he will continue in the Austrian parliament the good work he has done in the European Parliament .
The first point to make is that the issues of liberalization are of great concern to us - the directive has a legal basis but it has also to be said that the issue of legality must take account of employment levels and the social aspect .
The Commission 's power to legislate on an issue as complicated as the railways is not in dispute but we have also to bear in mind the impact that liberalization will have on the social structure of individual countries .
It is difficult for the railway system to compete with other forms of transport and , as far as we are concerned , we must promote it ; the proposal on the calculation of external costs is a positive one .
I also believe it to be very useful to think in terms of specialization of railway systems , in the form of both combined and intermodal transport , as this will make it possible to distinguish between railways of national and those of international interest , and also regional railways which are able to involve local government in company structures involved in railway management .
Of course a structure with public sector characteristics will contain marked elements of bureaucracy ; of course there are also inefficiencies , but the railway system has guaranteed mobility , particularly to the less well-off .
We have to bolster competitiveness and also to undertake financial reorganization - failing that , the railway system will be less competitive than other transport systems .
From that point of view , the resources needed for financial reorganization can , it goes without saying , also be private , although private investment cannot be the only kind to be considered .
There has specifically to continue to be a public role within the railway system , on the understanding that the sector is able to manage itself economically and independently , taking into account also the financial calculations and the inevitable inefficiencies. viewed in that way , the directive appears to meet a number of objectives , but in terms of the substance , the debate seems to me still to be open , and a number of contradictions pointed out by Mrs Ainardi are still there .
The trade unions are mobilizing and I hope that , as a result also of debate we shall have on the White Paper , we shall be able to table a more comprehensive proposal than is contained in the directive currently under discussion .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal is an important element of our strategy on the restructuring of the Community 's railways .
In the White paper of last July we emphasized the importance of introducing market forces in a way which would take account of the special character of rail transport .
The proposal for expansion of access rights is precisely the next step towards the introduction of those market forces .
Our objective is to see access to the rail infrastructure opened up in all goods transport services , internal and international , and in the international passenger transport services .
The Commission is very pleased that Parliament 's Committee on Transport approves its proposal , albeit with a number of amendments .
The proposed amendments cover debt reduction , the internalization of external costs , the equalization of tax treatment for all modes of transport and the adoption of common rules on infrastructure usage charges .
The Commission is working busily in all of those areas .
For instance , the White Paper on railway policy puts forward approaches to the questions of debt alleviation and infrastructure usage charges .
In the Green Paper on the law and the efficient determination of transport prices we provided the impetus for a wide-ranging discussion concerning the external cost .
We should not pre-empt the discussion of these two papers .
Moreover , the Commission 's proposal is limited to the expansion of infrastructure access rights . We do not think it right to introduce other policies into what is really a proposal on a very specific matter .
To do so would substantially alter the aims of the proposal and place us in the position of pre-empting other proposals in other areas .
Because of that the Commission is not able to accept many of the amendments , even though it views their objectives as constructive .
I will deal with them one by one .
The first amendment emphasizes the importance of uniform implementation of the directive in order to avoid distortions of competition .
The Commission does , of course agree , and it accepts this amendment .
Amendments Nos 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 relate to policies on which the Commission is working in another framework : debt alleviation , internalization of the external cost , indirect taxation and infrastructure usage charges .
As I explained earlier , these go beyond the scope of the present proposal and therefore cannot be accepted .
Amendment No 6 stresses the special contribution made by regional rail transport to the internal cohesion of the national economies .
The Commission agrees that serious account must be taken of this factor in the formulation of the policies relating to market access and therefore accepts the amendment .
We are unable to accept Amendment No 7 , which is composed of several parts .
The first part states that indebtedness must be significantly reduced by the time the directive is transposed into national law .
Transposition may take a number years , whereas Directive 91 / 440 imposed 1 January 1993 as the final date for debt alleviation .
In view of that , we consider that including the amendment would constitute a backward step and would possibly lead to legal uncertainty .
The second part of Amendment No 7 demands that the railway undertakings have the customary own capital resources .
While we agree that the railways must , indeed , have adequate capital , the financial experts inform us that talk of customary own capital resources is meaningless .
Consequently , we do not think that the amendment in question clarifies the existing text .
In the third paragraph of this amendment there is a call for the setting-up of a separate debt amortization unit .
I must inform the House that debt amortization units are only one debt reduction mechanism .
Other mechanisms , such as those used in Germany and France , can be equally effective .
That being so , the Commission sees no justification for imposing one specific financial mechanism to the exclusion of others .
Amendment No 8 refers to indirect taxation and interoperability .
Again , these matters go beyond the scope of the proposal that we have before us , and the Commission has already committed itself to submitting a report dealing with each of them .
We cannot admit provisions of that sort to the proposal that we are examining today .
As regards the new amendment , No 9 , the Commission is happy to accept it .
Madam President , I know that the rapporteur , Mr Farthofer , worked very hard to achieve a difficult compromise on the report , and I wish to extend sincere thanks to him for that .
I think that his report is an excellent piece of work , even though I have not been able to agree with him on every point .
But as I have already pointed out , we are taking a very positive approach to the issues which underlie the amendments .
Consequently , in leaving the European Parliament to return to his national parliament he can rest assured that his proposals are being examined carefully and taken very seriously .
Lastly , ladies and gentlemen , I take this opportunity , personally and on behalf of Mr Neil Kinnock , to offer warm regards to Mr Farthofer .
I hope that he has found his brief stay in the European Parliament a beneficial experience and that his expectations , of which I hope he has many for the future , have been met , and I convey our very best wishes to him with regard to the continuation of his political career in his national parliament .
Thank you , Mr Papoutsis .
I too would like to thank you warmly on behalf of Parliament and wish you all the best for your work in your national parliament .
Please do not forget your time with us , but I am sure you will not !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 7.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , yesterday an explanation of vote by Mr Dell 'Alba was recorded , two aspects of which were not an explanation of vote .
Firstly , it contained personal insults that I must reject , for he accused me of falsifying history , and secondly he called on the President to act contrary to the Rules , namely to delete passages from the explanatory statement in my report .
According to our Rules of Procedure , however , the rapporteur is solely responsible for the content of an explanatory statement .
It can no more be deleted than can passages from a speech .
This could only be done under some kind of Orwellian Ministry of Truth , and the Committee on External Economic Relations has unanimously rejected this notion in a letter to the President .
That has been noted , Mr Posselt .
But we really must get on with approving the Minutes .
Are there any other comments on the Minutes ?
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Votes
Have you noted , Madam President , that our group abstained because the Farthofer report as such does nothing to change the monopoly situations enjoyed by all the railway companies in the Member States ?
This is not really the time for explanations of vote , but we did hear what you said .
In principle it is desirable that there should be a common measure for support for the Philoxenia programme because the tourist industry is an important factor in economic and social development in the Union .
However , after the extremely serious criticism which has been levelled at the Commission and DG XXIII in particular on account of the manner in which previous plans of action have been carried out it is highly important that the resources which have been proposed for the Philoxenia programme and the objectives to be achieved are closely monitored as work progresses .
The aim of the programme is very clear : to create jobs .
The administrative costs of this measure , travel and staff costs , should not exceed what is reasonable .
Very briefly , I am pleased to see that Amendment No 28 , which I tabled , has once again been approved in the context of PHILOXENIA .
Commissioner Papoutsis ' reply ( P-2433 / 96 ) also suggested that the European Tourism Agency should by now be starting on its way , or so I hope , and I trust that the Commissioner , as a former Member of Parliament , will be able to champion the views of Parliament and not yield to other opinions or interests ......
I shall vote in favour .
I have voted against the reports on tourism as I believe that these issues are not EU issues but areas which should be governed by national policy and intergovernmental cooperation .
Parodi report
If measures in the tourism sector are really to have an impact it is essential that they should gain institutional recognition at Community level .
We do not believe , however , that it is necessary to establish a sub-committee on tourism . Nor is it necessary to create more units in the Commission to be responsible for monitoring the application of the principles of a common tourism policy .
The common budget resources must be used effectively .
A reasonable balance must be found between the effectiveness of the resources to be earmarked and the objectives to be achieved .
This is why the administrative costs , including staff costs , for measures in the tourism sector should not exceed what is reasonable .
I have voted for the report in the final round of voting .
It is important to promote the tourist industry in Europe but this is in the first instance a matter for the respective Member States .
There is no reason to introduce some kind of legal basis for a policy on tourism into the Treaty of Rome .
Nor is there any reason to give numerous mandates to the Commission in order for it to analyse this and that aspect of tourism , such as ' types of tourism ' , ' the financing of tourism ' etc .
This too should be done at national level and by the respective Member States .
The EU should , however , be able to take on a coordinating role in respect of national , regional and local authorities , the tourist industry and various consumer organisations .
Harrison report
The manner in which the Commission 's DG XXIII carried out the previous action plan has been the subject of considerable criticism , especially as regards administrative and operational questions .
This criticism must be taken extremely seriously .
A series of organisational changes must be made in the tourism unit .
If the Philoxenia programme is to ensure the economic and social development intended it is especially important as part of the continued work to monitor closely the resources proposed for DG XXIII .
Protection against certain legislation ( Rule 97 of the Rules of Procedure )
The next item is the report ( A4-0329 / 96 ) by Mr Kittelmann , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0420 - C4-0519 / 96-96 / 0217 ( CNS ) ) protecting against the effects of the application of certain legislation of certain third countries , and actions based thereon or resulting therefrom .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in its resolution of 24 May 1966 the European Parliament condemned the Helms Burton Act ' and all the unilateral measures adopted in the US against world free trade ' , called on the Commission ' to propose a regulation imposing a ban on compliance with such measures ' and at the same time called on the Council and the Commission ' to pursue the dialogue with the USA ' .
I am glad that today , if somewhat belatedly - for the mills of the executive always grind rather slowly , even in the case of clear-cut issues - and with the unanimous approval of all the Member States of the European Union , the Council and the Commission , we have a regulation that lives up to our expectations .
The Helms Burton Act , which concerns the situation in Cuba , and the d 'Amato Act , which concerns the situation in Libya and Iraq , are attempts to extend national American legal provisions governing undertakings and individuals to third countries that want to make new investments in the said countries .
We have established on several occasions , and we want to emphasize this again today , that this cannot reasonably be expected of European industry nor is it acceptable to European Union policy .
Even if President Clinton has suspended parts of the Helms Burton Act , the real danger to European interests remains , since it is not possible to suspend the law relating to Iraq and Libya .
And in any case the Helms Burton Act has only been suspended temporarily .
We have noted with extreme concern the economic implications of this law .
The unilateral measures imposed by law , under which third parties will be liable to sanctions , represent a clear violation of international law , the effects of which are not yet foreseeable .
What is certain is that if these laws are applied , European undertakings in particular will be damaged .
Meanwhile the Americans have drawn up a long list describing the forms of action they could take against individual undertakings .
But we are against the Americans taking on the role of world policeman and disregarding international agreements such as the World Trade Organization which they both supported and ratified .
Let me point out once again that the issue is not whether we unconditionally support the American Government , the American people , in their fight against international terrorism ; we are in favour of extending the measures needed to combat terrorism .
That is a tradition of the European Parliament !
We also stress that our strong opposition has nothing to do with our long-standing and good friendship with the United States and transatlantic relations .
They are an extremely valuable asset and it is becoming every more necessary for us to deepen these relations in view of the international problems facing us and which will also increase .
In these important areas the European Union will therefore work together with the USA on a cooperative and constructive basis .
But good friends must keep to the rules of play .
We must make it unmistakably clear that we reject bilateralism and protectionism .
Primarily , that is the task of the World Trade Organization , which will have to take a very rapid decision under the dispute settlement procedure .
We welcome the fact that the European Union called for a panel to be set up , which has been delayed because of US objections but which , we hope , will happen at the next meeting of the dispute settlement body in November this year .
Moreover , in the Madrid decisions in December 1995 the USA committed itself to transatlantic cooperation .
So it is simply not on for the USA to make commitments on the one hand and keep emphasizing how important it is to cooperate with us , while on the other hand it goes against the law .
We must counter the law it passed with very firm measures .
That is why I am glad that the Council and the Commission have begun by setting out five measures by which they intend to protect the interests of our undertakings .
In fact this regulation could be supported today without further discussion since it is in line with our requests and expectations .
Yet I would also like to point out that the general aim of the regulation needs clarification in some areas .
For instance , it is not quite clear how the proposal can be applied in the case of the d 'Amato Act .
Finally , let me ask you , given that the REX Committee has also approved and unanimously recommended the regulation to Parliament , to vote for this regulation .
Madam President , my Group views with satisfaction the proposal for a Council regulation on protection against the effects of extra-territorial legislation .
We are also happy to see that the line taken by the Council was the one approved by this Parliament in its resolution of 24 May , as Mr Kittelmann also pointed out , once it became clear that the United States intended to institute a series of measures designed to restrict , penalize and ultimately to prevent trade with and investment in certain countries by means of two instruments : the Helms-Burton and d 'Amato-Kennedy Acts .
From the outset this Parliament , via the REX Committee , considered that these proposals , which were in fact put forward for domestic political reasons , were dangerous to the future of the trade rules signed in Marrakesh , and a politically intolerable challenge .
Without the cover of a multilateral organization , or an international institution such as the United Nations , which in exceptional circumstances may issue resolutions which have an impact on trade , these unilateral measures are unacceptable , as are the arguments which have been used in an attempt to convince us , after the event , of the worthiness of the objectives .
The Commission and the Council have secured the backing of Parliament and of public opinion in the Member States , which have provided them with enormous support in their twin-track approach : on the one hand the regulation on the protection of interests and on the other the application to the World Trade Organization .
Both approaches are right , although the Council , as too often happens , forgot that this Parliament is an important part of Community institutions and its opinion could have been sought in a more timely manner .
Despite this discourtesy , our Group will support the proposal for a regulation , as it supports the application to the World Trade Organization .
We believe that unanimity is essential in this dispute , and , in line with international commitments undertaken , and with an approach entirely different from that of the United States , we believe the World Trade Organization to be the proper forum for settlement of the dispute , since its members include other countries whose interests have also been damaged by the arbitrary nature of these measures .
We acknowledge the role of the United States in the world , but we are not prepared to accept restrictions at the expense of other parties ' economic interests , as in this case , without a specific mandate issued in advance by an international organization of which we are members , which might well be , as we have already said , the United Nations .
We congratulate Mr Kittelmann , who has worked with great urgency , and we also trust that this regulation will be unanimously approved , as it will strengthen the position of the European Union in a dispute such as the one we are discussing .
Madam President , the principle of this legislation is supported by the Liberal Group as a proportionate , timely and appropriate response to the ill-judged extra-territorial legislation of the United States .
Given the coincidence of each Member State 's separate and collective interests and the role of the Commission in the domain of international trade , this is classically the type of legislation that is more suited to the European Union than a multiplicity of bilateral Member State arrangements .
Collectively we must defend our rights to choose when and how to engage , or isolate , regimes such as those in Cuba , Libya , Iran or elsewhere .
The will of the United States to isolate such states in the defence of democracy is not well-served by the undemocratic arrogation unto themselves of a presumption to act and to choose for all .
The United States has no such right and in no uncertain terms they must be induced , and if needs be , through retaliation such as proposed in this legislation , forced to accept this fact .
In recent days , Madam President , we have been disturbed to read reports that suggest that Denmark may delay the adoption of this legislation on the grounds of a challenge on the legal base .
The legal bases proposed are longstanding and not innovative in themselves .
Custom and practice pending any Supreme Court decision in Denmark would suggest that the status quo should prevail .
I hope this will not delay matters and the Liberal Group fully supports the legislation and the REX Committee 's amendments .
Madam President , I believe that in supporting this regulation which protects the interests of companies and the trading interests of the European Union as a whole , Parliament is merely following a tradition which has been producing political and commercial effects since the time of the 1993 Melandri report .
As mentioned in the actual amendments , we are sorry to see that no account was taken of the role of Parliament , and we also deplore the delay in bringing the matter before Parliament .
In addition , we believe that the committee on this matter should be advisory .
As the Committee on Foreign Affairs says , stringent measures have to be taken to counter the unacceptable commercial and political provocation offered by the United States with the HelmsBurton Act and the d 'Amato Act , since , as the rapporteur rightly said , this legislation will also have to be used to counter the future d 'Amato Act relating to Iran and Libya .
We also support the proposals of the Committee on External Economic Relations , which make the watch list of United States companies and changes in the EU entry procedures for American companies the logical counterpart to the provocation represented by these US Acts .
At all events , I will conclude , Madam President , by saying that in my view this regulation is backed by the European Union 's decision to defend the principle of its and other countries ' sovereign right to decide with whom they should or should not trade .
Madam President , once again the USA wants to play world legislator and is not keeping to the rules that were agreed in the framework of the WTO .
We cannot let this be done to us .
In the REX Committee all the groups were in agreement on that .
After the Council gave its assent in mid-July , the Commission has now presented a proposal for an anti-blockade regulation .
The REX Committee - and here again all the groups agreed - believes that it would be preferable for measures on the basis of this regulation to be taken by the Commission rather than the Council .
Parliament itself has been calling for this kind of anti-blockade legislation since 1992 , since the USA reinforced the blockade against Cuba with the Torricelli Act .
The Council and in particular the German Government have been the main stumbling blocks so far .
Nor did the Commission fall over backwards to act .
Presumably at the time people expected the Cuban business to sort itself out by itself within a few years .
But last year the Cuban economy recovered somewhat and now the USA is tightening the screws of the blockade even further , supposedly in order to promote the spread of democracy .
But that was also how it justified its support for the military coup in Chile and for the Mujahedin in Afghanistan .
Once again the Council and the Commission did not act , did not immediately take the matter before the WTO .
Only when the trade interests of the EU , especially of Germany and France , were seriously affected by the d 'Amato Act did frantic activity break out on all sides .
But after the EU has kept quiet for so long , people will no longer believe that it really intends to hit back now .
This anti-blockade legislation is a few years too late .
If European trade interests are suffering now , that is primarily the fault of the national governments , but it is also because of the Commission 's failure to act .
After years of inaction on the part of the Union followed by the frantic activity of recent weeks , the attempt by the EU to adopt a common position risks being defeated by Denmark 's veto .
I have the fullest understanding for the reservations expressed by Denmark , which does not want to create a precedent for giving the Commission wider general powers with the anti-blockade legislation .
Such matters belong in the intergovernmental conference , which is where they should be resolved by agreement .
But in this specific case we need prompt action , which is why I appeal to all parties concerned to put aside the legal disputes and come to a rapid agreement on this question .
Madam President , although the issue is not to show how other-worldly we are , since the Sierra Madre , since the barbudos , behind their comandante , descended on Havana , things have changed a great deal in Cuba .
We were there with a small parliamentary mission and we met President Castro himself - Carlos Lage was there too , incidentally .
Things have changed , clearly , on the economic front , with the appearance of the paladares , or little restaurants , and the tax reform of 1994 .
And it was at that time , when Cuba , despite its problems , was beginning to open up , that we saw the truth of the saying ' what 's bred in the bone comes out in the flesh ' . The United States reverted to type , with the ' big stick ' of Theodore Roosevelt , the Monroe Doctrine , the Bay of Pigs philosophy - arrogance , diktats , unilateral action , embargo !
In other words , the same tactics that were used , with the support of everyone here , against Iraq and the Iraqi people .
In Cuba , the effect was to create united opposition , including the Archbishop of Havana : we met him in June , and he too was against this philosophy of unilateralism , against this philosophy of protectionism , against this philosophy of economic nationalism .
Suddenly we learn that American legislation includes a section 301 , a splendid section which enables the United States to impose unilateral sanctions on anyone who inconveniences it .
Suddenly we learn , in this House , that Europe has given way to the multinational Chiquita in the ' banana affair ' .
We learn that we were getting ready to give way in the hormone affair , allowing the global extension of American legislation .
And yet all the tax experts know what is going on !
California 's behaviour in connection with unitary taxation , which obstructed companies in the United Kingdom and obstructed Péchiney in France , goes back more than fifteen years !
So you see , ladies and gentlemen , the mistake of alignment that was made during the Gulf War .
Over there on the left they forgot , during the Gulf War , the attacks by American fighters on the Mondoa Palace in Santiago de Chile , because the multinational Kenneccott & Braden gave an order for the Chilean Government to be overthrown .
You had forgotten that .
You had forgotten the alignment in the GATT negotiations , on the Blair House agreements .
Well , at least , it 's an ill wind .
We are going to start at Singapore in November , we are going to start on the GATT negotiations in 1999 .
We have already seen President Clinton pushing through a new agricultural law .
Is Europe going to forget , is the European Parliament going to forget the female spirit he displayed during the Gulf War ?
Because , if so , we shall avoid finding ourselves , too , subjected to the equivalent of the Amato Law , the equivalent of the Torricelli Law , the equivalent of the Helms-Burton Law !
Thank you , Madam President , when slaves awaken , anything is possible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this regulation is necessary and right on this particular occasion .
The Kittelmann report should therefore be supported .
The question is , however , whether the road of rapid liberalization on which the European Union and the WTO have embarked is the right one when it is increasingly being undermined by protectionism and extra-territorial laws and then has to be corrected or commuted by counter-measures , such as this regulation .
These are dubious legal methods of combatting a breach of international law .
Would it not be better in this case to take more measured steps to liberalize world trade and only to take the next step when the advantages of earlier steps have been assured and all the national economies can take the next step without reservations ?
I have discovered in many areas of our Parliament 's activities that proposals and decisions were based on wishful thinking and a lack of realism .
Since this is the last time I can speak in this Chamber before my return to the national Austrian Parliament , let me take this opportunity to thank all those with whom I enjoyed good cooperation and cordial meetings in the committees .
I also thank the Commission for answering my many questions .
And I thank the interpreters for their work , which is not always easy .
At the same time , let me appeal to a number of Members to consider whether it is in the spirit of Europe for them to judge other colleagues not on the basis of their qualifications but purely and simply according to where they sit in this Parliament .
I wish you all great success in your work for Europe !
Many thanks , Madam President !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is glad that the European Parliament is prepared to invoke the urgency procedure in connection with the Community antiboycott provisions which the Commission proposes to adopt in order to protect European operators from the extraterritorial effects of the American Helms-Burton and d 'Amato laws which came into force this year .
The Commission is fully aware of the fact that the European Parliament has on numerous occasions , most recently during its plenary sitting of 24 May 1996 , called for such provisions to be adopted .
The Commission believes , like Parliament , that it is now necessary to protect the interests of the Community , its citizens and the undertakings established within its territory against the illegitimate extraterritorial effects of the laws adopted by the United States .
The Community provisions should also be such as to send a clear message to the American administration , and even more so to the American Congress , that the rules of public international law must be respected .
That is the position which the Commission , the Council and the Governments of the Member States have steadfastly defended .
However , the Community 's provisions must not be seen as a rejection of the objectives pursued by the United States in its anxiety to bring back democracy to Cuba and to put a stop to the support provided by certain countries to international terrorism .
The European Union still shares these objectives , and the Council has restated its desire to support democratization in Cuba .
On the other hand , it cannot accept that Washington , by making its laws applicable outside its national frontiers , should endeavour to impose its own view regarding the means to be employed in order to achieve shared objectives .
The Commission must also thank Parliament for the constructive amendments that have been proposed .
It undertakes to keep the European Parliament regularly informed , through the competent parliamentary committee , and will ensure , in compliance with the provisions of the Treaty , that the European Parliament is involved as it should be in any follow-up legislation .
The Commission shares the views of the European Parliament regarding the comitology procedure and will pass on those views to the Council during the discussions to be held there .
As far as the Union 's objectives regarding Cuba are concerned , it should be recalled that the European Council in Madrid on 14 and 15 December last year adopted the following conclusions . It deemed it appropriate to continue dialogue and cooperation with Cuba with a view to actively supporting the ongoing process of reform , encouraging respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and broadening the scope of private enterprise and the development of civilian society .
To this end , it called upon the Commission to present a draft mandate for an agreement on economic and commercial cooperation in the first half of 1996 , which the Council will examine in the light of the developing political and economic situation in Cuba .
Moreover , the European Council in Florence on 21 and 22 June this year adopted the following conclusions : it regretted the fact that political circumstances in Cuba had not enabled any progress to be made in relations between the European Union and our country .
It hopes that the changing political situation in Cuba will create the conditions necessary for such progress to be made .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
After earlier reticence because of the American presidential elections the Commission decided in favour of a tough political response to the trade measures taken by the United States against Cuba .
A formal complain has been lodged with the WTO , but it will be some time before it is dealt with .
A further concrete step we can take at the moment is thus this proposal for a European regulation .
Although we do not accept the extraterritorial validity of the American legislation , this Union measure against our most important ally is painful .
Especially since like the United States we deplore the ruling dictatorship in Cuba .
The European legislation proposed by the Commission is far-reaching .
The ban on recognizing and complying with rulings by the American judge encroaches on the law of Member States .
Moreover , it also makes it possible for American damage claims to be removed from the jurisdiction of any judge in the Member States .
These measures will mean a far-reaching transfer of sovereignty .
The question for us is thus whether there is a sufficient basis for community action under Articles 113 and 235 of the Treaty .
Would it not be more correct , legally speaking , to place the measures under the third pillar and act at an intergovernmental level ?
Among other things to avoid the risk of judgments being subsequently declared void and challenged ?
And we do not think the regulation is formulated clearly in every respect and we think there are also a lot of legal details which need to be ironed out .
Lastly , we cannot agree to the Commission 's proposal that this legislation should also be enforced against the American d 'Amato Act .
Unlike the Helms-Burton Act the d 'Amato Act denies European citizens and companies access to the American market if they trade with Libya or Iran .
That calls for countermeasures other than legal proceedings on the part of the European legislator .
In view of all this we have chosen to abstain .
Fishery
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
report ( A4-0306 / 96 ) by Mr Kindermann , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0189 - C4-0312 / 96-96 / 0124 ( CNS ) ) amending for the fourth time Regulation ( EC ) No 3699 / 93 , laying down criteria and arrangements regarding community structural assistance in the fisheries and aquaculture sector and for processing and marketing of its products ; -report ( A4-0271 / 96 ) by Mr d 'Aboville , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0131 - C4-0268 / 96-96 / 0089 ( CNS ) ) on the conclusion of the Protocol defining , for the period from 18 January 1996 to 17 January 1999 , the fishing opportunities and the financial contribution provided for by the agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Seychelles on fishing off Seychelles ; -report ( A4-0270 / 96 ) by Mr Gallagher , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the communication from the Commission ( COM ( 95 ) 0669 - C4-0016 / 96 ) on the implementation of technical measures in the common fisheries policy ; -oral question ( B4-0979 / 96-0-0213 / 96 ) by Mr Arias Canete , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , to the Commission , on the crisis in the European Union salmon sector ; -report ( A4-0305 / 96 ) by Mrs McKenna , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the Commission report ( COM ( 96 ) 0100 - C4-0213 / 96 ) on monitoring the common fisheries policy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , The Commission has presented a proposal amending for the fourth time the FIFG implementing regulation ( EC ) No 3699 / 93 .
Essentially it adjusts this regulation to other legal provisions .
It is designed to permit FIFG participation in action to promote sales of fishery products .
Under Article 12 of this regulation it was previously not permitted to include regional indications in a guarantee of quality .
With this amendment it is now recognized that under certain conditions , which may be fulfilled especially in the aquaculture sector , the geographical origin of a fisheries product may provide objective information about its particular qualities .
Article 12 is therefore to be amended such that this special case can become eligible for funding under the FIFG sales promotion measures .
The Committee on Fisheries supports this proposal .
The protected designation of origin or protected geographical indication together with the guarantee of quality can be regarded as an important means of promoting sales and opening up new possible outlets for fishery products , although only in the medium to long term , as its application is subject to an extensive examination procedure at the level of the Member States and the Commission .
I therefore call on the Member States to inform their producer organizations of the new opportunities after this regulation has entered into force and examine the relevant applications as quickly as possible and forward them to the Commission .
A further proposed change is more technical , although also important .
It is a legal provision that from 1 January 1994 the budgetary conversion rate for the ECU will be used for granting aid from the FIFG .
This transposes into law the decision of principle taken by the Council not to use the agricultural conversion rate for the ECU for FIFG interventions .
Since the entry into force of Regulation No 3699 / 93 on 1 January 1994 there has been uncertainty in the Member States as to the ECU rate to be applied in conversion into national currencies .
As this was not specified , conversion has to some extent operated differently in the Member States .
The proposed change is therefore a legal precision which removes current uncertainty and which the Committee on Fisheries welcomes , since it ensures that the retroactive nature of the provision will not work to the detriment of the recipients .
I therefore ask the House to adopt the report by its Committee on Fisheries and to approve the Commission proposal .
Turning now to the report by Mrs McKenna , this excellent report on the Commission report on monitoring the Common Fisheries Policy says it very plainly : the success of the Common Fisheries Policy depends on an effective system of control and resources management .
But that does not exist , as the Commission document clearly shows .
The Member States ' control measures vary in intensity and , in relation to the overall monitoring programme , tend to be very sketchy and not very effective .
Unfortunately , reading the Commission 's report , one cannot avoid the impression that the inadequacies noted in the national transposal of the Union 's control provisions reflect a lack of political will on the part of the Member States .
The fishermen feel they are being treated unequally , since the controls vary from one Member State to another .
The fishermen 's distrust of EU legislation is undermining their sense of justice .
That is why the European Parliament is calling for EU-wide similar penalties for similar offences , for the EU inspectorate to be granted increased powers and for the Commission itself to be able to impose sanctions .
Illegal landings make it essential to have a more intensive control system for the landing and marketing of fish .
This must be supported by setting up a satellite control system in the Member States by 1999 at the latest .
These measures proposed by Parliament can , however , only partly help resolve the problem .
Its root cause lies in the over-capacity of the EU fisheries fleet .
The fishermen must be freed from the pressure of economic survival and it is vital to establish a lasting balance between catch capacity and available resources .
This gives new force to the question of restructuring the fleets and restricting fishing activity while at the same time implementing socioeconomic flanking measures .
Madam President , I should first like to protest against this rag-bag sitting devoted to fisheries . What kind of speech can you make when you have to talk simultaneously about salmon imports , fishery agreements with Seychelles and technical measures in community waters , and then expect a comprehensive answer ?
As for the automatic inclusion , week after week , of the ' fisheries ' business on the Friday agenda , I think it is an absolute scandal .
Of course I know that Friday is fish day , but , after all , these reports are dealing with problems affecting the future of people working in appalling conditions and an industry going through an unprecedented crisis !
What sort of opinion do you think fishermen form of our institutions , when their problems always come up in a three-quarters-empty House and , what 's more , in the absence of the Commissioner responsible ?
A word about the technical measures before I proceed to my report .
No one has any doubt , the fishermen least of all , that if their livelihood is to be saved , the resources must be carefully husbanded .
The Commission 's proposals are on the right lines , rightly suggesting various measures based on the protection of juvenile fish .
Although the intention may be good , the practical arrangements are more dubious .
For a start , such measures cannot be adopted until they have first been tested to assess their efficacy and their socio-economic impact .
That is why we are insisting that the main proposals , especially those relating to fishing gear , should be the subject of pilot projects run over reasonable periods of time and at various sites corresponding to the differing situations to be found in Community waters .
As for the possible box closures , such steps , even more than others , call for a prior assessment of the socio-economic consequences to which they will give rise and the detailed planning of suitable flanking measures .
I now come to my own report on the Fisheries Agreement with Seychelles .
This agreement relates exclusively to tuna fishing .
In quantitative terms , in the context of Fisheries Agreements as a whole , this one could be regarded as average .
However , it is of very great importance because of the strategic location of the area in question .
It could be said that access to the waters around the Seychelles determines fishing activities in the Indian Ocean as a whole .
The Agreement provides for fishing licences for 57 European vessels , with financial compensation amounting to ECU 9.9 million , divided between the fishing rights as such , the financing of scientific programmes and educational schemes such as study awards .
This agreement covers the period from January 1996 to January 1999 , and is a renewal of an agreement of the same type .
Although the financial compensation for a given quantity of catch is unchanged , a number of other things have changed .
I made the point that the monitoring system has been tightened , that communications between the vessels and the authorities have been enhanced , that catches will be verified by the Seychelles Fishing Authority , a semi-public body responsible for managing fish stocks and developing scientific research .
On the other hand , penalties have been increased , both for failure to comply with the rules and for incorrect declaration of catches .
As far as stocks are concerned , it is important to note that tropical tuna , as a whole , is not regarded by scientific experts as being overexploited .
However , I made a point of stressing the need for the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission , a coordinating and research body which deals with the management of resources , to become operational as soon as possible .
This commission covers not only the Indian Ocean seaboard States but also all States fishing in those waters , and its recommendations regarding species conservation will be binding on all members .
As regards the relations between Community industrial fishing and non-industrial fishing , it is important to bear in mind that the Seychelles Government has adopted stringent measures to protect zones where non-industrial fishing takes place .
These measures , which prohibit foreign fleets from coastal and reef areas , have prevented any kind of conflict .
The Fisheries Agreement with Seychelles is having particularly notable economic consequences .
Before the arrival of the European tuna boats , Seychelles existed solely for and by tourism .
Today , the activity engendered by tuna fishing has become as important as this tourist activity .
For example , two-thirds of the total catch from the western Indian Ocean is landed at the port of Victoria .
The country 's largest cannery , set up as a joint venture by the State , a canning company and a marine fitting-out company , employs 600 people .
There are plans to double its capacity in 1997 , which will create an additional 900 jobs .
Furthermore , the Community vessels are required to take on board two Seychelles seamen , an obligation which is complied with and often exceeded .
In conclusion , given that the basic economic assets of this agreement are the same as in the previous agreement , given the development value of this agreement and given the fact that the provisions concerning the declaration and monitoring of catches have been improved , I believe that our Parliament can support the adoption of this Agreement .
I should like to thank the Committee on Development and Cooperation for its opinion , which I trust I have taken into account in my report , especially as regards its concerns about preventing the over-exploitation of stocks .
I should also like to thank the Committee on Budgets for its contribution , especially for inviting the Commission to open negotiations on the renewal of the financial protocols relating to fisheries before they have even expired , and to close those negotiations in good time for Parliament to be able to be consulted as it should be - in other words , before signature of the agreement in question .
Finally , I must thank my colleagues on the Committee on Fisheries , who adopted this report unanimously .
( Applause )
Madam President , I wish to place on record my appreciation of the interest shown by my colleagues in the Committee on Fisheries in this report on the communication from the Commission on the implementation of technical measures in the common fisheries policy .
I warmly welcome the approach of the Commission 's communication and indeed many of the ideas which this communication contains .
Regrettably , in the past not sufficient attention was focused on technical measures within all of the Member States although a number of Member States were concerned .
I am convinced that technical conservation measures are essential for the protection of juveniles and spawning adults .
The Fisheries Committee believes that more attention should have been paid in the past to this important aspect of conservation .
It is indispensable to improve consultation and cooperation at grass-roots level if policies are to be acceptable to those who have to operate these policies .
The Commission must take appropriate action to restore the confidence of fishermen in the work of scientists by means of full consultation with the fishermen .
Consultation with technical experts who have experience of fishing operations is essential .
The views of both fishermen and technical experts should not be ignored .
Furthermore , I am convinced that this Parliament will support me when I say that it is vital for technical measures to be simple , that they should be cost-effective , that they should be technically feasible and practical for operation in commercial conditions .
Technical conservation measures must be easily understood and they must be uncomplicated to enforce .
Remember , fishermen are fishermen , not Eurocrats .
Technical conservation measures should be an integral part of an integrated policy for the preservation of stocks .
Technical conservation measures must be accompanied by other measures such as TACs and quotas .
Only a few Member States have made proposals to the Commission .
I call on all Member States to become more actively involved and to make proposals .
In my report I call for a comprehensive scheme of incentives and training for fishermen in the use of conservation technology to be included in any package of measures as a matter of urgency .
I strongly advocate the concept of conservation dividends .
The purpose of the committee advocating conservation dividends is to entice fishermen to voluntarily accept conservation technology so we do not have to resort to legislation .
I believe that if the goodwill of the industry is not forthcoming , technical measures will be flouted where possible .
I suggest by way of a conservation dividend that we should consider MAGP concessions or , indeed , extra quota allocations for those who conform .
If voluntary introduction of technical measures is not rewarded then the only option left is EU legislation which would require , no doubt , the agreement of all Member States .
I believe that this would be almost impossible to obtain .
At this time nobody contests the need for appropriate measures and regulations .
I strongly believe that these same measures and regulations should be introduced in all future international agreements .
I call on the Commission to ensure that this will be the case .
The Commission must ensure that the proposed measures include increased minimum mesh size - to be introduced in stages and after sea trials are undertaken , geographical simplification and the introduction of square mesh panels and indeed box closures where necessary .
Before I refer to the other reports and wear my national cap , I want to again thank all of those who took such an interest in technical conservation measures because I believe that such measures can play an important role in the conservation of fish stocks for the future .
But it will , as I say , require the full support of the fishermen .
So again , I want to advocate the need to consult with the fishermen and the technical scientists who have experience in this field .
I want to take the opportunity to refer to the McKenna report .
In this report , Ms McKenna urges the Commission to make provision for deciding not to grant , to suspend , to reduce or to cancel vital Community financial aid for the fishing industry in the event that certain EU regulations are not complied with .
This report unfortunately advocates quota reductions to be imposed as a penalty .
Such recommendations , I believe , are totally unnecessary .
Ms McKenna attempted unsuccessfully to seek a further reduction in the meagre Irish fishing fleet .
I would like to point out that Ireland has the best fishing grounds in Europe : we have 4 % of EU quotas ; 44 % of our fleet is upwards of 25 years old ; 64 % of our fleet suffers from safety deficiencies .
I would hope that this will be addressed and I am pleased that , some time ago , the Commissioner gave me an assurance when it came to safety that the Commission would be quite forthcoming .
We in Ireland can ill afford to lose any further tonnage .
We should be given the opportunities to develop our fishing industry , remembering full well that in addition to having a common fisheries policy , we have a regional policy , we have a rural development policy .
These should be integrated with a view to ensuring that coastal regions of my country and of Europe where there are no alternative sources of development are allowed to develop and provide much needed jobs in all of those areas .
I therefore will have great difficulty in supporting that report .
I cannot over emphasize the damage being caused by Norwegian salmon imports to the Irish salmon farming industry , as indeed is also the case in Scotland .
I realize that the Norwegians gave a commitment at a recent meeting in London with a view to ensuring that the production in the last quarter of 1996 and the first quarter of 1997 would be on the 1995 basis plus 10 % .
We will be very vigilant on this issue .
Minimum import prices , which we appreciate , were introduced earlier this year but have not worked .
They have been circumvented .
Therefore , I now call on the Commission to reintroduce minimum import prices and to follow on with quantity restrictions .
I call on all governments , including my own government , to take the necessary steps .
Madam President , the difficult situation in which the Community 's salmon fishing industry finds itself , particularly in Ireland and Scotland , is not news for this Parliament .
There were already serious malfunctions in the Community market last year because of imports of Norwegian salmon at abnormally low prices , which resulted in heavy losses for our producers .
As a result the Committee on Fisheries tabled an oral question in November 1995 , requesting that the Commission take immediate action to protect jobs in this sector .
Following this move , the Commission set a minimum import price in December 1995 .
The minimum price was welcomed by the sector as a first step towards a proper resolution of the crisis .
However , the expected results did not materialize , as Mr Gallagher has pointed out .
Irish producers in fact experienced a 10 % fall in sales of their products after the introduction of the minimum import price .
This price was retained until June 1996 without any improvement in the situation , which indeed continued to deteriorate .
In 1995 we pointed out that imports from Norway had risen by 27 % in the preceding nine months , and that the price of Community salmon had fallen by 21 % .
Our question today is justified , since in the last eight months imports from Norway have increased by 22 % , with a matching 21 % further fall in prices as a result .
This means that , overall , European selling prices have now fallen by about 35 % as compared with last year , whereas , as everyone knows , production costs have risen .
There appear , therefore , to be grounds for believing that exports of Norwegian salmon to the Community in such massive quantities and at such price levels are only possible because dumping is taking place .
In late August this year , at the request of the Association of Scottish Salmon Growers , the Commission opened an anti-dumping case against Norway .
But we are told that the minimum period required to conduct this investigation properly and institute corrective measures is at least nine months .
And this is the difficulty , because the producers cannot wait that long .
If action is not taken immediately , the producers of Community salmon will suffer such heavy losses that many will be ruined .

We are talking of an important sector , for salmon production accounts for about 5 , 000 jobs in the United Kingdom and around 2 , 000 in Ireland .
These are jobs in Objective 1 coastal peripheral regions , where there are few or no sources of alternative employment .
These suspect Norwegian imports are therefore a serious threat to jobs which would be very difficult to replace .
In these circumstances , immediate action is required , since it is worth recalling that the last quarter of the year is the most important period for salmon sales .
If no action is taken now , and the price of salmon continues to fall , many producers will be unable to cover their production costs .
It is therefore baffling to see that the Governments of the affected Member States have not so far taken suitable measures to deal with the situation , and that the subject comes under the doubtful heading of ' other business ' on the Council agenda , where decisions are never made .
This situation requires us to take appropriate Parliamentary action in a serious attempt to solve this problem .
The European Parliament 's Committee on Fisheries has set up a working group on the salmon question , with the aim of conducting a thorough and stringent analysis of the sector 's pleas , and the group enjoys the close cooperation of the Commission in arriving at its decisions .
This group believes that there are various measures which could be adopted immediately , all of them consistent with the legal framework of the World Trade Organization and the European Economic Area .
The Commission can also take steps under Article 24 of Regulation 3759 / 92 on the COM in fish products , which , in the event of serious disruption of Community markets , enables it to take suitable action on trade with other countries until such disruption or threats to the market are removed .
A new minimum import price is the least which can be envisaged , but on the basis of past experience we remain sceptical if the circumventing mechanisms which the Norwegians have imaginatively put in place are not taken into consideration .
If this is not possible , the most suitable option would , regrettably - I repeat , regrettably - be to impose quantitative import restrictions .
A Commission spokesperson argues that this is contrary to the letter and spirit of the agreement on the European Economic Area , but in fact it is the dumping faced by Community producers which is really contrary to both letter and spirit .
The Commission is legally competent to adopt the required measures , i.e. those which are needed to put an end to this situation .
If quantitative restrictions are necessary - regrettably , as I say - then they must be adopted .
There is a broad consensus that in the long run the only way of restoring market stability is to reach a bona fide agreement with Norway .
But meanwhile , in the precarious situation in which Community producers find themselves here and now , the action we request is the only possible response to the emergency conditions we are experiencing , since the future of the salmon farming industry demands these decisions .
In conclusion , Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs of the four reports - which , unfortunately , we are once again debating on a Friday - on their excellent work , and express my gratitude to all those attending this debate who support the rapporteurs ' proposals .
Madam President , there are two points I must make .
First , I am not in fact the rapporteur .
I am deputizing for Mrs McKenna , who is unavailable .
My second point echoes what Mr d 'Aboville said .
I find it quite deplorable that not only is Mrs Bonino , the Commissioner responsible for fisheries , absent , but also we are having a debate where we are more or less lost , because I strongly suspect that non-specialists in fisheries will understand very little of what is going on .
The Commission report on monitoring the common fisheries policy summarizes the monitoring activities of the Member States for 1994 .
1994 was , in fact , the first year of implementation of the Regulation adopted by the Council in the previous year .
Article 35 of that Regulation requires an annual report to be drawn up .
The report describes the way in which the Regulation is being applied - it is a stocktake - and it makes proposals .
It is the first report of its type , and is therefore very important .
The Commission 's general conclusion is that much remains to be done in order to institute an effective monitoring system .
Specifically , the main conclusions of the report are as follows . First , no Member State escapes criticism .
The controls are not sufficient , and they are not effective - a point which I feel will cause concern to us all .
As regards at-sea inspections , the figures are quite alarming .
In some Member States , it would appear that each vessel is inspected once every ten years , a figure which might just as well be zero .
As far as inspections on land are concerned , the situation is no better .
The consequence of all this is inevitable : fraud .
Published estimates show that , for more than fifteen species , the extent of undeclared catches is in excess of 10 % , while for three species it is over 40 % .
Catches are clearly exceeding the recommendations made by the scientists .
We are therefore confronted with a serious problem , since we are dealing with an endangered resource and , at the end of the day , it will be the fishing industry itself that is at risk .
Politically , it has to be said that everyone suspects everyone else of not obeying the rules and not complying with Community legislation , which creates a totally disastrous atmosphere and a positive incentive to cheating .
It is imperative that we react to this situation .
The Commission makes useful suggestions .
In particular , it says that penalties should be increased and that they should be applied more frequently .
The rapporteur believes that penalties should indeed be tightened , and I believe she has the support of the Committee on Fisheries in that view .
Personally , I think that we should refuse to grant aid under the structural funds where a Member State is failing to comply with Community rules on this matter .
On the technical side , it goes without saying that measures are called for , and the Committee on Fisheries makes relevant suggestions in this respect .
However , there is one fundamental suggestion that unfortunately makes no appearance in the motion for a resolution ; any vessel , and any fishing fleet , must be prohibited from having several nets of different mesh sizes available on a single trip , a prohibition which to my mind is absolutely fundamental in order to prevent a form of cheating which is simply too easy .
However , we can leave the technical problems aside - the basic problem lies elsewhere .
That problem is the capacity of the fishing fleets .
Everyone in the circles concerned believes that the capacity of the fishing fleets must be reduced .
If there is a balance between fishing capacity and available resources , it will be much easier to guarantee the conservation of the fish stocks - to guarantee the resources .
If this is not the case , which unfortunately is the situation at present , those resources will necessarily come under very heavy pressure from the fishermen .
It is understandable - socially understandable - that the pressure exerted by the market should induce the fishermen to cheat .
We have to be alert to this situation .
What we need , then , is a drastic policy of fishing fleet reduction .
If we decline to address this central problem , to take a firm grip on it , we will not solve the monitoring problem .
I should note in passing that , in early 1996 , nine Member States out of thirteen - disregarding two Member States which have no access to the sea - had failed to reach the reduction targets set by the multi-annual guidance programmes , which clearly shows the scale of the problem .
The fourth programme will be decisive , because if it is not - as I have just said - the Regulation will never be really effectively applied .
Finally , there is one problem that has not been mentioned , except very much in passing , which is the monitoring of fishing in international waters , or in third countries ' waters , under the Fisheries Agreements .
In this context , there is no monitoring of the activities of the Community fleet , either by the European Union or by the Member States .
This is both hypocritical and ineffective .
It is hypocritical because we are well aware that most of the States to which we are bound by these agreements lack the necessary capacity to carry out such inspections .
Unless we do so ourselves , obviously there will be fraud , and we will know it .
These considerations all seem to me to be essential .
In conclusion , I can say that this is a context in which it is impossible to refer to the concept of subsidiarity .
I believe that concept is absolutely at odds with the spirit of the common fisheries policy .
We shall never achieve efficiency in this area by quoting the principle of subsidiarity .
Unfortunately I have to note that our Parliament was only consulted on this agreement four months after the end of the negotiations in mid-January , to be precise on 9 May .
A month later the Council then decided on the provisional application of the agreement .
For the rest , the first compensation payment , which according to the Commission was paid a month later , should have been paid by the end of May , which means before this House had delivered its opinion .
We therefore have exactly the same situation as in spring last year in the case of the fisheries agreement with the Republic of Senegal .
Specifically , that means Parliament was only consulted four months after the renewal of the fisheries agreement .
Once again the Council took a decision with considerable financial implications without first obtaining the opinion of the other branch of the budgetary authority and without the existence of an adequate legal base .
The first payment - which , after all , amounted to ECU 3.5 m - was also made before our Parliament could deliver its opinion , in this case indeed before the committees responsible could give their opinion on this agreement .
So the Commission has once again regarded the Council 's decision on the provisional application of the agreement as an adequate legal base .
The Committee on Budgets and this House have repeatedly protested vehemently against this way of proceeding on other occasions .
I do so again here today .
After all , presumably we are still a part of the budgetary authority !
It is a bit much for the Council to assume it can systematically circumvent us here .
If the Council and Commission continue to proceed in this way in future , we will really have to consider seriously whether we will in fact have to take legal steps .
I therefore call again on the Commission to start and close negotiations in good time in future so that the proper consultation procedure can be concluded and a legal base adopted before payments are made .
That would put an end to the unholy practice of provisionally implementing international protocols by means of exchanges of letters and circumventing Parliament .
This has been tolerated once more because the international fisheries agreements involve non-compulsory expenditure .
In any case , these events show once again how necessary it is for the Council and the Commission finally to sign the code of conduct we proposed on improving information and budgeting in relation to international fisheries agreements .
Madam President , I shall go for keywords : the issue of monitoring is a very sensitive one .
I share the views expressed by the rapporteurs , and the Socialist Group also contributed to them in committee .
The issue of monitoring is not just a regulatory and hence a bureaucratic issue , the fishermen 's associations and environmental groups have also to be brought in .
We have to take account of technological instruments but also of biological particularities when reforming the common fisheries policy , given that it can be reformed by applying the principle of subsidiarity but also by means of a number of social policies designed to support fishermen 's incomes , an issue already covered in the common agricultural policy .
That is the point we shall be making in the debate on the reform of the common fisheries policy , realizing that the fourth programme could be a useful factor for debate .
Madam President , I welcome the Commissioner here this morning .
It seems a long time since the Commissioner was on the Committee on Agriculture of this Parliament and it is nice to see her taking an interest in fisheries matters again .
We have four important issues in front of us this morning and I want to concentrate on salmon in particular .
Let me say that the monitoring and control of the common fisheries policy is extremely important and I hope that Parliament is covering the matter adequately today .
I would like to let the Green Group know that we will support their amendments on the McKenna report .
It is especially important that we recognize in this Parliament that by-catches , discards and black fish are something that we really have to get to grips with .
But I address basically the question of the import of salmon from Norway .
We have to recognize that the Commission has moved a long way by bringing forward this inquiry into the dumping of Norwegian salmon .
The chairman of the Fisheries Committee has graphically demonstrated the problem , and I thank him for his involvement and support in this issue .
However , the Commission could have gone further and , like Mr Gallagher , I call on all Member States to take some action against the Norwegian Government at the present time on the amount of salmon that it is sending into the Community .
It is not good enough for governments to stand aside and see fish-farming and perhaps the future of fish production in the European Community being decimated by one country which is determined to gain a substantial market share at the expense of a young , thriving industry in some of the peripheral areas of our Community .
The Commission could go further and take interim measures on its own , and I call upon the Commission so to do .
In the last few days I have had the opportunity of looking at this problem and recognize that minimum import prices could be implemented straight away .
I hope that could happen and that in the longer term we have the courage and the guts to bring in some form of quantitative restrictions .
Madam President , the McKenna report assesses the first of a very important series of reports by the Commission on the effectiveness of the common fisheries policy in the area of monitoring .
One of the key things to have emerged is uneven enforcement across the Union and the lack of political will by Member States to make the enforcement system work .
The policy is failing and will continue to do so under its present structure .
I am delighted that the Committee on Fisheries has accepted a large number of the Liberal Group 's amendments : increasing the powers of the EU inspectors , which is essential for fair play across the board ; similar penalties for similar offences across the Union to ensure legal equity in a common policy such as fishing ; much greater enforcement in the transport and marketing areas of the supply chain , which this report showed was almost totally lacking .
One of the things that I would stress is that our group considers that this situation illustrates how the common fisheries policy in its present form cannot conserve fish stocks .
That is the challenge .
That is what we need to find a new solution for .
Madam President , I should like to say something - four things , in fact - about Mr d 'Aboville 's report and the fisheries agreement with Seychelles .
First , yet again , Parliament is in the process of holding a debate on a decision which has already been taken .
Even the financial commitments have been entered into .
This is an unacceptable situation - we say it over and over again , and we show our teeth , but we never get anywhere .
So that in itself would be one good reason to vote against .
But there are others .
My second comment relates to the fact that there is no regional approach on this .
When we talk about the Indian Ocean , the regional approach would mean simultaneously taking into consideration Madagascar , Mauritius , the Comoros and the Seychelles .
So if we adopt a piecemeal approach as we are doing here , then , inevitably , we will not achieve a global view of the situation .
Thirdly , we are talking about an agreement with no quotas , which is a somewhat obsolete form for a fisheries agreement to take .
And , finally , who carries out the inspections ?
It is surely important to note that they are carried out by the French and Spanish monitoring authorities .
That says it all as far as any genuine intent to monitor the situation is concerned .
For all these reasons , we shall be voting against .
Madam President , I am glad we are having this debate , even if it is on a Friday .
I took this initiative in the first place to bring to the attention of Parliament the grave situation affecting the salmon producers of Scotland .
But we should not have had to have this debate at all and we have to understand why this has been necessary .
When we had the Fisheries Council , the Council of Ministers discussed the issue under ' Any other business ' and when it came to the turn of the United Kingdom to say something , to take some action , it was like the famous detective story called ' The Dog That Did Not Bark In The Night ' .
The surprise was that the dog was there and did not bark .
This was the fault of the UK Government which , when people were expecting it to stand up for the Scottish salmon industry , failed to take the legal action .
In other words , the dog did not use its teeth in this context to force the Commission into considering quantitative restrictions .
The industry was expecting that .
There was even a Scottish Minister sitting there , but no action was taken .
So it is now up to the European Parliament 's Fisheries Committee to step in to fill this breach .
What exactly are we asking for and what can we expect ?
The minimum import price is not a very good instrument as we know from the past , but it is the only one that can be implemented immediately .
With the threat of an antidumping case hanging over the Norwegians , there is a good chance that they will behave themselves rather better in the run-up to this Christmas than they did last time .
But then I am almost convinced that we have to follow up with quantitative restrictions .
We have to ask ourselves the political point , which is asked constantly and I was even asked it by French television yesterday : Why is it that the Norwegians outside the European Union are managing to do better with salmon production than the Scots and the Irish who are within ?
That is why this action is absolutely imperative , necessary and urgent .
Madam President , the Community structural measures to help fisheries and aquaculture are designed to amend an old regulation dating back to 1993 , revising three aspects of it : product promotion ; aid for the creation of producer organizations and confirmation of exchange rates for the budgetary ECU .
We are of the view that product promotion can be regulated by this proposal , provided such references are actually linked to the protection of geographical indications and the designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs .
We are therefore supporting the Commission 's requests both as regards the aid for the launching of producer organizations and the application of the ECU conversion rate , based on the exchange rate supplied by the association of fisheries organizations .
As far as Mr d 'Aboville 's report is concerned , this is not in fact a new agreement , it simply redefines what happened back in January , supplemented by funding that makes it possible to increase monitoring measures as a result of improvements in land-based communication systems .
Unfortunately , as is now established practice , the European Parliament was presented with a fait accompli .
While condemning that state of affairs and hoping that it will not be repeated in the future , we support the d 'Aboville proposal .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , the quality of Mr Gallagher 's report and the importance of the technical measures certainly deserved the allocation of more time .
At all events , it must be said that Mr Gallagher has done an excellent job , although admittedly he was not flexible or bold enough to accept the amendment to indent 3 of paragraph 7 , which would have considerably improved his report .
I should like to ask whether the Commission is prepared , as technical measures are such an important subject , to open a consultation period , since the European Parliament 's unanimous opinion on technical measures was that no precipitate action should be taken and that the measures must be implemented with the sector 's agreement .
We are adopting the Gallagher report , but my question , for which I request a direct answer , is whether the Commission is willing to open this consultation period for the report on technical measures .
Parliament needs the Commission 's reply as a matter of urgency , for , as you know , we have the Council in the background pressing for a response .
I therefore request , Madam President , that the Commission give me an answer to this important question during this session .
In general terms , I have to say that as far as technical measures are concerned the Commission tends to issue them with its head in the clouds .
It needs to be advised that these measures , which are ideal for an ideal world , have to be applied to fishing , where incentives have to be introduced and fishermen encouraged to implement the measures .
Thank you , Mrs Izquierdo , but I have to inform you , in the kindest possible way , that you have used almost double your time allowance .
When in the Chair , I never cut speakers off .
I believe you should regulate yourselves , and I would ask other Members of Parliament not to follow Mrs Izquierdo 's example in terms of time , although the content of her speech was very valuable .
Mrs Fraga has the floor for two minutes .
Mr President , whilst I do not intend to disregard other reports , I shall concentrate on the monitoring report , which the rapporteur , Mrs McKenna , has tackled in a very realistic manner .
We are not here just to say what the fishermen wish to hear .
In a period of crisis such as we are now experiencing in the fisheries sector the temptation to flout the rules obviously increases , and this simply further emphasizes the fact that monitoring is one of the major failures of the common fisheries policy .
We must stress that whilst monitoring of their own fishermen is exclusively in the hands of Member States it is virtually certain to be ineffective .
Requests for control measures double in lean periods , but always for other people , and this is certainly one of the reasons for the current problem of over-fishing .
Member States cannot be deprived of their powers , but the Commission must strengthen its own control and monitor that of Member States , beyond the reach of partisan pressure and also of isolated and opportunistic moves which in fact solve little or nothing , such as the obsession over the control of distant-water fleets .
This is undoubtedly needed , Mr Lannoye , but anyone familiar with these fisheries knows that the Community 's fleets in external waters are , for the most part , among the best supervised in the world ( as in the NAFO case ) , whereas internally nothing is done .
Instead of lavishing so much attention on fleets which are already under control , we should reinforce the supervisory measures on the European Union 's roads , which are undoubtedly carrying a fluctuating traffic in prohibited species which is absolutely disgraceful .
I believe effective control over compliance with MAGPs is also needed , as well as the introduction of a system of genuinely deterrent penalties .
As for the proposals for cutbacks ....
Mrs Fraga , you should not take the sound of the gavel as a call to halt , merely as a warning that you have used up your own time allocation and now have Parliament 's time available at your discretion .
Mr President , I have noted your comment and I shall comply with the instructions of those presiding over this Assembly .
I therefore believe that I have now said enough .
Mr President , in isolated coastal communities such as my own constituency , there are very limited possibilities for locally-based economic development initiatives .
One success story in recent years has been the growth of the salmon production sector .
It is a sector with considerable potential but like any other business it needs some reasonable stability in terms of its business conditions .
People involved in it need some predictability for their business margins .
This Parliament and the European institutions need no explanation about the importance of stability for mediumterm policy .
We certainly know it in macro-economic terms with regard to EMU .
But in micro-economic terms at the level of the salmon industry consider the implications of Norway , a state outside the Union which produces a massive surplus for export - and has the potential to produce much more in the immediate future - and floods our market to such an extent that the anti-dumping case when it is examined will hold .
That is better late than never .
It has totally destabilized the prices and on four occasions since 1989 we have tried the minimum import price response and it has not worked .
Frankly , if we are to give these coastal communities a chance to survive , there is only one probable long-term answer : get tough , bring in quantitative restrictions .
The Council dodged the issue ; we should not .
Mr President , I must refer first of all to the report drafted by Mr Gallagher , whose proposals voted for in the Commission of Fisheries seem to me extremely positive and worth highlighting .
Especially at a time when we are discussing the POP IV operational plan for the coming year , since the proposals are accentuated here .
The Commission 's proposal accentuates the protection of young fish , of fishing resources , of links with fishermen .
Above all , I dislike the idea that controls alone should be carried out in order to find out what sanctions we impose and what violations the Commission detects rather than to show fishermen how to act , concentrating on anyone who depends on fishing and not just imposing rules and regulations .
I reject the idea that fishermen are all predators or destroyers of the environment .
Finally , I would like to challenge the Commission to try and put into practice a satellite system to control Community waters .
Mr President , I want to refer to the issue of salmon prices and thank Parliament for its solidarity on this issue over the years .
If we had received the same support from the Council of Ministers and the Commission we would have made progress .
We should not underestimate the seriousness of the situation .
Visiting the peripheral regions of my own constituency which have traditionally depended on fishing , I have very little to offer them .
The Community is asking that they reduce the fishing effort , their tonnage of boats and their intake .
We are threatening their state of stocks which is going to force us to reduce the turnover of the fishing communities .
We have only one alternative to offer them , namely fish farming .
Politically it was not very popular in the past but the fishing communities throughout the European Union are beginning to recognize that there are possibilities and that it can be achieved without damage to our environment and it can help to save coastal communities .
This effort is being sat upon by a gigantic Norwegian effort - which has obviously been subsidized over the years - that will not allow the flagship of fish-farming activities which is salmon farming to get off the ground .
I would like to thank Mrs Bonino .
I recognize that even though it is a Friday morning it was on Friday mornings in this Parliament that we eventually brought this problem to the attention of the Commission .
She has begun to take action and I appreciate that very much .
Following on from Mr Macartney 's point , in Killybegs in the north-west of Ireland when people complain about the common fisheries policy - and I try to defend the Community - I am told the Norwegians are surviving all right .
I just wanted to emphasize that point .
Mr President , on the matter of the technical fisheries measures , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur Mr Gallagher for his excellent work .
The proposal for a regulation which is currently being considered represents a continuation of this communication from the Commission on the implementation of technical measures under the common fisheries policy .
I would like to add a few comments to this general discussion .
The Commission 's aims are praiseworthy and the measures essential .
But I believe that the current lack of selectivity is not attributable to the small mesh of presentday nets , but to the increasingly frequent use of illegal nets by Community fishermen , which cannot be prevented because of a lack of political will .
Can the Commission prove that juvenile fish are being caught with regulation-mesh nets ?
In view of the refusal of Member States to reduce their fleets , I fear that the Commission is attempting to achieve this indirectly via a pure Darwinian process of evolution .
Many undertakings are trying to survive in these conditions and to do so are sometimes infringing the rules , often with impunity , with the knowledge of the Member States in charge of control measures and almost always with the knowledge of the Commission .
I should therefore also like to commend Mrs McKenna 's work in her report on monitoring .
With this scenario , what is an undertaking to think , and how is it to act , if it complies scrupulously with the technical measures , which will become stricter , but has to compete with others who do not ?
What is the use of complying with technical measures if the whole sector knows that a breach of the rules is not penalized and that this is the true cause of the capture of juvenile fish ?
I do not wish to sound apocalyptic , or demagogic .
I am in favour of maintaining resources , among other reasons so that the sector can remain viable in the medium and long term .
The technical measures are necessary , but if we tighten them when we are incapable of securing compliance with existing ones , we shall be seriously impairing the competitiveness of those operating legally , and complying , whilst favouring those who fail to comply , a result which is , of course , hardly encouraging for the conservation of resources .
I am going to invite Mr McMahon to speak , and I apologize to him because he should have had the floor before Mr Imaz .

This omission was not caused by my personal liking for and friendship with Mr Imaz , which ranks equally with my friendship with you .
After this apology , therefore , you have the floor for two minutes .
Mr President , I agree with most of what has been said .
I will not talk about fishing as such , but there are three general points that I think all the European Union institutions ought to address .
Firstly , Mr d 'Aboville 's report spells out very clearly that we have yet another agreement which has been signed and the payments made before this Parliament discussed it .
This must stop .
Secondly , why do we always have to debate this on Fridays ?
This has been raised several times .
Politically , fishing is one of the most important issues for our Member States , it arouses tremendous passions , tremendous disputes but we always consign it to Friday .
Surely that is a question the Conference of Presidents could address and deal with fairly .
Thirdly , I agree with the comment already made about this being too diverse a joint debate .
Surely the Commissioner should be present to answer the questions which have been raised .
Perhaps this is linked with the previous point .
So all three institutions need to address this whole problem of fishing .
I support all the reports incidentally .
It could be said that the question which Mr Gallagher has addressed in his report is a very old one .
The Commission is already in the process of taking action in this area , and that is a good thing .
It does indeed mean that Parliament can be involved , and what we need in this sector is less bureaucracy and more simplification .
That is also what the Council of Ministers wishes to see .
We should like to help to solve the problem of by-catches which die and are discarded .
We should like to help determine and develop new catching methods .
We should like to help protect fish stocks and limit the areas for fisheries .
But this can only be done in cooperation with the fishermen and through sets of regional agreements .
We must take care not to create a top-down bureaucracy in Brussels , rather than something which is created upwards from the last true hunters , namely fishermen .
And one final word from Scandinavia : it is painful to see how we are cutting back our fleet in Denmark , while the other Member States are failing to do the same .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I should like to thank Mrs McKenna for a report which is both to the point and comprehensive .
It contains a number of comments and conclusions which the Commission fully endorses .
The report calls attention to the difficulty of achieving a satisfactory level of monitoring of fishing capacity in the Union , and the urgent need to reduce that capacity .
The Commission freely admits that the level of monitoring within the Community is still insufficient and that urgent steps should be taken to improve it - steps which are desperately needed and long overdue .
The Commission , for its part , means to play its part in bringing about an overall improvement .
Nevertheless , I should like to draw Parliament 's attention to the limited powers the Commission has in this area .
I must inform Parliament , then , that the Council will certainly not accept some of the bolder proposals in its report : the harmonization of penalties for similar infringements in the form of the suspension of financial aid , in the event that quotas are exceeded , and the reinforcement of the powers of the Community Fisheries Inspectorate .
I shall take this opportunity to recapitulate the main elements of the Commission 's approach to this matter .
Rigorous and in-depth verification of the application of Community legislation by the Member States - which is what monitoring means - and the presentation of detailed reports on monitoring levels in the Member States , including special reports on specific questions - which is what transparency means .
Thirdly , encouraging closer cooperation between the Member States in the area of monitoring .
In this connection , I can inform Parliament that a first package of measures was adopted at the meeting of Directors-General and those responsible for the inspectorates in Dublin in September , and that this package was adopted by the Fisheries Council on 14 October this year .
Next , there is the question of granting Community financial aid in a way which allows genuine improvements to be made to the national inspectorates , so that the costs of monitoring can be spread more fairly .
Finally , the guarantee of comprehensive implementation of the provisions of the ' Control Regulation ' , that is to say Regulation ( EEC ) No 2847 / 93 on satellite tracking and the recording of catches .
To summarize , Mr President , I would like Parliament to know that the Commission will carefully study the recommendations made in this report .
As for the proposal for a fourth amendment to the Council Regulation bearing No 3699 / 93 , regulating structural assistance in the fisheries sector , it proposes the introduction of three amendments .
The first would make Community co-financing available for activities to promote protected geographical indications and designations of origin .
The second makes reference to Article 7 of the Regulation on common organization of the markets in fishery products .
And the third confirms that the conversion rate for the ECU is in fact the budgetary rate , the budgetary ECU , in accordance with the wish expressed by the Council on 21 December 1993 .
None of these amendments has any financial impact either on the Community budget or on the structural appropriation allocated to each Member State .
The first amendment alone represents a qualitative change ; the other two are mere technical updates of the Regulation , with no practical repercussions .
I feel sure that the European Parliament will give its support to the Commission , as it is invited to do by the report which is the subject of the present debate , and I take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kindermann .
With regard to Mr d 'Aboville 's report , the Commission would first like to thank the honourable Member for his excellent report on the new fishing conditions for the Community tuna fleet in Seychelles waters , which are applicable for three years , until January 1999 .
The Commission considers that , technically , these new conditions are such as to ensure even more effective implementation of the agreement , pursuant to the fundamental principles of conservation of resources .
In this context , you will not be unaware that the Community is to be involved as a full member in the work of the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission ( IOTC ) , whose inaugural meeting is to be held in Rome next December .
The policy which will be pursued by the Community delegation within this new international organization , will be directed , precisely as suggested in your report , towards improving knowledge and management of local tuna stocks , in compliance with the applicable basic principles agreed under international law .
With regard to the amendments , the Commission rejects Amendments Nos 2 and 6 , because they run counter to established thinking regarding the nature of fisheries agreements and prejudice the Commission 's negotiating powers .
It accepts the other amendments in substance but not as to form , emphasizing , however , that , first , the Commission is already supplying Parliament with regular information on the status of implementation of the fisheries agreements , in the form of statements and reports to the Committee on Fisheries .
Secondly , the principle of conservation of stocks is a matter of the law of the sea , which the Community has signed and which is already enshrined in all the framework agreements on fisheries , in particular that with the Seychelles .
Thirdly , the Community has already ratified the constitution of the IOTC , whose jurisdiction , as I said earlier , is specifically the scientific monitoring and management of regional tuna stocks .
As for the role of Parliament in the budgetary implementation of the fisheries agreements , I should like to remind the House that the three institutions concerned are currently finalizing a code of conduct on the budgetary procedure for the fisheries agreements , which is intended to improve the organization of relations between the Commission and Parliament .
The Commission 's report on the implementation of technical measures in the common fisheries policy represents an in-depth analysis of the utility of the measures implemented since 1986 to protect young fish in Community waters .
The Commission notes that the Gallagher report generally coincides with the conclusions of the Commission 's report , both as regards the general overview of the problems and as regards the possible options .
This proves that the ideas proposed by the Commission to improve the status of our fishery resources are along the right lines and encourage us to push ahead with these initiatives .
As you know , the Commission has already presented a proposal for a new Regulation on technical conservation measures , which will replace the Regulation in force since 1986 .
In this proposal , which was presented in June and will be discussed in detail during the coming months , the Commission has adopted most of the suggestions and ideas contained in its own report and in Parliament 's .
I hope that this general agreement will also result in the Commission and Parliament adopting a common position on this proposal .
Regarding the problem of the crisis in the salmon sector , the Commission would first like to emphasize that the decline seen over the last few years has affected not only the selling price of salmon but also the unit product cost .
In this context , price stability could not mean that prices must increase , or that they must remain at the same level .
They are of course falling , and the size of the market has increased considerably over the same period .
On the other hand , we do not know - nor shall we be able to know before the current inquiries have been concluded - whether Norwegian salmon prices have fallen more rapidly than the unit costs , to the extent that a substantial percentage of total sales are taking place below production cost , causing distortion within the meaning of the Regulation on unfair competition .
Nor do we know whether these selling prices on our markets have been made possible by State aid , such as rightly to give rise to compensation schemes .
Many assertions and allegations can be made , and there are indeed special cases .
What we lack , and indeed what everyone lacks , is an overall picture of the situation .
As you know , the market has been the subject of heated debate for some years , resulting in a great deal of sound and fury but very little light .
Now , once again , we face the same situation .
The Commission has taken the opportunity offered to it by the two complaints from Scottish and Shetland producers to conduct in-depth inquiries into the state of the market , especially with a view to clarifying whether or not dumping and compensatory aid have taken place and to determine both the nature and scale of the damage caused .
It is not true that the Commission is doing nothing - quite the reverse , it is hard at work on these files .
It is essential that action should be taken on a sound factual basis , otherwise it would fail to achieve its objective , as has been demonstrated by the floor-price rules .
We are of course continuing to monitor market trends , and in this respect it should be noted that the information available is less copious than it should be , and than it will be when inquiries are concluded .
Unfortunately , many Member States are being slow to respond to our request for information .
Even so , we can say that the price has remained stable to date , making due allowance for customary seasonal factors .
We have certainly found no indications of a sudden downward trend like that recorded during the fourth quarter of last year .
Mr President , this reply which the Commission has given on automatic pilot does not answer the question which I put orally .
Can the Commission at least tell me when it will be answering this question ?
Mr President . I thank the Commissioner for her reply but I would like further elaboration on the last point she made about lack of information from Member States .
Firstly , is the United Kingdom one of the Member States which has failed to provide the information she is looking for ?
Secondly , she has not really said whether the Commission will move for minimum import prices , which is what the resolution calls for .
Thank you , Mr Macartney .
Mrs Cresson , do you wish to respond to the comments made by Mrs Izquierdo and Mr Macartney ?
Mr President , I should like to answer the question regarding the information supplied by the United Kingdom .
That Member State has supplied information on salmon , but this is virtually the only information we have .
As far as minimum prices are concerned , the Commission believes that such provision is unjustified since prices are currently stable .
Thank you , Mrs Cresson .
Mrs Izquierdo , you must realize that we cannot enter into a debate , and I believe Mrs Cresson has not yet finished .
Mr President , I did not answer the first question , but I can say that we are discussing this matter with the Council .
Mrs Izquierdo , do you insist ?
Mrs Cresson has just answered you , but you have the floor if you wish .
When in the Chair I shall never deny your right to speak .
Mr President , I request that the minutes be checked , since clearly you have not been listening to the discussion .
You will see from the minutes what my question is , and I therefore ask you to review your response , since it does not answer anything .
Let us hope that you can be given a written answer when the Minutes have been checked .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Kindermann report ( A4-0306 / 96 )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Despite having chosen to vote for the report in this instance , this does not mean that we have a positive attitude towards routine support for producer organisations .
The industry and different types of producer associations should normally be able to manage without subsidies .
d 'Aboville report
Even though we are going to vote for the report we would like to declare our scepticism as regards the large-scale purchase of fish quotas by the EU .
The costs of purchasing fish quotas are of the order of ECU 300 million .
We believe it to be expensive and inappropriate to continue in this way to subsidise a fishing fleet which should instead be growing smaller .
There is also reason to believe that trade relations with regard to fishing with the countries concerned , particularly in Africa and the Indian Ocean , could be conducted under conditions more advantageous to those countries .
More ' joint venture ' solutions could provide more jobs , more processing and bigger fishing fleets for these third countries .
Gallagher report
Each time there is a discussion about measures to ensure the long-term and sustainable preservation of fish stocks there are immediately calls for allowances , compensation and aid .
This has also happened this time .
The laws of ecology , however , impose limits to which we must be prepared to pay heed even without subsidies .
The proposals to insert mentions of socio-economic considerations , among other things , are correct in the broader context but in this connection they give the wrong signals .
Salmon resolution
Mr President , I represent Greater Manchester East and some of my major interests in Parliament have been on research policy and arms conversion on which I have done two reports , all of which seems a long way away from the crisis in the salmon industry .
But sometime ago I was contacted by a company in my constituency that is actually in the defence sector and trying to move away from the defence sector to invest in new civilian high technologies .
One of the things they were using was radar technology to treat diseases of salmon eyes in salmon farms , which apparently is a major problem .
Because of the sudden dumping on to the market of Norwegian salmon the promised development money for that project was withdrawn . So we have a situation which does not just affect people in Scotland and in Ireland , it affects the whole of Europe .
It affects the development of new technologies ; it affects the commercialization of new technologies ; it affects jobs .
I am therefore supporting this resolution and it is very appropriate that Mrs Cresson was here to reply to that question in a way that she did not probably appreciate at the beginning .
We largely sympathise with the resolution .
There is every reason to pay heed to the increase in Norwegian salmon exports because Norway provides comprehensive support to its salmon farmers in the form of subsidised transport , subsidised loans , reduced social contributions and even debt remission and compensation for losses .
In this connection we would like to point out that Swedish fish farmers are also harmed by cheap Norwegian salmon .
Nevertheless , we believe that the investigation now being carried out by the Commission must be completed before different types of measures can begin to be discussed .
We have therefore decided to abstain .
McKenna report
Our support for the McKenna report and therefore the call on the Council to adopt a fourth multi-annual guidance programme should not be interpreted as meaning that we support all parts of the proposal made by the Commission .
Cuts in Member States ' fishing fleets must be related to the fish resources safeguarded .
For Sweden , taking the Lassen report into account among other things , there are insufficient ecological grounds for large parts of the Commission 's roughly prepared proposal as regards fishing in the Baltic .
European rural policy
Mr President , may I commence by putting on record my appreciation of the many Members who participated in the preparation of the report which deals with a broad and new area of EU policy .
I gave an undertaking to reflect to the greatest extent the views of Members in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and other committees and also the views of interested organizations and people who are keen to see the emergence of a planned and new integrated approach to the rural problem .
The report , I hope , is a faithful reflection of that consensus .
I also wish to put on record my appreciation of the interest taken by Commissioner Fischler and his officials .
All Member States are experiencing great difficulty in dealing with the problem of rural decline and the broader socio-economic problem of urban / rural imbalance .
The report takes into consideration the diversity of these problems in different countries and the need for a flexible application of any new initiative .
I have , however , prioritized the relevance of agriculture and family farming to the rural economy and , while agriculture alone is not sufficient to maintain a viable and living rural community , it is , I believe , the economic hub around which other economic activities evolve .
While I did not see it within my brief , it was inevitable that Members would refer to the common agricultural policy and references in this regard do not purport to represent a final position in this important policy area which will , no doubt be the subject of ongoing debate on the basis of the Commission discussion paper .
At a time when job creation is very high on Parliament 's agenda , it behoves those of us entrusted with responsibility in the agricultural area to bring forward proposals to maximize the potential of our entire land resource for the purpose of stabilizing existing rural structures and creating new areas of employment , including work for those not directly involved in farming .
I believe the report identifies these areas , commencing with the primary function of reducing food and creating employment through the added-value process in the food sector .
But , as I have already said , it is also recognized that agriculture alone will not maintain the viability of these areas .
The report also deals with the utilization of the Community 's human resources and the willingness of rural dwellers , given the opportunity , carefully to plan programmes to become involved in the work of rural development .
I am of the view that it requires an integrated approach , including the EU national and regional governments working in tandem with local communities , to maximize the full potential of our land and human resources .
I attach importance to the village / town infrastructure and the necessity to maintain essential community services and would point out that the provision and upgrading of these services cannot always be evaluated in pure economic terms but must take into consideration their broader social dimension or problems associated with unplanned and over-expanding urban communities .
The report deals with the importance and potential of the rural environment and the role of rural dwellers in keeping it intact for future generations .
It also identifies its economic potential to create employment in areas like rural tourism and also its significance as a sustainable base for our European culture and traditions .
It also addresses the challenge of providing alternative fuel resources which is a land-based enterprise , and also the importance of adjusting the SMEs to meet local needs and in particular initiatives such as the LEADER programme .
Planned forestry is also identified as a sustainable enterprise , giving both an economic return to farmers and employment opportunities to rural dwellers .
The report deals with the social requirements of rural living and the need to provide adequate schools , postal and telecommunications services and also adequate road infrastructure .
Special reference is made to the role of women in rural society and the need to provide the social conditions necessary to support women who work outside the home and those women engaged in agriculture and other rural enterprises .
The decline of rural communities is often attributed to advances in technology and , while this claim may to some extent be true , I believe that the advent of advanced new communication technology , like Internet , can now be used to reverse that cycle and create new jobs in the rural areas throughout the Community .
In conclusion , the report makes the case for a new coordinated approach to sustainable rural policy which puts people at the centre of the development process and calls for the establishment of a new fund specially designated for the new programme which keeps the rural areas of the European Union central to the broader economic and social objectives of this Parliament and its institutions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as the draftsman of the opinion for the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I must thank Mr Hyland for having incorporated into his report the conclusions unanimously adopted by our Committee .
The principle of a European Rural Charter , providing a global framework for Community action in this field , is of course something we can all support .
After all , let me remind you , from the start of the Common Agricultural Policy in 1961 until 1975 , Europe lost a farmer every minute .
Speaking in 1995 , the Commissioner for Agriculture , Mr Fischler , told the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture that another three million European farmers would disappear between 1995 and the year 2000 .
In other words , we would be losing seven farmers every eight minutes for five years .
This trend poses serious problems at every level : economic problems , obviously , but also , as honourable Members have emphasized , social problems , to which I would add cultural problems , in terms of civilization being at stake .
After all , throughout European history and even until after the First World War , the countryside was the basis of our organized society and the foundation of our culture in every sense , in conjunction and symbiosis , over the centuries , with what was going on in the towns .
The cities , then , were in symbiosis with the countryside , and it is to that that European civilization owes its very special character .
This equilibrium , as has been said , has been destroyed .
So we need to be creative and imaginative .
In terms of cultural policy , it is important to develop an interest in local history in the rural areas - an interest which , happily , is indeed developing - in order to valorize those popular traditions which are key elements for rural tourism . That tourism is necessary in order to sustain rural employment , ensure the survival of the countryside as a whole and preserve the overall balance of society .
In other words , we need to reinvent the symbiosis that formerly existed between the urban and rural worlds .
With regard to youth , it is important to note that the problem of the rural exodus is also the problem of the ageing of the farming population .
There is a need , then , to institute an active policy for responding to the specific problems of education and training in rural areas .
No-one would sacrifice his children 's education - just how important that is today is well known .
We need to create employment for young people based on activities associated with farming , yes , but also with the countryside in general .
In this context , bold innovations are possible , associated with the ecological concerns of our fellow citizens .
Farming has developed around mutual institutions and cooperatives which in turn have allowed development to take place not only in terms of agricultural production but also in terms of improving the quality of life of families in the farming sector .
It is necessary that bodies such as the agricultural mutual insurance system , the farmers ' banks and insurance companies , the training establishments and the rural social clubs should be involved in this rural policy .
They have a tradition , they have much to teach us , and we have everything to gain from working with them in this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rural world is in a precarious state , in open decline .
It is suffering from the pressure of modern times and urban contagion .
I am therefore delighted to see this Parliament concerning itself with the creation of a framework for rural living , enabling the Commission to put forward a social and economic model which can be used to tackle an urgent problem in time and on a rational basis .
The Rural Charter will be this Parliament 's contribution to the Conference on Rural Europe to be held in Ireland in early November .
We must therefore express satisfaction , and congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Hyland , on his excellent work , in terms of its approach and content and also its incorporation of other opinions , in this case that of the Committee on Regional Policy .
Rural areas have to be viewed from three standpoints : sociological , as a world to be promoted and developed , ecological , as a space to be put in order and protected , and cultural , as the home of the principles and traditions which have given rise to collective awareness .
Hence the question of rural areas comes within the scope of both land-use planning and economic recovery , via a process of redevelopment and economic diversification .
The European Rural Charter put forward for consideration by this Chamber represents a strategy for restoring balance within Europe , by promoting the maintenance of rural culture in the European Union ; it is also an instrument for spatial planning and the coordination of all Community policies which affect the rural community .
An exercise such as this , focused on rural areas , has to be integrated into a global view which can be used to balance priority options in the duality of rural / periphery / isolation versus urban / central / congestion .
Isolation and lack of basic services such as health and education are characteristic features ; maintaining the environment , preventing the costs of desertification , preserving the spatial balance , i.e. social viability , provide sufficient reason for the retention of economic activity and population in rural areas .
This approach is reinforced by broader considerations of economic and social cohesion , equality of opportunity and equality of access to services and infrastructures .
This is the line taken by the Committee on Regional Policy in its contribution to the Rural Charter , for although there is a shortage of basic services such as health and education in rural areas , it cannot be tackled separately in each and every part of the rural world .
The development of medium-sized urban centres encourages the necessary decentralization of economic activity and services and also brings fresh life to nearby rural areas and promotes local self-sufficiency , thus enhancing the quality of life in rural communities and reducing problems of congestion in the cities .
The potential role of medium-sized towns , serving as regional centres , deserves special attention .
I consider it essential for the future of rural areas that Member States should initiate , with Union financing , schemes for cooperation between municipalities to form such medium-sized centres which will provide services and infrastructures on a joint basis .
I ask you to vote for this European Rural Charter , which views rural areas as an opportunity in face of the increasing difficulties of conurbations , and sets the broad outlines enabling the Commission to propose the necessary measures for a policy to develop rural communities and keep them viable .
Mr President , I should like to start by thanking Mr Hyland for his work on this report .
It is of vital importance to the people I represent and to so many people throughout the European Union .
This recognition of the specific problems and the needs of rural areas is , I hope , the first stage in a fundamental overhaul in the structure and nature of the financial assistance they receive .
For far too long we have directed resources towards the development of an agricultural industry , the benefits of which have been limited in the larger rural community .
The continued reform of the CAP will release funds which should be utilized to transform the common agricultural policy into a common rural policy in which agriculture will continue to play a vital role but whose main objective should be to ensure the economic and social well-being of rural communities .
While such communities share a number of common characteristics , we must be careful in the creation of a common rural policy that we also recognize the diversity , strengths and weaknesses which exist throughout the Union .
Our aim should be to provide a framework within which the local partners can identify their priorities and participate in shaping programmes to ensure that they bring maximum benefit .
By supporting this report we can add our voice to the call for a rural development policy , but the policy will only be successful if we listen to the voice of all our rural communities .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all let me give very warm thanks to the rapporteur .
On the Hyland report I may say the following : the development of rural areas is only possible , in my view , if we have a competitive agriculture .
That is true EU-wide .
The rural areas must not degenerate into a museum of folklore .
When future developments are discussed in Cork in Ireland in early November it will have to be established from the outset that rural areas are not just of residual value .
In Germany 80 % of the entire country is rural .
Half of all the inhabitants live in rural areas , but only 20 % of them can find jobs there ; all the others are commuters .
The figures are very similar in all the EU countries .
Rural areas tend to be regarded as an important functional and services resource for over-strained urban centres .
Such a view does not , however , form an adequate basis for a programme of rural development and does not generally help stabilize rural employment markets .
There is no getting away from the fact that the remote rural areas in the EU are deprived areas in terms of employment .
In times of shortage of funds , little can be done to change this through the classical form of regional policy .
Doubts have also been expressed as to its effectiveness .
For the remote rural areas it is therefore urgently necessary to consider alternative ways of providing real prospects for people with little chance of gaining a foothold on the standardized labour market in the medium and long term .
To place ones hopes solely in Commission Green and White Papers is , in my view , not enough .
We have enough papers in Europe .
Some hope can , however , be derived from the new accent placed on the concept of independent regional development , which has meanwhile also found its way into European policy-making .
The development concept of independent regional development is aimed at protecting employment in rural areas on the basis of own initiatives .
Its objective is to integrate people in the world of work and to improve their chances of obtaining their own income independently of state transfers .
State aids can only serve as start-up finance !
That is why the aim of independent regional development remains to identify fields of activity by the creative use of local resources .
This should produce an employment market that is predominantly regionally based and draws on knowledge of the situation of the people , the land and the region .
Unconventional small-scale initiatives and small projects can be particularly useful here ; I think that new technology also offers new opportunities for rural areas .
The crucial question is this : what specifically regional demand actually exists , what specific fields of activity can be established in rural areas , how can these fields of activity be commercialized ?
The entrepreneurial principle should continue to apply wherever possible .
Mr President , may I congratulate Mr Hyland on his good work on developing a Rural Charter .
Agricultural policy is no longer really enough to ensure the development of rural areas : a broad and manysided rural policy is needed .
The premise should be respect for the individual identity and cultural richness of the various areas .
Finland is one of the most rural countries in Europe .
We therefore have a particular need for a rural policy .
One of the principal requirements for a living countryside and employment in Finland is sustainable exploitation of its forests .
In Finland , a rural programme was adopted in 1991 which is comprehensive and progressive .
The problem is the lack of resources with which to carry it out .
The living conditions of the residents of rural areas must be improved in such a way that people can make a living in their home region and live a full life there .
The countryside should not be transformed into sparsely populated reservations .
Agriculture must be adapted to meet the needs of the markets , albeit taking care that old livelihoods are not destroyed before new ones get off the ground .
Both European Union and national support should be used to develop know-how , entrepreneurial activity and infrastructure .
Particular attention should be devoted to putting rural women 's manifold creativity and skills to use in producing high-quality products , creating experiences for tourists and providing other services .
The new subcontractors ' networks and quality chains will help to diversify rural employment and promote small enterprise .
As we prepare for enlargement to the East , it is important to safeguard the opportunities for development of the peripheral areas of the present European Union and secure understanding for the special problems of sparsely populated northern regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what kind of rural areas do we need in Europe ?
Mr Hyland 's proposal for a European Rural Charter is a strategy paper for a future European policy of sustainable development .
Rural decline is continuing in the European Union , especially in the so-called remote regions such as those of southern Europe and the mountain and highland areas .
Yet the handicaps suffered by the rural areas can become trump cards , with integrated farming , which is particularly synonymous with employment , in close conjunction with the environment , social interaction , the countryside , green tourism and woodland - all recognized today as functions of rural areas .
This Charter asks the Commission to remove the constraints on rural areas and to exploit their potential on the basis of a very simple idea : bringing them to life .
Between the world market and the food needs of Europe 's citizens , it is essential to retain balanced , productive rural areas which will give farmers the dignity they deserve .
This is the price to be paid to ensure that rural living today recovers its full meaning .
If it is not to be put on one side , this policy needs to be supported , and I ask you , ladies and gentlemen , to use your joint efforts to ensure that these proposals really are implemented through planned activities .
A consensus has been reached within the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , focusing on Mr Hyland , and I congratulate him on it .
To ensure that this solidarity does take effect , my group , the European Radical Alliance , will be voting in favour of this report .
Mr President , I too support the excellent Hyland report .
I am reminded that some time ago I visited a Member State embassy in Tokyo .
An official there said to me that my rural region did not need any inward investment as everybody there is a rich farmer .
I very quickly persuaded him otherwise .
He could hardly be more wrong because we qualify for Objective 5 ( b ) aid .
In fact , The Guardian newspaper in Britain last week showed how one European citizen in four , living in rural areas , is in fact living in poverty .
This particularly applies to young people , pensioners and women who often face social and economic exclusion .
Yet , there are good ideas .
Only last week I launched a brilliant LEADER II project in a small place called Swanton Morley where all levels of the public and private sectors have come together to benefit the hard-pressed village .
We need more grassroots action like that , with European Union backing .
That is why a coherent , strategic approach must go way beyond agriculture .
It must recognize the rapid , demographic , sociological and technological changes that are taking place .
It must involve communities in partnerships .
That is why I welcome the Hyland report - although it is not without flaws - as amended in committee .
I hope that it will be a useful prod for participants at the forthcoming conference , to help bring about the real fundamental changes we need to reform European rural policies .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Hyland for his report .
The text before us is a very worthwhile contribution to the future development of rural areas .
It was adopted unanimously by our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and it provides us with a very useful argument in favour of economic and social development .
The resolution rightly identifies the need to develop job opportunities outside agriculture in rural areas .
I fully agree with this objective which will help prevent some of the overcrowding and environmental problems associated with big cities .
New employment from the enlargement or encouragement of existing small enterprises and the attraction of new industries and services to rural areas is the first priority of rural policy .
The production of high-quality regional products , and food products in particular , is essential if many of our rural areas are to be saved from depopulation .
Whatever the cost of developing the economies of rural areas , it will cost a great deal more in the long-term if we do not provide for the balanced development of both town and countryside .
The reference in the draft Rural Charter to a fresh reform of the Common Agricultural Policy is something that causes me some concern .
We had a fundamental reform of the CAP in 1992 .
Given the current crisis in the beef industry , it would be better to avoid further reforms at least until we have mastered the present crisis .
Without longterm guarantees I am not sure it is sensible to talk , as the proposal does , of further adapting agriculture to the marketplace because this usually means lower prices and increased costs for the people in rural areas .
I look forward to a paper from the Commission with concrete proposals to give effect to many of the very useful ideas put forward in the proposed charter .
I want to congratulate my colleague , Mr Hyland , for the work he has put into this report and to say to him that I strongly support it .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Hyland on his report and say that it is good that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has taken the initiative in pushing this Charter through Parliament .
Clearly the countryside is not a museum : there are living communities there which provide a great deal of wealth and services for every one of our European citizens .
We must look to the future and cherish the distinctiveness of rural areas .
We must avoid the twin dangers of suburbanization and depopulation .
Above all , that means giving jobs and hope to young people .
For example , there should be opportunities for young farmers , modern , light industrial estates on the edge of market towns , easy access to the information superhighway , sensitive development of tourism and recreation and new non-food uses for our skilled agricultural workforce .
I welcome this Charter .
I believe that the golden age of Europe 's rural areas lies in the future not in the past .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission congratulates Mr Hyland on his excellent report .
It also welcomes the great deal of thought given by the European Parliament to the European Rural Development Policy .
Those efforts , and the draft report we are debating today , are extremely timely because they will help to send a number of signals to the conference on rural development to be held in Cork from 7 to 9 November this year . That conference will provide an opportunity for further reflection , on the basis of the results obtained , and allow guidelines to be established for the future of the Union 's rural development policy .
Regarding the motion for a resolution , the Commission agrees in essence with what has been said , especially regarding the need to take account , in applying the rural development policy , of all the constituents of economic and social life in the rural areas .
This rural policy will not be just another aspect of regional policy , because it is designed to cover all rural areas of the European Union , rather than being confined to the least favoured regions or those undergoing structural adaptation .
It is , then , a total policy , the need for which has resulted in rural development being adopted as the political priority in the Treaty on European Union .
This political recognition at the highest level is , without a doubt , a solid basis for reinforcing the Community 's rural development policy and facing up to the challenges that await us .
The Commission shares Mr Hyland 's view regarding the need for integrated development of the rural areas in order to give them impetus .
That is one of the main lines set out in the strategy document presented by the Commission in Madrid in December 1995 , whereby rural development was to be oriented towards both farming and non-farming activities , via a policy of active diversification and the development of a multi-sectoral policy .
As the Hyland report emphasizes , this multi-sectoral policy integrating various approaches - economic , agricultural , social and environmental - is the best means of responding to the diverse needs of the rural areas , highlighting their strengths and combating their structural problems such as the ageing of the population , the decline of some activities and the relocation of industries .
The report emphasizes a number of urgent problems which the rural world has to confront , and makes constructive suggestions .
I am thinking especially of the priority given to employment , equality of opportunity , improvement in the quality of agricultural produce , environmental protection and the development of infrastructures and services .
The rural development policy endeavours to deal with these problems , and the political priorities it has adopted correspond to the problems and challenges so well expressed in the Hyland report .
In this respect , the problem of employment , or rather the problem of unemployment , which is very far from bypassing the rural areas , is the main focus of our concerns and is one of the priority objectives of the structural interventions .
The same applies to the preservation of the environment and protection of natural resources , areas which account for a substantial proportion of the appropriations earmarked for the rural development policy .
In fact , the promotion of the development of the rural areas is a priority of the Union , not only for economic and social reasons but also for the protection of the environment .
The general effect of the rural exodus is excessive urbanization , with all the adverse social consequences and additional costs that involves , for both the rural and the urban areas .
It is therefore incumbent upon all of us - as the Commission is well aware - to do what we can to ensure that the diversity and beauty of Europe 's landscapes and its heritage should be preserved for future generations .
The rapporteur rightly raises , in his proposal , the problem of defining rural areas .
The very diversity of the rural world makes this a very difficult thing to do on the basis of a simple , representative criterion .
In reality , there is no such thing as a typical , representative rural area .
The Commission shares Mr Hyland 's opinion that the population density parameter alone takes insufficient account of the diversity of the Union 's rural areas .
That is why we are continuing with our work , and that is why we shall ensure that the definition we are going to propose encompasses parameters other than population density , taking account of the diversity of situations in rural areas , as of course the motion for a resolution proposes .
Finally , we were most interested to note the proposal that a Rural Development Fund should be created , making it possible to finance all the schemes undertaken within the framework of integrated rural development , and designed to bring efficiency , flexibility , transparency and simplicity to the administration of Community aid to the rural world .
This is one topic which will certainly be debated in Cork in a few days ' time .
Thank you , Mrs Cresson .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Goods from the processing of agricultural products
The next item is the report ( A4-0264 / 96 ) by Mr Gillis , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( COM ( 96 ) 0049 - C4-0156 / 96-96 / 0039 ( CNS ) ) amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 3448 / 93 laying down the trade arrangements applicable to certain goods resulting from the processing of agricultural products .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council regulation aims at modifying Regulation 3448 / 93 defining the EU trade regime for non-Annex 2 products , that is , products which result from the manufacture of foodstuffs from the primary processing industries .
These products , given their dual nature , agricultural and industrial , on the import side are submitted to both an industrial protection and an agricultural protection .
The agricultural protection compensates for the difference between the EU and the world market price of the agricultural raw materials used in their manufacture .
Following the entry into force of the agreements resulting from the Uruguay Round of multinational negotiations , the Community negotiated various GATT agreements , including the agreement on agriculture .
The agreements changed the method of determining import duties on certain goods .
They also provide the option of imposing additional duties on other goods .
They impose a degree of discipline on the granting of refunds for agricultural products not covered by Annex 2 of the Treaty .
The reasons for the need to modify the regulation are twofold .
Firstly , EU agricultural protection has to be adapted following tarification into GATT / WTO .
Therefore , certain changes have to be made to Regulation 3448 in order to delete the provisions which no longer apply .
Secondly , it is necessary to add certain management rules to ensure compliance with commitments made on export refunds within GATT .
As rapporteur , I have had extensive consultations with different representatives of the food industry .
While I see no overall problem with this proposal following discussions with the people on the ground , I have incorporated an amendment which I feel may be advantageous .
As the Commission proposal stands , it provides for the introduction of a system of refund certificates .
In my view , this is rather too rigid and imposes an unnecessary burden on industry .
I have suggested , therefore , that we should make this optional .
To provide for the possibility of refund certificates and to make it more flexible , I suggest this be decided under the management committee procedure set out in Article 16 .
It can be argued that we do not need certificates at this time at all .
However , it is impossible to predict what the prices evolution will be over the next three or four years and maybe even further .
In the meantime , GATT ceilings for export refunds to be paid on processed products are being reduced each year and are becoming much more restrictive .
It is essential that we have a simple mechanism in place to be sure our GATT commitments are respected .
By putting the system in place now we are ensuring a much smoother path for the future .
I feel the modification I have made provides for the necessary flexibility which is missing from the Commission proposal and , with such an amendment , I have no problem in approving this proposal .
Mr President , I do not wish to add to what our rapporteur has said apart from thanking him and expressing the support of our group for his work in producing this report modifying the arrangements for complying with GATT .
We support his proposal to reduce the additional bureaucratic processes required in adapting to the new system and thus ensuring compliance with GATT requirements .
Mr President , I should like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and more especially Mr Gillis as its rapporteur , for the care taken with the proposal for a Regulation amending Regulation ( EC ) No 3448 / 93 .

As noted in the report by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the essence of this proposal is to make technical modifications to the trade regime for processed agricultural goods not covered by Annex II of the Treaty .
These modifications became necessary as a result of the tarification of import duties on agricultural products agreed at the multilateral negotiations of the Uruguay Round .
The amendment has already been studied at the Council , and by industry .
In general terms , it has been approved , but one point has created a problem : this concerns the supporting measures for the granting of export refunds .
On this matter , the Commission has adopted an approach similar to that previously adopted by the Council with regard to exports of agricultural products .
The proposal , however , takes account of the fact that the non-Annex II goods , unlike agricultural products , are only subject to a commitment to the WTO in terms of total refunds grantable per year and not in terms of quantities of goods exported .
Two amendments have been tabled regarding this approach .
The first amendment envisages the possible adoption of a refund certificate , in accordance with the management committee 's procedure , at the point where it is felt to be really necessary .
To evaluate the scope of this amendment , there are two comments I would like to make .
First , it is important that measures supplementing those that exist at present should be adopted in good time to ensure that our commitments are genuinely respected .
Secondly , in order for it to be possible for the granting of refunds to potential exporters of non-Annex II goods to be guaranteed , these new measures will have to be adopted before we are effectively confronted by the constraints arising from the agreements of the Uruguay Round .
The first amendment proposed by the European Parliament is not opposed to this .
It also restates the Community 's intention of ensuring compliance with its commitments .
For this reason , the commission can accept this amendment .
However , it is important that , as of now , the necessary measures should be drafted first to enable the Community to ensure compliance with its international commitments , and secondly to enable exporters to continue exporting with advance knowledge of the total refund to which they will be entitled if they so wish .
The Commission , then , in order to guarantee compliance with the Community 's commitments , entered into pursuant to Article 9 of the agriculture agreement concluded at the Uruguay Round , must be able to reduce the refund rates , or suspend the granting of refunds for as long as is strictly necessary .
This is in any case already provided for in Article 8 ( 3 ) of Regulation ( EC ) No 3448 / 93 , as amended by the present proposal .
Regarding the second amendment , it must be recalled that Article 8 ( 6 ) , which it is proposed should be amended , defines the powers of the Commission in the event of the introduction of refund certificates by ensuring that this Regulation is consistent with the other Regulations previously adopted by the Council on the adaptation of the common agriculture policy and on the agriculture agreement concluded at the Uruguay Round of multilateral negotiations .
This paragraph 6 will probably have to be adapted in order to take account of the modifications introduced by the first amendment .
Nevertheless , the amendment proposed here oversimplifies the arrangements , which must be laid down by the management committee 's procedure . It cannot therefore be accepted in its present form .
Thank you , Mrs Cresson .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
We welcome the fact that the EU 's agricultural protection is being modified in line with the GATT agreement .
Any adjustment of the Common Agricultural Policy to bring it into line with GATT commitments is a step in the right direction , not least from the perspective of enlargement to the east .
Ultimately , we are convinced that a far-reaching reform of the existing Common Agricultural Policy is inevitable if enlargement is to take place unhindered .
In the future the CAP must take its place within a framework for measures which can be seen as environmentally friendly and as fostering rural development and are independent of direct production influence .
Olive oil
The next item is the oral question ( B4-0977 / 96 ) by Mr Colino Salamanca , Mr Jacob , Mrs Fraga Estévez , Mrs Redondo Jiménez , Mr Filippi , Mr Campos , Mr Cunha , Mr Fantuzzi , Mr Jové Peres , Mr Arias Cañete and Mr Rosado Fernandes , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , to the Commission , on reform in the olive oil sector .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler recently confirmed that measures had been proposed for a reform of the common organization of the olive oil market , which was currently being studied by the European Commission .
The size of the sector , with almost five million hectares of olive trees , producing some 1 , 400 , 000 tonnes of olive oil , its location in the southern part of the European Union , and more specifically in areas where no alternatives exist , its contribution in generating the only available jobs in many areas , the dominant position of the European Union on the world market , and a market situation offering good prospects of continued growth in oil consumption seem reason enough to have suggested to the Commissioner the advisability of adopting a procedure similar to that used for wine , the fruit and vegetable sector or certain continental products .
This would have meant opening a debate in which appropriate options would have been proposed on the basis of the Commission 's views , identification of the problems , the environmental , social and rural development implications in the olive sector , the growth of and trends in olive producers ' incomes , the production and trade situation and competition with other types of vegetable oils .
Yet the Commission launched a proposal which will lead to a harsh restructuring of the whole sector without such discussion and without allowing those concerned with these products , whether producers ' organizations , professional oil industry organizations or regional administrative authorities , any opportunity to put forward their point of view .
The very nature of the reform measures announced ( subsidy for each tree , and no intervention in the market ) should have triggered such a debate in professional circles before the proposals were unceremoniously presented .
We therefore call on the European Commission , and I make this demand on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture , to explain , in the form of a prior document forwarded to the European Parliament , what aims it intends to achieve with the proposed reforms . Above all , we ask that the measures should be consistent with other policies , whether on employment , rural development or regional or environmental policy .
This discussion is more necessary than ever if we bear in mind that in general terms , and at no great cost to the Community budget ( about 5 % ) , the present common organization of markets has operated normally , raising olive growers ' incomes , modernizing farms and methods of cultivation , improving product quality , modernizing the industrial sector and ultimately creating a clearly dominant position in face of an open commercial future .
If the alternative to the present position has to be a system which further complicates control measures , whilst the European Commission evades its responsibilities , or involves the introduction of mechanisms which lead to the abandonment of cultivation methods and a consequent fall in production , or degrade the rural environment and cause a decline in employment , or produce a risk of shortage and a loss of the European sector 's competitiveness on international markets , or generate problems in the processing and marketing sector , or result in environmental deterioration through erosion , desertification , disease , pests , or fire , then the European Commission will be making a serious mistake .
I therefore urge the need to open a debate on the basis of any comments from the Commission itself , which will , in my view , be the best way to help the olive sector to remain a source of wealth , generating a large number of jobs and driving the economy of wide areas of southern Europe , and to perpetuate a culture associated with these trees , without which it would be difficult to understand the reality of large areas of the Mediterranean .
I am using the opportunity afforded by the presence of Commissioner Cresson to share my concerns with her as someone familiar with these problems , and to ask her to alert the Commission in the hope that this topic may be fully debated within the European Union .
Thank you for your question , Mr Colino Salamanca .
As you say , the Commission has undertaken a preliminary study of the need to reform the common organization of the markets in the olive oil sector .
These discussions took place at Chief Executive Assistant level , and the meeting reached the conclusion that Mr Fischler would present a detailed analysis of the sector to my colleagues on the Commission .
This analysis , accompanied by a specific proposal to reform the common organization of the markets in the olive oil sector , would then be presented to Parliament and the Council at an early stage .
The Commission recognizes the importance of the olive oil sector in the culture and prosperity of certain Mediterranean regions and their local employment situation .
Economic , socio-cultural and environmental implications of a modification of the system will be dealt with in the analysis document , and the Commission intends to institute , at both Community and Member State level , measures which are sufficiently flexible to ensure that the reform of the common organization of this market strengthens the role of the olive oil production and trade in regions where the growing of olive trees is a means of support .
The Commission also acknowledges that the common organization of the markets in the olive oil sector has been notable for serious control and fraud problems affecting all the mechanisms provided for by the system , especially as regards aid to production and consumption , and as regards intervention .
Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control and the Court of Auditors have repeatedly called for the Commission to take action to sort out this matter .
That is what we are going to have to do , fairly but firmly , without harming the many honest producers and dealers within the Community .
Although it is true that , in the past and for certain sectors , the Commission has decided to present a discussion paper to Parliament and the Council before presenting a formal proposal , the urgent need to simplify and strengthen the common organization of the olive oil markets argues against this approach in the present instance .
We shall have time to study the problem of the reform in Parliament and at the Council on the basis of the analysis and the reform proposal .
Thank you , Mrs Cresson .
As a doctor , I feel I should advise you to take care of your cold .
If not properly looked after , a cold may have unpleasant consequences later on .
Mr President , the Commission promised to present its proposal at the end of 1995 , but frequent postponements and the making of alterations appear so far to have prevented it doing so .
I must emphasize that these postponements and alterations have not occurred as a consequence of any discussion with the European Parliament and social and professional circles about a text but are being decided on solely by the Commission itself in the context of events and pressures as they occur . As a result the olive oil sector and the producers are faced with an accomplished fact .
In behaving like this the Commission has departed from the practice that it followed in the reform of the other major sectors , which involved the prior presentation of a discussion paper as the basis for lengthy consultation followed by the presentation of final proposals based on the conclusions of that consultation , and has placed itself at odds with the producer countries which have persistently requested it to follow that practice in this case .
This refusal is very hard to credit when one considers that the presentation of a discussion paper , as well as helping to widen public debate and to promote the widest possible consensus on reform of the olive oil sector , would enable the Commission to get to grips with the pressures which have manifestly led to the repeated alteration of the draft regulation and to the frequent postponement of its presentation .
We are just two years away from the commencement of new negotiations on the further liberalization of the world market .
The olive oil sector , which - and this must be emphasized - is a deficit sector within the European Union , will be in a dreadful position .
We need a solution now which will support the quality of European olive oil and bring relief to the thousands of olive oil producers in the south of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have heard the Commissioner 's comments , and she has explained that , on the grounds of necessity and urgency , she was asked to take immediate steps to control cases of fraudulent diversion .
However , we believe that this is no reason why questions should not be asked and the various sectors allowed to put their views .
We therefore understand and support the request of the Socialist Party representative .
And we specifically ask Commissioner Fischler , on behalf of the European People 's Party , for a discussion paper to be submitted by the Commission before any action is taken .
Mr President , what we know of the Commission 's intentions for olive oil COMs sadly comes from the newspapers .
That is why I would like to put 4 questions to the Commission .
First question : when I was a Commissioner , whenever we had to carry out a major reform known to be a controversial one , we would first of all draft an analytical document , containing our thoughts and perspectives .
Then we would carry out a wide-ranging debate only once the Commission had formally presented its proposal .
Why has the Commission not followed this procedure in the case of olive oil ?
Second question : what are the motives lying behind this reform of the olive oil COM ?
Because there is a surplus ?
No , there are no surpluses !
Because of the budgetary cost ?
But those have been under control for a long time !
Because of fraud ?
Is there fraud ?
Then you should combat it !
But combating fraud is not per se an objective reason for reforming a COM .
Third question : apparently the Commission is proposing ending intervention in the olive oil sector and creating aid per tree .
Why are you ending intervention in the olive oil sector and not in other sectors , which are also surplus sectors ?
This is a mystery which I would like to be cleared up .
Why is it that the Commission is proposing for Portugal , for example , 40 % aid whereas that proposed for Spain or Italy is 60 % of that proposed for Greece ?
If this aid is equal for everyone at present on the basis of production , can they explain to me , a Portuguese , why they are going to reduce it by 60 % ?
Fourth question , Madam Commissioner : why is it that the Commission is not carrying out an overall reform of the CAP which it has already admitted is needed by the year 2000 instead of taking these tiny measures on a piecemeal basis ?
Finally , Mr President , I would like to regret the fact that , on this Friday , we are debating such important farming reports as this and the Commissioner for agriculture is not even here .
Mr President , hitherto all proposals for reform of the common organization of a sizeable market have been preceded by a discussion paper so that the consequences of the proposed measures could be assessed .
No such discussion paper has been produced for the reform of the COM in olive oil , despite the fact that some 800 , 000 people work in this sector and are concentrated in regions seriously affected by unemployment .
This reason alone would justify the production of a discussion paper , but apparently neither the Commission nor the Commissioner is concerned about workers and growers in the olive oil sector .
It is worth recalling that the Commission should have submitted a report on the working of the system of aids in the olive oil sector to the Council before 1 January 1995 , as laid down in Council Regulation 2261 / 84 .
Almost two years later this report has still not been produced , but this has not prevented the Commission from drafting a proposal for reform in the absence of the proper and necessary prior documents .
The lack of a serious piece of work from the Commission - of a kind which can be required of any employee and even more so from public servants - has to be made clear .
So far the Commission has not published its planned reform , but its content has nevertheless become known and achieved an important record for the Commission : a demonstration in Brussels by some 5 , 000 people representing farming organizations and the unions of producing countries .
Demonstrations are usually against the Council or Parliament , but apparently the Commission wishes to break this monopoly .
Does the Commission not wonder whether its proposal may cause problems ?
Would not this situation justify the production of a thorough analysis ?
At present we have no time to make an assessment of the projected reform , but I would like to point out that the draft took no note of the recommendations put forward by the group of experts in 1992 .
Abolition of the intervention system will also mean that producers have to bear the cost of market management , which violates the principle of solidarity .
For these reasons we think it essential for the Commissioner to produce some serious work and endeavour not to conduct experiments which carry obvious risks of creating serious social , environmental and market problems .
Thank you , Mr Marset .
I have received six motions for resolutions pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Commissioner , as you have pointed out , the European Parliament has also been at the forefront in combatting fraud .
Naturally , this is something that has already been done by the Committee on Budgetary Control , but that cannot be used as a pretext to deny the European Parliament a role .
What we are basically asking for is our own debate : we want to be able to discuss this issue , as representatives of sensitive areas of European territory in which economic and social cohesion is crucial and agricultural production , such as olive oil production , is a major support to family income .
In those terms , then , we consider that Parliament must play a positive role and it seems to me that your statements have hinted at a willingness to view favourably the proposals that the House will be drawing up on the proposed reform of the COM .
There is no doubt that the proposal we have seen reported in the press contains many contradictions and causes problems for some Mediterranean regions , particularly in relation to methods of calculation and because production differs depending on geographical characteristics .
For that reason , a reflection document would clearly be desirable .
It is therefore appropriate that Parliament and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development should be involved first hand in a matter of such importance .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission should have presented a long time ago a report assessing the regime of aid to the production of olive oil .
Yet , we are now at the end of 1996 and no such report exists or has yet been published .
The Commission has recognised the need for a study document before it carries out a reform of the olive oil COM .
It has made a promise but we have yet to see the document .
The Commission appears to be forgetting its obligations and promises and , at the same time , it seems to want to take decisions by itself and very quickly .
That is why we have suddenly had a reform project thrust upon us and , apart from rejecting the methods used , we must also , at once , denounce the solutions which it puts forward .
In this draft document , olive oil as a crop is not included in the regional rural development and employment strategies nor is it seen as a vital element for protecting the environment in farmlands and even less is it seen as guaranteeing agriculture income and quality production .
This document aims to substitute production aid with subsidies per tree and proposes that , for example , for each Portuguese olive tree less than half the sum paid for an Italian or Spanish tree be handed out .
This is an obvious attempt at dividing and ruling : it is also trying to hide the wood for the trees , the kind of action recently been duly repudiated by the demonstration held in Brussels .
Thank you , Mr Novo .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Joint motion for a resolution on reform of the common organization of the market in olive oil
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
Mr President , this is simply to confirm t