Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 11 October 2007 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , last Thursday and Friday we had a very successful summit meeting of the Heads of State or Government of the countries of the European Union with the President of the Commission , the President of the European Parliament and our three Intergovernmental Conference representatives .
Whilst I have no wish to anticipate the content of tomorrow 's debate with the President-in-Office of the European Council , José Socrates , I would like to stress that , in the eyes of the European Parliament , the summit was a truly resounding success because the entry into force of the Treaty , which is scheduled for the start of 2009 , will give our Parliament equal rights in almost all areas of legislation .
We in the European Parliament have not wavered from the course we adopted for the Convention and followed in spite of the setbacks in the referendums in France and the Netherlands , and if this Treaty now materialises we shall have played a key part in its creation .
We hope that the ratification process will be successfully concluded in all 27 countries of the European Union .
The signing of the Treaty will take place in Lisbon on 13 December , and on the previous day - the twelfth of December , as agreed with the Presidents of the European Council and the Commission - we shall proclaim the Charter of Fundamental Rights at a formal sitting here in Strasbourg .
That will be a significant event .
I would like to express my sincere gratitude for the work of our three representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference - Elmar Brok , Enrique Barón Crespo and Andrew Duff .
( Applause )
I am pleased to see that Enrique Barón Crespo is with us , but I cannot see the other representatives .
In that case we shall defer the approval of the Minutes .

( DE ) Mr President , I have a question for Mr Pöttering : will you still have the right to vote in this Parliament ?
I am well aware that Mr Cohn-Bendit 's thirst for knowledge knows no bounds .
Let me say to you that there was not one second in the entire process when this was in any doubt .
Nor was the matter raised at all during the open session at the summit meeting .
But this rumour was being spread in other circles .
Wherever I could , I acted immediately to quash it .
There can never be a situation where the European Council or any other body could withdraw the voting rights of the President of the European Parliament .
This is not about me personally but about the office of the President of Parliament .
I would vigorously oppose any such move , and the House is united on that stance .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , I just wanted to say , on behalf of my group , that we fully endorse your position .
It goes without saying that every Member of Parliament elected by the people has full voting rights , including the President .
We entirely agree with that .
Excellent !
I am deeply grateful that we are in complete agreement on that point too .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Written declarations ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Wednesday , 17 October , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments to this draft have been tabled :
Wednesday :
The Green Group has moved that the tabling of motions for resolutions be permitted at the end of the debate on the Council and Commission statements concerning the EU-Russia summit .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we spoke about this at the Conference of Presidents and said that , in view of the EU summit with Russia , Mr Putin 's trip to Iran and the very real nature of the disputes that are taking place there , it would surely be absurd for this Parliament to debate these matters and not adopt a resolution in which the position of Parliament is set out .
Who are we , in point of fact ?
We always want to have powers of codecision , yet now , when we have the opportunity to take a decision , we choose not to .
We are in favour of a resolution prior to the EU-Russia summit and , if need be , another resolution after the summit .
It is the duty of Parliament to scrutinise the Commission and formulate political guidelines and not simply to behave like a debating society .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it has indeed been the practice of this House in the past , on matters of major importance such as the EU-Russia Summit , to have a debate followed by a resolution .
There are many things that need to be said and many messages that this Parliament needs to send to those who will represent the Union at that summit .
We should indeed send a firm message to the Russians and a firm message to the people who will represent us at the summit , with the beliefs of this House behind it .
My Group would therefore support that move .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , if nobody else is speaking against , I will speak against .
Those who are putting forward this motion for a resolution seem to believe that the debates of this House only matter if we adopt a resolution at the end of the debate .
They are actually devaluing the debate itself , because all of them are outside negotiating the text of a resolution instead of being inside the House debating it .
The points they and others wish to make ahead of this summit can be made in this House by a very vigorous debate , by people making articulate and intelligent points , instead of going out and working all night in a drafting committee to add to the huge book that we write at the end of each part-session , with pages and pages of resolutions .
It is about time we changed our priorities and revalued the debates on the floor of this House .
I plead for Members to have vigorous debates in this Parliament .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( DE ) Mr President , I am not noted for intervening to any great extent on points of order , but we hold this debate every Monday at five in the afternoon .
I have started to wonder why we have another debate on matters of political importance on Thursday afternoons .
Maybe this very question could be discussed again by the parliamentary powers that be , because we have this same discussion every time about whether some item , such as a summit that some people are holding somewhere or other , should or should not be added to the agenda .
I would very much welcome a question of this nature being placed on one of the agendas of the House .
Mr Bosch , all of you , all Members of this House , are the ' powers that be ' .
As you will have seen , those who sometimes regard themselves as such are subsequently outvoted here in plenary . That is just the way of our democracy .
Thank you for your comments .
Thursday :
Regarding the debates on cases of breaches of human rights , the EPP-ED Group has moved that the item entitled ' Uzbekistan ' be replaced by an item entitled ' Pakistan ' .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I will speak on behalf of my Group .
As you will realise , a few days ago there was the most monumental suicide bomb attack against the party with the returning Ms Benazir Bhutto , with over a hundred civilians killed .
There has been the recent deportation by the Government of Pakistan of another returning civilian politician , Nawaz Sharif .
All sorts of things have been happening in that very key strategic South Asian country which need to be urgently debated by this Parliament .
I am not aware of any recent changes in the situation in Uzbekistan , other than the fact that the Council is deliberating on whether or not to remove the travel bans on Uzbek leaders .
That pales into insignificance compared to what is going on in Pakistan , so I would urge this House to support the need to debate the Pakistani situation on Thursday .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , it is always so difficult to decide between the pros and cons .
We were in favour of this motion , and we could subscribe to it if we had an undertaking from the EPP-ED Group and other groups that Uzbekistan really would be put on the agenda and discussed at the next opportunity .
In other words , changing the agenda should not mean losing sight of Uzbekistan and the developments that are taking place there .
Given such an undertaking , we could support the motion .
That is surely a splendid compromise .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , there can be no doubt that Pakistan is a very important issue .
It is too important , however , to deal with it as an item in Thursday afternoon 's debate on breaches of human rights .
Discussing Pakistan is clearly not just a matter of examining human-rights violations but a real opportunity to debate aspects of EU foreign policy in that entire region .
I believe we would do better to put Pakistan on our next agenda as a proper debate with the Council and the Commission , because that , in my view , is what we need most .
The subject of Uzbekistan is of more immediate concern , because the Council intends to lift certain sanctions today .
In the present situation , I believe we should adopt the position that what is happening in Uzbekistan is a human-rights issue which dictates that sanctions should not be lifted .
That can be quickly decided on Thursday afternoon .
Pakistan is a very difficult and crucial foreign-policy issue and should be placed on our next agenda .
( Parliament adopted the motion . )
( The order of business was thus adopted . )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( BG ) Bulgaria 's Abandoned Children , the documentary screened on BBC 4 , describing the conditions in and attitudes to the inmates of the social care home for physically and mentally disabled children in the village of Mogilino , has evoked tempestuous response in the Bulgarian and international community .
This makes me tell what steps have been undertaken .
First of all , we sent inquiries to the Minister of Labour and Social Policy and to the Chairperson of the State Agency for Child Protection .
We demanded that the home be closed down and the de-institutionalisation process be accelerated .
The Ministry sent an answer to our inquiry .
Secondly , we appealed to international non-governmental organisations providing social services to disabled people .
Among them is Betel , the largest charity organisation in Europe with 150-year-long experience in providing care to mentally disabled people .
Its experts responded to my request to visit the home in Mogilino together and seek specific solutions to the problems .
The government is primarily responsible for the provision of the necessary material and technical conditions at these homes amd for the support of the children .
What we need , however , is a changed concept of social services to children with severe mental disabilities and changed attitude to them on part of society and institutions .
The isolation of these children in hardly accessible villages and small towns is a practice long abandoned in Europe .
Problems will not be resolved by hiding the truth but by the concerted efforts of all of us .
( ES ) Mr President , this Parliament is internationally recognised as an institution of freedom and human rights which respects international law and the United Nations system .
In view of this , many of us would like to hear Parliament 's own assessment , and that of its President , of the outcry produced by the public disclosure of conversations between Presidents Bush and Aznar in 2003 at Crawford Ranch shortly before the invasion of Iraq .
Aspects of that conversation are extremely serious because they demonstrate a total lack of respect for the United Nations , disdain for trans-Atlantic relations and disregard for international law .
We all had suspicions that something had occurred along these lines but never before has the evidence been so clear ; so clear that it requires Parliament to take a stance if only to state that such a shameful thing must never occur again .
- ( LT ) The fact that reports by European politicians on global warming , energy saving and similar issues are received with indifference in most European countries is cause for concern .
Similarly , regions , provinces and other administrative units do not give these problems the consideration they are due .
Cases where energy is wasted and the consequences of global warming are neglected can easily be seen everywhere .
For example , almost every day on my way from Brussels to Luxembourg I see street lights stretching over tens of kilometres , but no-one , neither Wallonia nor Belgium or the provinces , admits responsibility .
On the other hand , very often , even within the European Parliament , our words do not match our deeds .
It is beyond my comprehension why , at every sitting at Strasbourg , each Member is handed around 200-300 pages of stenographs and protocols .
In my opinion , we should have this material only on the Internet and put a stop to printing it out .
( PL ) Mr President , on 10 October two activists from the Polish Association in Belarus , Angelika Borys and Igor Bancer , were arrested again in Grodno .
They were charged under the pretext of hooliganism and Bancer was sentenced to ten days ' imprisonment , whilst Borys was fined the equivalent of about fifteen times the average monthly salary in Belarus .
It is well known , however , that the real reason for their arrest was the planned demonstration by the opposition against the authoritarian regime of Alexander Lukashenko .
The Belarus authorities have again demonstrated that organisational independence and freedom will not be tolerated in that country .
Fear , arrests under any pretext , and maligning western countries are the methods that Lukashenko has used for a long time to maintain his tyrannous rule .
Mr President , we cannot allow such widespread breaches of the human rights of personal dignity and freedom to take place right next to the European Union .
Europe cannot be democratic if Belarus is not a free country .
Let us increase our spending to help Belarus society to escape from the tyranny of dictatorship .
Let us demand that the rights of ethnic minorities be respected , that arrests without just cause be stopped and that political prisoners be freed .
This is the only way to change the one tyranny and dictatorship in Europe .
( SV ) Thank you Mr President .
I would like to speak about the Turkish Parliament 's decision to authorise the Turkish military to go into the only relatively calm region in Iraq .
It now looks as though we will be able to include these events in our discussion on the general report on Wednesday .
I hope that everyone will have the opportunity to be involved in the process and to table amendments , as this is a big threat to peace in the region .
It highlights the problem of the military exerting pressure and pushing through decisions .
We must now ensure that the government resists , that there are no troops and that no one is provoked into going into Iraq with military forces .
If there is anything they have too much of , it is the military .
If there is anything they have too little of , it is normal discussion between people and that is what we must support . Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , it is almost as if the European Union were subject to a news and activity blackout with regard to the systematic violations of human rights perpetrated by the Kingdom of Morocco in relation to the occupied territories of the Western Sahara .
They have us well trained .
None the less , Parliament deserves an explanation from the Kingdom of Morocco concerning the delegation , which was not able to visit those occupied territories .
Two further pieces of information should be added to those already given : first , Morocco refused to allow the Human Rights Association - the association is called ' CODESA ' - to hold its Congress in the occupied territories and , secondly , the United Nations has still not published the report by the High Commissioner for Human Rights who was visiting the occupied territories to compile a full report on the situation there .
That report has not been published to date .
I urge the European institutions - this Parliament , the European Commission and the Council , to bring this situation to an end .

Mr President , Gordon Brown said today that there will be no need for another EU Treaty for at least 10 years .
He knows full well that there will never be a need for another Treaty .
The proposed Reform Treaty is a self-amending Treaty .
What little will be left of sovereign power can be transferred to the EU by decisions of the European Council without recourse to Parliament , let alone the people .
The Reform Treaty formally states the legitimacy and supremacy of EU law over national law .
If the British Houses of Parliament accept and practise the provisions of the Reform Treaty as superior and at the expense of existing English and Scottish law , then it is an act of treason under the existing treason laws .
Any member of the House of Commons or House of Lords that votes for ratification of the Reform Treaty is therefore , literally , a traitor to their country .
( Laughter )
Go and look at the treason laws if you do not believe me !
We should exercise caution in the use of such terms , Mr Batten .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year before the start of the Beijing Olympic Games , worrying messages are being daily given out to the public at large .
This time it is not a case of human rights or environmental pollution , but the decision by the Organising Committee and the authorities of the People 's Republic of China to ban any type or form of religious worship by participants in the Olympic Games .
In contravention of the agreements adhered to since the beginning of the Olympic Games and signed by the Chinese authorities and the International Olympic Committee , and religious symbols such as the Bible , the New and the Old Testaments , places of prayer and even the crucifix on a chain round the neck of a male or female athlete will be banned .
As a Christian I am deeply saddened .
I hope that the international community and the EU will duly prevent the Organising Authority of the 2008 Olympic Games from implementing these unprecedented measures .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , colleagues , on 3 October the Michelin group announced that it is to cease tyre production at its Toul plant .
More than 800 jobs are likely go by 2009 , although neither the company 's industrial performance nor its financial results indicate any crisis behind these redundancies .
Shareholders are selling off equity at a profit , on the back of the restructuring announcement , while ordinary men and women come to terms with the fact that they alone will bear the brunt of the situation .
I should like to put on record before the House how much I respect the trade union representatives and workers who , despite the deeply gloomy prospect they face , have shown a tremendous sense of responsibility from the outset .
The issue now is not about finding a humane way of closing a factory ; it is about finding ways of retaining jobs in areas such as this , which can be extremely hard hit .
The workforce in Toul expects the EU to create systems of protection and organisation that will be capable of securing workers ' social rights , helping people to get back into employment , and putting compensation funds to good use in relaunching industrial projects .
What they need is the flexisecurity that we , as European Socialists , have been urging ; but it is also essential to encourage adaptation to industrial competitiveness and explore ways of promoting an integrated industrial policy for the benefit of all the areas in Europe currently affected by restructuring .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the deteriorating situation on the border between Iraq and Turkey .
On Sunday morning , 12 Turkish soldiers and 32 Kurds were killed in a Kurdish ambush .
As we already know , the Turkish Parliament has approved the invasion of Kurdish-populated areas in northern Iraq .
At the same time , the Prime Minister of Turkey , Tayyip Erdogan , has said that his Government is ready to give orders to the army to attack the bases of the Kurdistan Workers Party in northern Iraq .
Hence , there is a strong probability of an escalation into a serious military conflict in northern Iraq .
Since Turkey is officially an EU candidate country , is it not time for us to act to try to stop a military conflict between Kurdish fighters and the invading Turkish troops ?
Otherwise the situation might really destabilise in this fragile region and bring about frightening and unforeseeable consequences .
( PL ) Mr President , last week the European Parliament welcomed to a group of people with multiple sclerosis .
There was an exhibition , concert and conference dedicated to the issue of people who suffer this terrible condition .
They were looking for assistance with their difficulties from Parliament , but , in Brussels , they were met with extreme discrimination .
The chairperson of the association , who has severe impairment of sight and hearing , and who is in a wheelchair , has a guide dog to help her .
The airline Wizzair refused to allow the dog on board , even though their regulations state that it is possible to transport guide dogs belonging to blind or deaf persons , and the online purchase of the ticket also included the dog .
It was only after an hour of discussions that it was finally decided to treat the situation as exceptional and the passenger and the dog were taken on board .
This situation undoubtedly had a negative impact on her health .
( BG ) My country Bulgaria is on the eve of the first local elections to be held after the accession to the European Union .
Therefore they are different and charged with lots of expectations derived from the new European realities .
Capable and active people should be elected to local authorities to work skilfully with EU funds .
Bulgaria stands a good chance to absorb almost seven billion Euro over the period 2007 - 2013 as a full EU member .
However , it is much more important for these resources to reach the people who need them most rather than to sink into the coffers of companies or political parties .
Since Europe is Europe of the regions and decentralisation is an irreversible process , the role of the people involved in local government is growing .
Bulgaria has repeatedly and justifiably been criticized for its insufficient administrative capacity and for the shortcomings in the work of institutions .
Having received the trust and confidence of our European partners and having become part and parcel of the big European family , we should make the next important step , too , i.e. to elect mayors and municipal councillors capable of working not only at the regional and national level but at the European level , as well .
As a representative of Bulgaria in the European Parliament , I find it very important for highly qualified and competent people to be elected to local authorities .
Entering the common European home , we have to make our personal efforts to gain our well deserved place rather than receive it as a gift .
( HU ) Mr President , tomorrow Hungary celebrates the anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian Revolution and fight for freedom .
The past few years , and the debates that have taken place on the nature of Hitlerism and Stalinism and the damage they caused , including debates in this House , have demonstrated that Europe 's more fortunate western half experienced history very differently from the ten newly acceded central European Member States .
Likewise , 9 May has a different meaning for us .
For us it was not just the date of liberation , but also the start of occupation .
Three central European events , acts of opposition to the Soviet Union and Soviet-style Communist dictatorships - the Hungarian Revolution of ' 56 , the Prague Spring of ' 68 , and the Polish Solidarity ( Solidarność ) movement - have nevertheless become part of our common European history .
The uniqueness of 1956 lies in the fact that no other uprising involved a people taking up arms against the world 's largest army , the Soviet army , and no other case involved a country declaring its neutrality .
All the goals for which the heroes of 1956 were fighting - democracy , the rule of law , and liberty - were realised with the regime change .
If we Hungarians can be proud of anything in the 20th century , we should be proud of the 1956 Revolution and the role we played in Germany 's reunification . Thank you for your attention .
( RO ) The use of cyanides is one of the current gold and silver mining methods .
I would like to emphasize that the effects of such a mining process may lead to the irreversible destruction of ecosystems and seriously harm the human body , since cyanide is one of the substances that pass unchanged into underground waters , the main existent source of drinkable water .
In the context of global warming , cyanide has the role of changing the temperature and precipitations pattern , generating floods and landslides .
The accident that happened in Romania , in Baia Mare , in the year 2000 , when , following the crack of a tailing pond , approximately 100,000 m3 of water contaminated with cyanide and heavy metals was spilled , caused the biggest catastrophe in Eastern Europe since Chernobyl .
This triggered a mining law reform in Romania by introducing an amendment to the Parliament , which prohibited the use of cyanide in mining .
Mr. President , I express my wish to see Romania 's example followed by the other European Union countries , as well , so that the prohibition of cyanide shall become an European rule eventually .
Mr President , on Thursday this week , this House will vote on the 2008 budget .
Bearing in mind that the Court of Auditors is due to report back next month , I want to draw your attention to the Interinstitutional Agreement signed between the three Institutions in 2006 .
Under Article 44 of that agreement , all Member States are obliged to give certification for financial transactions involving EU monies .
I am advised that under the current programme the Commission will not receive relevant information from the Member States until 15 February 2008 .
Only at that point can the common standards in accountancy and internal controls be identified .
This means that it is unlikely the Court of Auditors will receive the required information for a further two years .
That is not acceptable .
Not only does it contravene the spirit of the Interinstitutional Agreement , but the ongoing failure to achieve a satisfactory audit report seriously undermines the credibility of this House .
I urge you , Mr President , to take every opportunity to insist that Member States attach far greater urgency to this matter in the future .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the United Nations has set 10 December next as the deadline for determining the future status of Kosovo .
However , with the Kosovan authorities threatening to declare independence unilaterally , Serbia arguing for a system of broad autonomy and Russia vetoing the UN special envoy 's proposal for supervised independence , the situation is critical .
My concern is to highlight the key role that the European Union will have to play in resolving the crisis .
It is our collective wish that the Union should have a High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
But what credibility can that appointment carry if we are incapable of playing our part in finding a specific solution to the Kosovo situation , which is still officially classed under foreign affairs although it is in fact a matter of internal concern to the Union ?
The EU therefore needs to demonstrate a sense of direction and a clear vision that reflects compromise between the Serbian and Kosovan demands , while taking care not to open the Pandora 's Box of partition ; and it needs to speak out on the future of Kosovo and make its voice heard in the concert of nations .
( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Mr President .
The European Parliament delegation to Chile met not only with Chilean MPs , but also with environmental organisations earlier this month in Santiago .
In their view , the behaviour of European Union companies locating in Chile is very far removed from the environmental principles they espouse in Europe .
The legal and ethical positions on this are clear , but unfortunately the two are diametrically opposed .
What these companies are doing may be legally above-board , but ethically it is damaging .
A lack of environmental legislation often entices European capital abroad .
Relocation of this kind is detrimental to our interests in many ways .
We must therefore push for environmental rigour not only within the European Union , but also outside it .
The European Union must be the initiator , because a failure to take responsibility towards the next generation on the global scale is now inflicting material and non-material damage on Europe 's citizens .
( SK ) Allow me to praise the fifth edition of the European Week of Regions and Cities that took place in Brussels from 8 to 11 October 2007 .
This event provided a unique platform for regions and cities of the entire European Union .
They exchanged practical experience and gained knowledge about innovative initiatives in the field of regional development .
We , the Members of the European Parliament , also had the opportunity to meet regional politicians in the course of interesting events .
I would like to thank the Committee of the Regions , the European Commission 's Directorate-General for Regional Policy and the European Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development for organising this event .
I want to thank our President , Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering , for his speech that conferred dignity on this event .
Only dynamic European regions with a strong human potential , with brave and enthusiastic regional politicians and well-prepared projects focusing on innovation and the creation of new jobs and cooperating in regional groupings , will be able to cope with the challenges of a globalised world .
( ET ) Friday will see the opening of the second European Union-Russia summit this year .
We do not meet any other country so frequently , yet problems persist .
Friday 's summit is not Mr Putin 's farewell visit : he will still be holding Russia 's reins in the future .
Instead of singing his praises we should be debating how to bring substance to the strategic partnership between Russia and the European Union .
For Europe 's security it would be very important to launch the cooperation on crisis management agreed at the meeting of November 2003 , especially in respect of frozen conflicts .
In Portugal Russia should be asked to treat Transnistrian separatists declared personae non gratae by the European Union as a genuine partner would , by prohibiting the Transnistrian elite from travelling across Russia 's borders .
Currently a gang which is sowing instability among Europe 's neighbours can travel freely through Russian airports .
This step would not be difficult for Russia , and at the same time would be a sign that Russia will listen to Europe and that we are genuinely partners .
Mr President , following the unifying outcome of the Lisbon Summit last week , it is sad to be reminded that Nicosia is still a Berlin-like divided city in Europe .
Since 1963 , a so-called Green Line has divided the city and its people into a Greek Cypriot and a Turkish Cypriot sector .
This line is closely guarded by Turkish troops on one side and Republic of Cyprus troops on the other .
The division is most absurd at Ledra Street , a busy shopping road in the centre of Nicosia , which is cut in half by a glass wall running across it , separating Greek Cypriots from Turkish Cypriots .
Mr President , I beg of you to make an urgent personal plea to the governments of Turkey and Cyprus to take the historic step , without any complicated preconditions and seemingly cheap political excuses , of opening Ledra Street and allowing Greek and Turkish Cypriots to move freely across their capital city .
Let the opening of Ledra Street in Nicosia become another symbol of peace and unity for the people of Europe and the catalyst for the solution of the Cyprus problem .
( EL ) Mr President , the EU 's internet site is today publishing the news that OLAF , in collaboration with the Austrian authorities , has broken up a cycle of illegal Chinese clothing and footwear imports .
Damage to the Community budget amounts to EUR 200 million .
In view of this breaking story , which is not an isolated event but happening all over Europe , I call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to petition the Commission .
Customs checks need to be increased and import restrictions extended beyond the current year .
Commercial protection measures for footwear imports need to be made more effective .
( DE ) Mr President , I am very pleased that Commissioner Stavros Dimas is here .
On this occasion I would like to offer a word of praise for the action taken by the Commission last week on the illegal spring hunting of wild birds in Malta .
We have devoted a great deal of attention to this matter , not only in the Chamber but in our Committee on Petitions too .
Serving a final warning to the Maltese authorities is , I believe , an important step .
I hope that we shall see the fruits of this valuable and judicious political measure next spring and that European laws will be put into practice in the form of an enforced ban on illegal spring hunting .
( PL ) Mr President , last year 25 countries in the European Union signed a joint stabilisation and association agreement between Albania and the European Union .
Today , 16 months after that agreement was signed , only 10 countries have ratified the document .
It is telling that , of this ten , six are new EU Member States : Poland , Hungary , Slovakia , Slovenia , Lithuania and Latvia , and there are four countries from the old EU : Spain , Ireland , Sweden and Luxembourg .
I would therefore like to call on the 17 remaining EU countries to ratify this agreement as soon as possible , unless we want the concept of European solidarity to be seen as empty platitudes or slogans .
( SK ) Italian authorities have informed the Member States of the European Union , through the European Early Warning and Response System , about an outbreak of tropical fever spread by the chikungunya virus in the Emilia-Romagna region .
They have reported 197 cases of the tropical virus .
Laboratory tests have confirmed that 14 % of the total number of ill people have contracted the virus and it has claimed one victim .
Although there is no reason to panic yet , the European Commission must once more take steps to prepare for the possibility of a large epidemic .
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control , monitoring communicable diseases , notes that favourable climatic conditions allow the virus to spread , in particular in the Mediterranean region .
The risk of the virus being transmitted to other European countries is also high .
Infected people can initiate new transmission cycles in other regions of the Union .
( EL ) Mr President , last week Arat Dink , son of Hrant Dink , the murdered Turkish journalist , was found guilty by a Turkish court because of a series of articles he had written on the Armenian genocide .
Mr Dink , the editor of ' Agos ' newspaper , was found guilty according to Article 301 of Turkish Penal Code .
This was the article which had been used to condemn his father .
Hrant Dink has been given a one-year suspended prison sentence .
It is therefore justifiable to ask ourselves what the European Commission is doing to urge Turkey to remove this article from its penal code .
Further , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of Turkey 's continuing intransigence , how much more time do we believe Turkey needs before it finally understands that it has European commitments and should therefore behave like a democratic state ?
Mr President , there is disturbing news from Slovakia .
The Director of the Danube Museum in Komárno , Csaba Fehér , has been threatened with dismissal .
Among the charges is that he was co-organiser of an exhibition in the European Parliament last year .
That exhibition documented the sufferings of the Hungarian minority under the Czechoslovak Government after 1945 on the basis of collective guilt .
The concept of collective guilt is wholly irreconcilable with the civic norms and human rights that are at the heart of the European Union 's democratic underpinnings .
Slovakia , as a Member State of the European Union , has accepted those principles in full .
So , what the Slovak authorities are doing not only flies in the face of human rights normativity , but implicitly criticises the European Parliament .
Slovakia must resolve these contradictions as rapidly as possible .
( RO ) Statistics show that the European Union population is aging .
Only 35 % of the European Union citizens are over 50 years old and only 16 % of the European Union population is under 14 years old .
The European Union 's demographic policy is a policy that Europe 's future depends on .
The demographic policy should refer to accessible health services and decent pensions for pensioners , measures to increase the birth-rate in all Member States , as well as to decent , stable and well paid jobs .
For this reason , I ask the European Commission to develop , together with the Member States , a Community policy and national strategies as regards the demographic policy .
The result of such measures will be seen in the next 20-30 years .
Social Europe needs all its citizens and , especially , it needs each citizen to be integrated into society and have a decent living .
This is why we have to correlate the population protection and development policies with the demographic policies .
( SK ) The Hungarian Guard was once again one of the main topics in Slovakia and Hungary this weekend .
All people of good will strive for peace and conciliation between all nations .
The present governments in Hungary and the Slovak Republic being what they are , there is the need for a strong Christian-Democratic opposition in the interest of democracy .
However , we will not win if we succumb to sentiments and emotions .
I am asking the Hungarian Government to respect the Treaty of Peace signed with Hungary in Paris on 10 February 1947 .
In this Treaty Hungary pledged never to suffer in the future on its territory the existence and activities of fascist-like political , military and semi-military organisations , spinning revisionist propaganda .
I can see nothing better that could be done in the name of peace and mutual understanding between our nations .
Mr President , I would like to comment on a letter that was printed in an Irish national newspaper last week and was signed by , among others , several Members of this Parliament .
The context is that Ireland will probably be the only country to have a referendum on what will now surely be called the ' Treaty of Lisbon ' .
In this letter three demands were made .
One of the demands is that the Treaty must be submitted to the citizens in a referendum in each Member State .
The second demand goes so far as to demand that the EU national parliaments make appropriate legal and constitutional provisions to allow for referenda .
I have to say that I find these demands astonishing .
What about the principle of subsidiarity , where decisions are taken at the most appropriate level , in this case , at the level of the Member States ?
I suspect that , in some convoluted way , those who want less interference from Europe are in fact themselves promoting the ultimate interference in the business of Member States by demanding that national parliaments change their constitutions and legal provisions to suit the wishes of the letter-writers .
That would surely be a democratic deficit !
( EL ) Mr President , every year 650 000 people die from smoking-related causes in the EU .
It is like a small-scale war .
Of these , 80 000 deaths are due to passive smoking .
Smoke has been found to contain 4 000 substances , of which 50 are carcinogens .
Decades ago the medical community documented the adverse and possibly fatal consequences of smoking .
It is our duty to try and reduce smoking and especially to prevent young people from starting .
If we are to succeed , strong legislation is needed .
Smoking in public places must be banned .
Industrial additives in tobacco have to be monitored , researched and restricted .
We need monitoring and rigour at sales points .
We owe this to the 70 % of EU citizens who do not smoke and to the overwhelming majority of smokers who want to give up .
Mr President , along with many Members of this House - perhaps most Members , in fact , given our resolutions - I am dismayed that the European Union intends to allow the Zimbabwean tyrant , Mugabe , to be invited to the EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December .
Commissioner Michel tells me that the reasons for this - and I would suggest rather perversely - are that we should try not to isolate Mugabe , as this just reinforces his image , and that the EU wants to be seen as a global strategic player .
To invite Mugabe to Lisbon is an affront to our principles and is a direct contradiction of the EU 's own stated positions .
It is a failure of our Africa diplomacy that any African government still has any regard for Mugabe .
Mr President , I know you share our concerns about the appalling situation in Zimbabwe .
Can I ask you to do two things : first of all , to convey yet again the strong feelings of this House that Mugabe should not be invited to Lisbon in December , and secondly , to respect the wishes of this House and not attend any EU summit to which Mugabe or any other banned Zimbabwean politicians are invited ?
( PL ) Mr President , during today 's discussions in the European Parliament we shall be considering the report by Richard Corbett on the amendment of Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament concerning verbatim reports .
In my view , the committee is not going in the direction that it should .
I feel I can say this because of Article 96 , which states that ' Parliament shall ensure the utmost transparency of its activities ' , thus any attempts to restrict the provision of information to European Union States , as well as access to it , undermines this fundamental right and is contrary to the idea of the Union , to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , to existing agreements and breaches fundamental human rights in the European Union .

Surely we are not constructing a European Union in order to have discrimination against smaller nations with less resilient cultures , or , if we are , this should have been stated prior to accession .
It is no argument , either , to talk about costs , about financial resources .
We spend so much on unnecessary facilities and on administration that we should be able to afford at least to communicate with society .
( PT ) Mr President , the largest demonstration in Lisbon in the last 20 years took place on 18 October last , when more than 200 000 people called out by the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers condemned the European Union 's neoliberal policies , said ' no ' to flexicurity , protested against unemployment , social exclusion and the poverty in which over 20 % of the Portuguese people live , and demanded a social Europe .
European leaders cannot ignore this important demonstration .
We therefore salute the General Confederation of Portuguese Workers and its members and express our commitment to the struggle to protect the dignity of working people .
Mr President , Howard Stern - sorry , the Stern weekly showed the ' private parts ' of the German society by publishing in its latest issue that every fourth German still believes that National Socialism had good sides .
Well , if this is true , it may mean that either every fourth German in this hemicycle finds good sides of National Socialism - which would be scandalous in itself - or this German delegation to the European Parliament is not the voice of its whole nation .
Recently , Germany was allocated 96 seats .
Having taken into consideration the statistics in Stern , it would be wiser , perhaps , to allocate only three seats to that country so that there would be no chance for the fourth one !
However , I agree with Mr Schulz with regard to one thing : in a united Europe , there is no place for the doctrine of nationalism in any dimensions .
However , Mr Schulz should take a closer look at the backyard of German hooliganism .
As for me , being from Poland , I wish all German Members would speak against nationalism as much as Mr Schulz .
( PL ) Mr President , within the psychological framework , feelings such as responsible love for another person , family or one 's country - which is given the name of patriotism - are evidence , together with other higher emotions , of a high level of personal development .
In contrast with primitive emotions that we share with animals , higher emotions even have a separate area in the brain .
Patriotism expresses itself as love for and a desire to nurture national traditions , culture and language , attitudes of respect and devotion to one 's own country .
These are completely opposed to nationalism and chauvinism , which are characterised by hatred of other people .
Patriotism does not permit offence to nations or countries .
It is characterised primarily by openness to other countries and respect for their right to sovereignty and independence .
I would like to remind you of the nature of patriotism , particularly after the speeches made by certain left-wing MEPs who have insulted national governments and patriotic attitudes , perhaps because they do not understand the difference between love for one 's country and the hatred that characterises such attitudes as chauvinism .
In a situation of European integration it is particularly important to differentiate between these completely different concepts that are confused by many people .
Mr President , addressing concerns about energy supply is one of the major and most important issues facing the European Union , linked as it is with concerns about climate change .
Security of supply and rising cost , with prices up 100 % in the last five years , are major worries .
Well , for Ireland the challenges are particularly great .
We face growing demand for energy and yet a high dependency on imported fossil fuels .
We are 90 % dependent .
We need to invest heavily in our infrastructure , work towards liberalising the market and reduce our carbon emissions .
Parliament is looking at an action plan on implementing energy policy for Europe .
Within Ireland we are establishing an all-Ireland energy market with the merging of electricity markets north and south .
That is positive , but it is not enough .
The scale of the market is too small .
To achieve a harmonised energy market , inter-connection with the rest of the European Union is vital for Ireland - but that will cost money , and I would urge the Irish Government to look at the use of cohesion funding to make that investment , because it is necessary for the continuation of Irish economic growth .
That concludes the item .
Framework directive on the sustainable use of pesticides - Thematic strategy on the sustainable use of pesticides - The placing of plant protection products on the market ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Christa Klaß , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for Community action to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides - C6-0246 / 2006 - ,
the report by Irena Belohorská , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on a Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides , and
the report by Hiltrud Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market - C6-0245 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , first let me thank the European Parliament and especially the rapporteurs , Mrs Belohorská and Mrs Klaß , for their exceptionally thorough work .
Thanks are also due to the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety Committee , to Mr Ebner and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , and to Mrs Corbey and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , for the reports and view they expressed at first reading .
Over the last thirty years the EU 's policies and laws on the protection of public health and the environment have enabled us to make significant progress , considerably reducing the risks of pesticides .
Current legislation , however , focuses on the one hand on approving and placing products on the market , and on the other hand on monitoring product residues in food and animal feed .
Between these two points of focus no law covers the period when pesticides are used .
This , however , is the crucial stage ; during it human health and the environment are at risk .
The monitoring programmes implemented in Member States have exposed traces of pesticides not only in food and animal feed but also in the environment itself , in concentrations exceeding the limits values set by European legislation .
Additionally , it has become clear that pesticides are an issue of serious concern to European citizens .
We ought therefore try harder to increase the protection of European citizens and our environment .
The thematic strategy on the sustainable use of pesticides and the framework directive accompanying it are covered under the general heading of tackling the human health and environmental due to pesticides .
The main elements of the Commission 's proposal for a framework directive are as follows .
Firstly , each Member State will draw up national action plans establishing targets , measures and timetables to reduce risks and dependence on pesticides .
Secondly , professional pesticide users , who are mainly farmers , distributors and advisers , will need to have access to appropriate training .
This will teach them enough about the risks of pesticides and about using alternative means .
Public awareness-raising about the risks of using pesticides will also need to be increased .
Thirdly , professional equipment for pesticide spraying will have to undergo regular checks and be correctly maintained .
Fourthly , aerial spraying will be prohibited , but Member States will retain the option to make exceptions in limited cases where aerial spraying is the only feasible solution .
Fifthly , special measures will be taken to protect the general public and vulnerable sectors of the population , as well as water systems and geographical areas , such as those of the Natura 2000 network .
Such measures may include , among others , creating buffer zones , or prohibiting or restricting the use of pesticides .
Sixthly and finally , but just as importantly , we must support agricultural techniques which have recourse to low pesticide doses . This is to enable the implementation of integrated pest control , which ought to become compulsory from 2014 .
Other measures envisaged by the thematic strategy have been incorporated or will be incorporated shortly in other legislative acts .
These include a proposal to regulate the placing of plant protection products on the market .
The regulation will bring about an ever greater restriction of harmful active substances circulating in the market , particularly through comparative assessment and adherence to the principle of substitution .
This is my colleague Mr Kyprianou 's proposal , which we are also discussing this evening on the basis of the report drafted by Mrs Breyer .
There is also a proposal to regulate the collection of statistical data on plant protection products .
This proposal is of crucial importance ; it establishes indicators to measure progress on risk reduction .
The proposal is now being discussed by the relevant Parliamentary Committee .
There is also a proposed new directive laying down basic specifications for spraying equipment to be placed on the market .
The proposal will add to the existing provisions on the maintenance and regular inspection of spraying equipment .
In conclusion , Mr President , let me stress how important an aspect of the proposed directive on the sustainable use of pesticides integrated pest management is .
This is a fundamental measure of the Commission 's proposal ; it has been debated by the other parliamentary sub-committees .
Nobody doubts that we must reduce dependency on pesticides and turn to more environmentally friendly alternative means of protecting plants and controlling pests .
Integrated management and pest control are the most effective way to achieve this goal .
It is thus particularly important that this element should be maintained in our proposal and should become compulsory in all Member States from 2014 .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , we shall be debating a really difficult but important issue today .
let me first of all thank all those who have worked to make this debate possible today , and especially the rapporteur , Mrs Breyer .
The subject has always been difficult .
A balance needs to be struck .
Protection of health and the environment need to be increased , while procedures are simplified and administrative costs are reduced to allow for greater competitiveness and innovation .
I am convinced that the Commission 's proposal will help achieve these two goals , for it supplements the internal market . It does this by setting up a system of flexible mutual recognition of zones , and allowing Member States to take measures and to adopt restrictions , in cases of special health or environmental hazards , whether in throughout a Member State or in parts of it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a fact that plant protection products play an important role in agriculture , crop growing , silviculture and market gardening .
I wish we did not need them , because they certainly affect human and animal health , and the environment .
We must therefore ensure that the relevant rules are effective and balanced .
The legislation in force dates from 1991 .
On the basis of a 2001 report by the Commission on the legislation 's function and where it can be improved , both the European Parliament and the Council asked the Commission to put forward proposals for the amendment to the directive .
I daresay nobody doubts the need for the existing legislation to be updated .
Allow me to thank the interested bodies in all sectors and mention the vital contribution they have made in the framework of this proposal 's preliminary draft .
The Commission has also carried out a comprehensive impact assessment .
The first priority is indisputably to achieve the highest possible level of protection for human and animal health , as well as for the environment .
This will be achieved through a number of provisions : establishing clear , strict criteria for the approval of active substances ; giving a central role to the European Food Safety Authority in the assessment of active substances ; and obliging farmers to maintain files on the use of plant protection products , to be made available on request to their neighbours and the water industry .
The Member States ' authorities will also have to intensify checks on the commercial exploitation and use of plant protection products , and the Commission will examine and verify how effectively Member States are carrying out these checks .
Further experiments on animals will be banned outright .
So as to promote sustainable agriculture , the safest alternative solutions will replace the most hazardous products .
The proposal will thus create a safer framework for the use of plant protection products in the EU and will reinforce measures to protect the environment .
The proposal does the same as the Lisbon Strategy because it will also reduce administrative costs .
The procedure will be shorter and more efficient , while , more importantly I believe , preserving levels of safety and protecting the health of the environment .
The Member States will no longer be working in isolation because mutually recognising approvals will now be the rule , rather the exception .
This will avoid dividing the internal market over plant protection products and stop splitting the market over agricultural products .
The changes to data protection rules will lead to greater transparency and fairer competition without hindering research and innovation .
The proposed regulation is one of the keys to the Commission 's overall strategy in the pesticides sector .
It complements the proposal for a directive on the sustainable use of pesticides , which has already been analysed by my colleague , Mr Dimas .
Finally , let me to mention the large number of amendments which have been tabled .
This is hardly surprising for such a complex subject and perhaps we have not yet reached complete agreement in our views .
I am optimistic that we will shortly be able to do so the next stages of the procedure .
Meanwhile , the Commission can accept certain amendments while rejecting others .
The complete list , with the Commission 's view on each amendment and the relevant explanation , is available to Parliament and MEPs .
It is not for me to analyse every amendment separately here because there is certainly not enough time .
I ask for this list to be included in the Minutes of the sitting .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I look forward to a constructive and interesting debate .


rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioners Dimas and Kyprianos , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the Commission 's proposal for a framework for Community action to achieve sustainable use of pesticides , and my remarks here today will be confined to that part of the overall package .
This is a vast field , in which a great deal of adjustment is still needed throughout Europe for the sake of consumers and users and particularly for the sake of the environment .
Differing rules in the European Union not only create divergent safety standards but are also confusing and distort competition .
The possibility of pests destroying a whole year 's harvests is , thankfully , a thing of the past in Europe .
Today , however , we face new major challenges , to which we must respond with a sound policy on plant protection .
The global population is growing , and food is becoming scarcer worldwide .
Climate change has altered the conditions in which farming takes place : new pests are appearing , and natural disasters decimate harvests .
It is still essential today , therefore , to safeguard harvests , and the use of plant protection agents helps to do that .
With plant protection , as with many other things in life , it is the dose that makes the poison .
Whilst a sleeping tablet is a boon , many sleeping tablets can be fatal .
Care must be taken to ensure that plant protection products are used properly and professionally , because improper use is dangerous .
That is true not only on farmland but also in public spaces such as parks , playgrounds , sports fields , pathways and railway tracks .
Information , education and knowledge of the implications of pesticide use , of its benefits but also of its risks , are at the heart of this directive .
Sellers and users of plant protection agents must be trained and informed .
By means of national action plans , the Member States must ensure that plant protection products are used sustainably .
In so doing , they must strive for consistency with other Community provisions .
Well-tested and safe application machinery will ensure targeted plant protection , the aim being to minimise any risk .
An arbitrary percentage reduction across the entire range of plant protection agents runs counter to the aims of good agricultural practice and integrated pest management .
We need both these factors , Commissioner Dimas , and we shall continue to need good farming practice and integrated pest management , because we need dynamism .
The stringent regulation on authorisation , moreover , has been reduced to absurdity .
Products with harmful effects must not be authorised at all ; it is not enough to cut their use by half .
If , however , plant protection agents have come through a stringent approval process , reducing their use by a certain percentage across the board would be illogical .
Moreover , no one has yet been able to explain to me precisely how such a reduction is supposed to be managed and quantified .
The same applies to protection of the aquatic environment .
The arbitrary establishment of standard buffer strips next to water bodies serves no purpose .
A differentiated approach remains necessary here .
Buffer strips must be right for the geographical situation , the soil properties and the plants that require protection .
This kind of approach has already been adopted in the instructions for use that come with the various plant protection products .
You mentioned crop spraying from the air , Commissioner .
For the steeply sloping vineyards along the banks beside the Moselle in my home area or indeed for the rice plantations in southern Europe , there is no alternative .
In those places crop spraying from the air is indispensable .
The use of crop spraying helicopters , however , must be regulated .
Particular care is needed in sensitive areas , such as parks and public or school playgrounds .
The use of pesticides there must be kept to an absolute minimum , and non-chemical alternatives should take precedence .
In my opinion , that could even mean sending out an entire school class to weed the school grounds .
Banning plant protection altogether in areas that are home to particular species of flora and fauna would be inconsistent with the aims of habitat conservation .
Pesticides are actually essential if these habitats are to be preserved .
Plant protection products are expensive , and no farmer will apply more than is absolutely necessary .
Additional taxes distort competition in the world market .
They would result in the purchase of cheaper products from outside the EU , which would ill serve the cause of sustainability .
We want the same protection and the same standard throughout the EU .
In many countries the proposed measures have typified good practice for some time .
For this reason , harmonisation of the rules governing the use of plant protection agents is imperative , which is why the Commission 's approach is the right one .
It is up to all of us now - and we can take this as an invitation - to initiate a directive that keeps red tape to a minimum while matching our aspirations .
I ask for your support .
( FR ) Mr President , I have asked for the floor because I am not quite sure what is going on .
I took part in the discussions on these various reports in the Committee on the Environment but it seemed to me that what Mrs Klaß has just presented was not the report that the committee had approved unanimously , but rather a reflection of her personal position .
I would therefore like to know whether we may hope for a more objective presentation of the Environment Committee 's position on this very important report .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , may I say to Mrs Isler Béguin that there was no unanimous vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , that we definitely took the opposite view and that most of my group opposed the position to which she refers .
I have certainly stressed that I support the Commission 's proposal .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) The Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides , being a non-legislative political document that accompanies the directive , responds to the fact that the risks of pesticide use are not decreasing .
Today 's residue levels in food products exceed acceptable values : 44 % of fruit is contaminated with pesticides , 5.5 % of which contains the maximum residue level .
Excessive residues were even found in the fruit being sold in the European Parliament premises .
The aim of my report is to minimise the dangers and risks to health and environment that arise from the use of pesticides .
Firstly , I would like to stress that the use of pesticides is linked to the development of malignant tumours or immunological and other neurotoxic defects .
That is why I found it surprising ( unfortunately it was a bad surprise ) that in its text the Commission mentions only in passing the health risks posed by the use of pesticides , in particular by their cumulative effect .
Pregnant women , children and foetuses are the group most at risk .
Although I am in favour of protecting plants , I think that first and foremost we have to protect people 's health .
There is clearly a connection with climate change .
Global warming will bring more pests : we cannot continue endlessly to increase the amounts of pesticides used .
The National Action Plans containing the Member States ' individual targets in terms of risk reduction are the most important part of the whole process .
I consider the proposal in which the Commission rejects the quantitative use reduction targets to be insufficient .
The phrase ' to reduce hazards , risks and dependence on pesticides ' is imprecisely defined and will not prompt the Member States to lower the amount of pesticides used .
The Thematic Strategy is a general text and does not offer a detailed solution for calculating the amounts .
However , my colleagues and I propose the following for the directive : a 50 % reduction in the most dangerous substances that are , if used in certain large quantities , carcinogens and mutagens ; the use of biological pesticides and pesticides that present little danger does not have to be reduced at present ; the so-called frequency of application index will be used for other pesticides .
The individual characteristics of , and conditions in , each Member State will be taken into account .
It must be emphasised that quantitative indicators in the National Action Plans do not impose equal reduction of pesticide use on all countries .
They will take into consideration the specific geographical conditions and arable farming systems of the given country .
It is true that an automatic reduction in quantity does not necessarily lead to risk reduction ; however , it does so in many cases .
The Thematic Strategy and the directive must deal with both crop protection measures and biocides .
Protection of the aquatic environment from contamination by pesticides must be strengthened through the establishment of buffer zones along watercourses .
Although I support the ban on aerial spraying , I accept that it will be possible to grant an exception under certain circumstances , in the absence of a more viable alternative .
When aerial sprayings take place , the general public will be informed , by suitable means , about the time of spraying , the place and the substance used .
The Strategy is not directed against farmers .
I believe that all these measures can be taken without radical cuts in farmers ' budgets .
This was proved by the Danish experience .
All of us have to realise how important it is for farmers to be competitive , and we have to make sure that their products will not be replaced by products of farmers from developing countries .
To conclude , allow me to express my opinion on the amendments .
I cannot agree with Amendment 4 , which seeks to change the name of the entire Thematic Strategy .
Although I want pesticides to be used with care , I think that we should leave the official name of the entire document as it is : after all it is an official name in the Official Journal and I think that it is suitable .
I also want to mention Amendments 3 and 5 , which deal with residential zones .
Amendment 3 proposes to add the term ' urban ' : to me this means ' suburban zone ' and thus excludes those who live in rural areas .
The term ' residential zones ' is both vague and imprecise .
I also propose to amend paragraph 8 linguistically because the term ' practitioner ' is a bad translation ; in French it is even ' médecin ' .
I am going to finish , Mr President , and to conclude I would like to thank sincerely all those who worked on this report .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have the privilege of introducing a report that will offer Parliament the opportunity tomorrow to vote for a breakthrough towards greater health , and environmental and consumer protection .
According to the Eurobarometer , the use of pesticides is the foremost concern among European consumers , and the Committee has taken that into account .
More than 220 000 tonnes of pesticide are applied in Europe every year .
This represents 25 % of global pesticide use on only 4 % of the world 's farmland .
In our view , the eradication of high-risk pesticides should be the core of this regulation .
These are pesticides which have carcinogenic , mutagenic or reproductively toxic properties as well as those with neurotoxic , immunotoxic or hormonal effects .
This regulation would be a huge contribution to making pesticides safer , but we must also incorporate rules for less dangerous pesticides .
The active substances that are most frequently discovered in concentrations exceeding the EU residue limits should not be marketed any more , because they have thereby proved , I am afraid to say , that they are uncontrollable .
We are also pleased that the substitution principle , which already represented a crucial step towards better health protection when it was incorporated into the EC Chemicals Regulation , is to be enshrined in the proposed regulation too , because substitution is a particularly powerful stimulant of competition in the pesticides industry .
It is scandalous and nothing short of scaremongering to sound warnings that up to half of all pesticides could disappear from the market .
May I thank the Commission for establishing such stringent substitution criteria , for pesticides need to be improved tenfold .
They should - and this is a proposal made by Parliament 's Environment Committee - be authorised for a period not exceeding five years .
The Commission 's proposal , however , also regulates how we should deal with cases of resistance .
Another key feature of the proposed regulation is better protection of sensitive groups .
As we know , foetuses , babies and children are particularly vulnerable to the toxic effects of hazardous chemicals .
For this reason I am pleased that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has proposed that decisions on the authorisation of active substances and the assessment of the risks they entail be made by reference to the more vulnerable groups in society .
I am particularly pleased to be able to tell you that we have also introduced rules on labelling , because food products that are not compliant with Directive 2006 / 215 must carry an indication to that effect .
That is a giant step towards greater transparency , for studies , and in particular a study conducted by environmental NGOs in the parliamentary supermarket , have shown just how risky products , notably everyday products , can be .
Measured values were up to 200 times higher than the levels normally prescribed for infant and baby food .
Greater transparency for the sake of these vulnerable groups , but also for consumers and people living near farmland , means greater support for Europe as a whole too , because there must be no more prodding about in the dark when it comes to traceability .
Reports , lists of licensed pesticides , residue readings and , above all , toxicological and ecotoxicological data must be made accessible to everyone almost in real time , and local residents must be informed of imminent crop-spraying through a central information system .
The pesticide passport will make it possible to trace , through wholesale and retail outlets , which pesticide was used when .
That will create competition , and consumers , of course , will be the main beneficiaries of competition between manufacturers producing only safe products .
Another of our aims is that this regulation should ensure high environmental standards .
This is why the Environment Committee came out against the idea of dividing Europe arbitrarily into three zones that are not based on any environmental or climatic criteria or on landscape types .
Moreover , Commissioner , the idea did not win majority support in the Council .
Like the Council , we advocate better voluntary cooperation in Europe on product licensing .
Let me also reiterate that there are strong legal reservations , because no intergovernmental agreements exist within these zones to enforce mandatory mutual recognition of pesticide licences .
Such provisions exist in the EU context on the basis of the European treaties , but there is no legal framework for mutual recognition within the defined zones .
People in Europe do not want poison on their plates .
I hope that this regulation will also improve Europe 's standing as a business location , because it will make Europe a better place for consumers to live , and it will be universally beneficial - not only to the environment and consumers and in terms of animal welfare , but above all to manufacturers and farmers , since they will receive more incentives to innovate and become more competitive .
In conclusion , I would like to express my warmest thanks to the shadow rapporteurs , who have collaborated on this report in a truly cooperative manner .
I hope that this new pesticides regulation will enable us to raise health and environmental protection to new heights in Europe .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - Mr President , we have to face up to the very practical idea that we need to produce food in Europe - last month we reduced set-aside to zero to bring 10 % of land back into production - and we need the necessary tools to do that job .
We are all quite happy to want safe food and safe chemicals , but - and the Commission is dealing with this in the right way - this has to be done on a risk-based system similar to that used for REACH : if a chemical is safe to use then it can be used , but if it is not safe to use then it should be taken off the market .
That is how we should deal with this the whole way through .
Climatic conditions make a great deal of difference to when you should spray , so you need flexibility in when and how you spray .
There are now satellite systems which can introduce the spray at the right time , and you can actually reduce the amount of spray and chemical you use .
Take for instance this year , which was an extremely wet year in many parts of Europe .
In my own country , Britain , you cannot buy organic potatoes because you could not spray them and could not keep the blight away from them .
There are , therefore , very few organic potatoes to be had .
We need the necessary tools , and that is why we cannot go for a percentage-based reduction each year .
We have got to go for a sensible , risk-based system .
Also , when it comes to the 10-metre strips , there are - believe it or not - chemicals that you can use in water courses .
There is a chemical called Roundup which can actually be sprayed on the banks of a river or a stream .
Are we going to ban its use on a 10-metre strip next to a stream when it can actually be used on the banks of a stream ?
Let us be sensible about this .
We need food security , we need food production and we need safe food in Europe .
Let us all work together to achieve that .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( NL ) Mr President , I think that one minute for two opinions is very short , but all right , I shall try and keep it as brief as possible .
Pesticides are useful and necessary and without these products it is becoming difficult to feed 6 billion people .
Certainly there is still a great deal to be done to combat the harmful environmental and health effects of pesticides .
Bringing new products onto the market is a long and always expensive process .
It is good for the industry that approvals can be dealt with more quickly , but Parliament is rightly asking that Member States should have the right to refuse products in their territory .
The industry is focusing increasingly on the major crops , the ' big five ' , rice , corn , maize , soya beans and cotton , because with those they can recover a lot of the cost .
But it is of course important for the minor crops to be properly protected and the Committee on Industry has made a number of good suggestions for that .
The Committee is also making a number of good suggestions to introduce incentives to switch to more sustainable products .
That is also very important .
I have another comment to make on the use of pesticides .
The compulsory buffer zone of 10 metres from surface water is not a good idea for some Member States .
I therefore welcome the amendment tabled by the PSE Group on that point .
Surface water is now one of the assessment criteria for approval and on that basis Member States have the right to establish a buffer zone for products themselves .
All in all , I think that this is a balanced and workable position for Parliament .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Commission proposal on this report had a dual legal basis , namely Article 37 ( 2 ) on agricultural policy , and Article 152 ( 4 ) ( b ) on health protection .


The Committee on Legal Affairs has studied these proposals .
For example , a proposal was made by the Committee responsible to remove Article 37 ( 2 ) and incorporate Article 175 ( 1 ) , by removing Article 37 ( 2 ) , retaining Article 152 ( 4 ) ( b ) and adding Article 175 ( 1 ) .




The key aspect as far as the legal basis is concerned , is for the debate to be geared to the aim and content , and the Committee on Legal Affairs is of the unanimous opinion that the applicable article is Article 152 ( 4 ) ( b ) , there being no need to refer to Article 175 ( 1 ) .

In our view , this is perfectly clear and there is no need either for the twofold legal basis proposed by the Commission or for the twofold legal basis proposed by the Committee responsible ; all that is required is a reference to Article 152 ( 4 ) ( b ) , because the purpose of this proposal for a directive is the protection of human health .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Mr President , as draftswoman of my Committee 's opinion for the Breyer report concerning the Regulation on the placing of plant protection products on the market , I should like to comment on the proposal .
In this proposal for a regulation , it is important that we should strike a balance between the following interests : on the one hand , there are the interests of consumers in healthy food without residues , in other words in safe plant protection products that do not endanger public health and the environment , and in clean drinking water ; on the other hand , consumers also have an interest in a reliable supply of fresh and affordable products , and they want home-grown fruit and vegetables rather than those from countries outside the EU , given that there are scarcely any checks on the pesticides that have been used those countries .
Our farmers need certain plant protection products if they are to combat resistance .
That cannot be done , however , without a certain number of protection products .
At the same time they want safe , risk-free protection products .
This is why we also believe that demonstrably carcinogenic substances must be banned .
As regards the other licensing criteria , however , we intend to rely on scientific evidence and base our approach on maximum values .
That is a balanced midway position that protects our consumers while guaranteeing that home-grown fruit and vegetables are affordable as well as being subject to adequate testing .
As far as informing neighbours is concerned , if we have stringent licensing criteria and if we test plant protection products properly , I cannot see why we have to go through bureaucratic procedures to alert neighbours and local residents to the use of plant protection products when they have not even asked for information .
What are consumers supposed to make of such information ?
How , in practice , are farmers supposed to inform all their neighbours and all residents of the local area before they apply plant protection products ?
It is for these reasons that I argue passionately against the proposal made by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which would impose this very requirement , and I also advocate rejection of the Commission 's proposed public information clause at this point , for if we have safe plant protection products we have no need for these bureaucratic procedures .
Let me make a very brief comment on the zonal approach .
We are seeking greater harmonisation .
That is the main point for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection too .
The provisions proposed in the Breyer report would result in 27 national licensing zones .
Our aim , after all , is harmonisation with due regard to the opinions of the Member States , which could adapt this authorisation to their own conditions of use .
I therefore urge the House to support this harmonisation effort and to back the Commission 's zoning proposal .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FI ) Mr President , the subject being discussed , the use and placing on the market of sustainable pesticides , is a very important one .
It embraces both the practice of sustainable agriculture and matters of public health .
It is therefore regrettable that the Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development should not be taking part in this debate right now .
Over the millennia mankind has had to contend with pests , vermin , weeds and plant and crop disease .
They have reduced harvests and rendered them unfit for human consumption .
In recent decades the struggle has been overcome to some extent , mainly on account of new plant protection products .
At the same time , however , there has been a threat to health .
The proposals for a directive now before us are very rigid .
Generally speaking , the purpose of the new regulations is to improve the situation regarding public health .
However , no clear analytical illustration of the dangers of plant diseases and weeds which pesticides are used to try and prevent has been put forward .
This is a huge drawback because in this case what is best may not be what is right .
The sustainable practice of agriculture could be set back years .
Not using pesticides is not necessarily a good option , even as far as public health is concerned .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , this is an important , complex and tricky subject that we are debating today .
Combating the pests that devour and damage crops is a necessary challenge in terms of both food security and the protection and improvement of our environment .
Sensible recourse to pesticides is therefore unavoidable .
It is essential , however , that the associated risks should be assessed in a balanced way , particularly with regard to human health , and that measures to scale down pesticide use should be properly planned .
The motion for a resolution on a Thematic Strategy is , in my view , a helpful response to the crucial questions that we face , and I should like to pay tribute to our rapporteur , Irena Belohorská , and to record my appreciation of the close cooperation that went into the drafting of the text .
Certain comments are called for : the core problem of risk management is inseparable from the question of how much pesticide is used .
The elimination of the use of toxic or extremely dangerous substances needs to be established as a firm principle .
In respect of other pesticides , we have to apply subsidiarity .
Working within a common European framework , it will be the responsibility of the Member States to set their own national targets , timetables and criteria for reducing the quantities used .
National action plans will also facilitate adaptation to particular circumstances in each country .
It is extremely important , too , to protect the aquatic environment and we must be rigorous here by establishing buffer zones fixed in accordance with local conditions .
Finally , I would point out that the system we wish to implement is a logical follow-on to the REACH directive .
With regard to pesticide quantities , the thrust of our argument should be ' as little as possible and as much as necessary ' .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , my British fellow Members sometimes use the expression ' An apple a day keeps the doctor away ' .
This is the way it should be !
Fruit and vegetables are normally healthy types of food , but unfortunately this is not always the case .
In far too many cases there are pesticide residues on fruit and vegetables and naturally this has direct negative consequences for human health .
The subject that we are concerned with here is therefore very important .
Consequently , it is very important that we use these substances in a sustainable manner , so that we can reduce their usage in those cases where we use too many pesticides .
Our nature , environment and health are being damaged , and groundwater sources may also be contaminated .
Therefore , I also believe there is reason to criticise the Commission , particularly because you , Mr Kyprianou , are known ( in my country , too ) as a man who is very concerned with consumer interests and have done a considerable amount to safeguard the environment and health .
I do not understand how you can stand here today and defend a proposal from the Commission concerning zone division that will force European countries to lower their environmental protection levels and will also force European countries to reduce their levels of consumer protection .
Allow me simply to give a couple of examples of what this will mean if we accept the proposal that you have put forward .
In Denmark around 100 types of pesticide are permitted .
We have reduced the use of pesticides by around 50 % since the beginning of the 1980s .
I am sure you will agree that this is a very sensible thing to do .
If your proposal is implemented , we will be forced to double the number of pesticides permitted in Denmark .
Double the number of pesticides !
This will probably mean that we will find it very difficult to continue drinking our groundwater untreated as we do today .
I do not view this issue purely as a national one .
I speak on behalf of the entire Socialist Group in the European Parliament and fortunately also on behalf of the vast majority who made their views clear through the vote in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
There are many examples .
In every single zone , it is of course the case that every country apart from one will be forced to approve pesticides that they do not currently approve .
Let me give an example of one crop : maize . In the UK a maize pesticide is used that contains around 15 active substances .
In Hungary 57 active substances are used , while in Poland 37 are used . However , if the Commission 's proposals are implemented every country will therefore approve pesticides that could contain up to 57 active substances .
This means that in the UK the level will be quadrupled .
It should not be the EU 's task to force countries to use more pesticides .
It will affect the environment , it will affect health and it will affect groundwater .
Surely this cannot be the intention .
I hope that you will back up what we have proposed in the Committee on the Environment ; this will also make life easier for the industry .
It is in the compromise that we have adopted in the Committee on the Environment : we will say no to the mutual obligatory approval of pesticides , but yes to the mutual obligatory approval of data .
Moreover , we are talking not only about zones , but also about data throughout Europe .
This will make life much easier for the industry .
At the same time , we are actually giving countries the right to say no if they have climatic conditions that require them to do so .
Finally , with regard to the reduction targets , I would like to say to Mr Dimas that it is unbelievably positive that we are getting rid of the most dangerous substances - substances that cause cancer , substances that affect child development , etc .
Naturally we would like to remove these substances from the market .
They are also completely unnecessary .
In addition , I think that we should go a step further and also establish a general reduction target for all substances .
Of course this should be something that is determined individually in each country , but if we simultaneously link this with the European reduction targets of around 20 % , I think we are being ambitious .
However , in spite of everything I still believe we are at a stage where it is possible .
It will be of great significance for health and the environment in Europe .
With regard to the justification that has been used by the Commission for not introducing these reduction targets , we have introduced a treatment frequency index that takes account of the points that you have otherwise emphasised .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Members of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it is true that a number of Member States have already initiated measures to reduce pesticide-related risks , but trends in pesticide use differ from one country to another .
For example , certain substances , the use of which is banned in some Member States , are none the less on sale in those states because their use is permitted in other states .
There is a clear need to harmonise the rules here in order to ensure that the same conditions apply throughout the Union .
The ALDE Group advocates strict control of pesticides , whilst recognising that their use is both a necessity and a reality .
We have a number of amendments that are intended to make the text more easily applicable , while sticking to the principle that safer or non-chemical alternatives should be encouraged .
My group is keen to focus the volume-reduction targets on dangerous substances .
We co-signed an amendment to Article 4 on national action plans , setting as the EU-wide target a 20 % reduction in frequency of application within 10 years and 50 % rates of reduction for dangerous substances by 2013 .
Some may think it paradoxical that my group has tabled a further amendment , also to Article 4 , offering Member States the option of an approach based on risk reduction .
This is , in fact , a more realistic approach but the calculations are more difficult than they are with volume reduction .
We thought it was important to put forward this amendment because the question is one that we would wish to see addressed in the interinstitutional discussions after the vote at first reading .
I should now like to consider a few specific points .
For the protection of watercourses it would seem more logical to take measures tailored to the geological environment , rather than fixing a minimum buffer-zone area .
It is legitimate to seek to protect specific living spaces such as parks , children 's playgrounds and school areas because the use of pesticides in proximity to such areas should be restricted to the minimum necessary , or indeed be prohibited , and non-chemical methods should be prioritised .
On the fraught question of aerial spraying , the European Commission 's proposal - for a ban in principal with exceptions that must be justified - made a lot of sense .
The text from the Committee on the Environment is , however , acceptable .
Whilst I understand the need to notify the public of pesticide spraying , I think it has to be left to the Member States to determine the nature and extent of the notification and the means of giving it .
We are dealing here with so many different types of terrain and so many different approaches that any attempt to standardise seems unrealistic .
The ALDE Group is thus seeking to achieve a balance , the essence of which is that no single party , whether user or manufacturer , should be penalised but rather that rigorous and consistent legislation should be introduced : allowing pesticide users to protect their crops ; allowing manufacturers to sell products that will gradually become less harmful ; and allowing consumers not only to eat safe food but also to live in a safe environment .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the three reports that have been presented are inextricably linked .
The European Union is trying to do as much as possible to reduce the negative impact of pesticides on the environment and to prevent their accumulation in the soil , in water and in plants .
A great deal has been done in the last few years to minimise these effects .
A particularly important role in this work has been played by research organisations that have created modern preparations that work more selectively .
However , we should remember that in past years the quality of pesticides was much worse , they were used in much higher doses , many times higher , and , as a result , the pollution in our environment is a consequence of activities in years past .
For this reason , in addition to the new directives , we must supplement existing legislation with a directive on the deactivation and disposal of outdated pesticides .
I would ask for your active participation in this matter since , despite the passage of some years , problems are still increasing instead of decreasing , and the risks are increasing instead of decreasing , as was shown at the last NGO forum in Kishinev .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , whilst I should like to congratulate Ms Breyer on the excellent outcome she has achieved , I cannot support those who defend the use of pesticides , because it is absolutely vital that we rid our environment and our bodies of these dangerous substances .
I hope that the European Parliament may in future support the most forward-looking positions on this question , instead of yielding to the latest siren calls from manufacturers representing a deadly industry .
Eliminating carcinogenic , mutagenic and reprotoxic pesticides , and substances that weaken our nervous and endocrine systems and damage our immune systems , is an entirely healthy aim .
We should also welcome our fellow Members ' efforts to ensure transparency in the provision of information for consumers , who are the ' innocent victims ' of these dangerous substances .
Surely , Commissioners , it is high time that action was taken ?
Never before have insecticides , fungicides and herbicides of various types been used as systematically as they are used today .
To look no further than France , a situation that can only be described as ' joint management ' of public policy on pesticides by the state and the chemical industry has succeeded thus far in marginalising ordinary people 's expectations about public and environmental health , regardless of research findings on environmental toxicity and at the expense of statistical studies if they establish links between chemical substances and pathological conditions : all this despite recent warnings from the medical profession , via the Paris Appeal for example , and the Grenelle Forum on Environment in France .
The industry is doing its utmost to play down the impact of pesticides .
Thus , after the pollution of water courses by the herbicide Atrazine , which everyone has heard about , and the decimation of bee populations , the chemical industry is trying to draw a veil over the fact that France remains the European Union 's number one pesticide user .
Every year , between 70 000 and 80 000 tonnes of pesticides are poured into our environment in France .
So , in relation to the ' pesticides package ' - unlike the REACH directive - the Members of this House will not allow themselves to be discredited .
Ordinary people expect no less of us : that is clear from the mass of correspondence we receive , calling for swift and strong action .
We hear , for example , from people highlighting the dangers of inhaling pesticides that are sprayed by vegetable growers in the south of France , and from others concerned about heavy use of herbicides in public parks and gardens , prompting some to call for pesticide-free zones .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to commend the rapporteur , Mrs Belohorská , on her report on a Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
I believe that the rapporteur succeeded in preparing a document that makes provision for , and strikes the right balance between , the need for sustainable competitive agricultural production in Europe , and promoting the use of pesticides only where there is minimum adverse effect on human health and the environment .
I welcome the fact that the report incorporates the amendment on the precautionary principle regarding human health and safeguarding of the land and water ecosystem , which I co-authored .
Like the rapporteur , Mrs Belohorská , I , too , regret that whilst the most important result to be expected from the thematic strategy is the reduction of adverse effects on human health deriving from pesticide use , the strategy deals with this heath impact only marginally .
I believe that it will be up to the Commission to complete the work in this regard in the future .
From the point of view of occupational health and safety , I welcome the points in the report that highlight the need not only for adequate information but also for appropriate protective means and regular checks of application equipment .
I believe that we have here an instrument with many concrete effective mechanisms to reduce , and improve the safety of , pesticide use .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , in the pesticides debate I have always tried to adopt a realistic and balanced position between environmental concerns on the one hand and the interests of producers and consumers on the other hand .
I should like to talk about several aspects of these reports in more detail .
One of the proposals is that the policy should be based on reducing use .
I am very sceptical about this .
You can certainly reduce the total quantity of pesticides , but often it is the most used pesticides that are the least dangerous .
In that case the risks are still more or less equal .
I am much more in favour of a policy based on reducing the risk .
The Netherlands has been operating such a policy since 2000 and it has been found to reduce the environmental risk by 86 % .
Another disadvantage of reducing use is that fewer different pesticides are available and resistance builds up more quickly .
Another point is the introduction of buffer zones around watercourses .
An amendment to create a 10-metre buffer zone has been approved in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
For a country with a lot of water like the Netherlands , that 10 metres is a problem .
It means in effect that 35 % of agricultural land cannot be sprayed .
Finally I would like to point out that it is not only a standard that is important ; enforcement is undoubtedly important .
At the moment that is lacking , as can be seen from the products intended for consumption we regularly come across that do not meet the standard , even in the European Parliament .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , as we all know , it has long been presumed that a connection exists between pesticides used in agriculture or genetically modified foodstuffs on the one hand and various diseases on the other .
When pesticides are even being found here and there in drinking water , it is undoubtedly high time to make the slow-grinding wheels of EU bureaucracy turn faster .
It remains to be seen how far we can actually go towards achieving the present aim of reducing the application of plant protection agents .
We are all familiar , of course , with ambitious aims that are not achieved in the end .
I do believe , however , that the intended replacement of carcinogenic substances is far from the great achievement it is volubly proclaimed to be ; on the contrary , it is , in my view , an immediate imperative .
In actual fact , the replacement of these substances is long overdue .
If we consider that the EU accounts for one quarter of all global pesticide use even though it possesses only 4 % of the world 's arable land , the problem becomes immediately clear .
These statistics also show that our EU support schemes have patently been steering conventional agriculture in the wrong direction .
There is , of course , a general suspicion among consumers - and it is not entirely unfounded - that resourceful farmers are trying to circumvent the prescribed ceilings with combinations of authorised plant protection products .
Given the lack of research into interaction between products , it is high time for intervention to curb such practices .
Moreover , the continual increases in maximum concentrations in recent years must be reversed in view of the greater danger posed to high-risk groups such as children .
Importing organic products from the opposite ends of the earth is not only inconsistent with various environmental objectives but is also one of the causes of increased traffic volumes and a perennial indictment of the Union 's misguided support policy .
Our support schemes should therefore be rethought , particularly with a view to providing more support for those European farmers who refrain using pesticides .
If we choose instead to go on harassing farmers with bureaucratic obstacles , no one should be surprised if they ultimately throw in the towel in frustration while Brussels is bewildered by the chronic dwindling of the farming community .
Madam President , I am tempted to say that a political pesticide to deal with the rampant weed that is EU regulation would do us all a favour .
When I look at some of these amendments and proposals , a proposal like the 10-metre rule , I detect within it a gross degree of overkill .
I think we have to face some facts .
Without controlled use of pesticides in our agriculture , we will drive more food production to less regulated regions of the world , jeopardising quality and food safety .
Perhaps of even more interest to some , without fungicides and herbicides to protect and cure disease in fine turf , many golf and bowling surfaces would become weed-infested and unplayable .
Yes , pesticides must be controlled , but our measures must be based on sound science and be practical at farm and street level .
The strident codes of practice governing the use in my country are , I believe , adequate , and therefore I will vote against those dogma-driven changes which some would wish to impose .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is a pity that representatives of the agricultural sector have not been involved in this debate , as it would have been extremely interesting , in the light of the recent CAP reform , to hear the farmers ' voice as well .
The task we face is not only to safeguard the future of farming in Europe and the quality and quantity of food production but also to promote research and to ensure that data are protected .
The greatest challenge , of course , is to protect human health and to prevent toxic products from accumulating in our water and our environment .
We must also be concerned , however , with the health of farmers and their families , who need better protection as it is they who come into direct contact with these products and the advice they receive is often the advice of the companies marketing the pesticides .
The companies are hardly likely to tell them that researchers have started asking questions about the link between exposure to pesticides and the steadily increasing incidence of certain conditions such as Parkinson 's disease , Alzheimer 's , prostate cancer , brain tumours and congenital deformities .
It will therefore be absolutely essential to establish strict rules for the placing of products on the market .
We should also encourage research through proper provision for data protection , and promote research programmes on biological means of pest control - a useful example of innovation .
At the end of the day these products should also be affordable for farmers .
My final point , Commissioner , concerns the protection of bees : the long-term evaluations provided for in Directive 91 / 414 have not been carried out .
Simply having rules and regulations is not good enough : they must be applied and systems are needed to ensure that they are applied .
I agree that the most important thing is to regulate the placing of these products on the market but I would also make the comment , Madam President , that in the course of this impassioned debate the intrusions of lobbying by the chemical industry - although infrequent - have been disgraceful .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , all the health and environmental data now available , which I do not propose to list this evening , must necessarily prompt this House to take decisive action on pesticides and their conditions of use .
It is essential that such action is based on measurable targets .
It became clear in the discussions prior to the vote in plenary that there are major differences between the Member States in both their practice and their policy approach , so we ended up compromising on certain issues and relying on subsidiarity .
I hope we shall not be deceived here by subsidiarity , for it will entail flexibility that could easily become a pretext for watering down our policies to a very minimal expression of the political and public will being voiced here today , particularly on the issues of exposure to risks and the extent of the buffer zones beside watercourses .
If subsidiarity is to be meaningful in relation to pesticides , it must encourage more comprehensive thinking about the agricultural and environmental issues in each European region .
That will mean stepping up research and the transfer of technologies ; involving all the stakeholders , including farmers , researchers , NGOs , health professionals and representatives of the food industry ; and carrying out thorough research in each geographical area , jointly identifying best practices and non-chemical alternatives that are suited to the soil , the climate and the crops .
There are a few regions in which this work is already being done .
I therefore propose that the Commission should encourage the introduction of such an approach and should facilitate inter-regional exchanges of experience , whilst at the same time ensuring that European laws are properly applied .
( DE ) Madam President , many of my fellow Members believe we need strict rules for dealing with plant protection agents , and they are right , but at the same time we must not ignore the impact of the legislation we adopt .
The fact is that plant protection products are an important element of modern-day agriculture .
Take the example of the regulation on authorisation .
We are in the process of banning entire clusters of active substances on the basis of exclusion criteria , simply because of an abstract notion of hazardousness .
This approach ignores the actual risk involved in applying these agents down on the farm .
It leads us to ban active substances which do not pose any problem at all in practice .
As a result , not enough active substances will be available in future to combat pests properly .
If only a few active substances are used , resistance to pesticides will develop more quickly .
There will be no reliable means left to deal with many pest problems .
And these are probably the new heights to which Mrs Breyer just referred .
When that stage is reached , the security of Europe 's food supply will plumb new depths .
Instead of imposing blanket bans we should be providing for a reliable licensing procedure that examines the actual risk involved in the use of each substance .
The next example relates to the strategic approach to this issue , in which we argue for an across-the-board Europe-wide reduction target for the use of plant protection products .
That , however , has nothing at all to do with the risks involved in their use .
The Commission had set targets for reducing the actual risk .
That is a good idea , and we should retain it .
When all is said and done , we should focus on what is feasible , namely efficient pest control coupled with proper risk management .
After all , it is also a matter of establishing how the growing need for raw vegetable materials is to be met in future .
In the past innovative plant protection products have helped to make production grow faster than demand for arable land .
Our aim for the future should not be to reverse this situation .
- ( LT ) I do not think you could find a single person in this House , in this Parliament , who would claim that ecology , a healthy environment and human health was not important .
I do not believe that any European citizen would ever say that .
However , ladies and gentlemen , while making decisions , talking about legislation and making and implementing rules that hundreds of thousands of people would have to adhere to and that would no doubt have an impact on the lives of millions of people , we cannot base our decisions on emotions and good intentions .
We need to achieve this objective in a balanced and sensible way .
One of the key objectives set out for the EU agricultural sector is to supply good quality food at affordable prices .
The EU is known for the high standards of food production and strict farming regulations it lays down for its Member States .
On the other hand , there is constant pressure on EU agriculture to be competitive as well as to produce good quality food .
We are in no position to ignore these factors when discussing plant protection regulations .
The opinion expressed by the Commission and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has satisfied the expectations of all interested parties .
Nevertheless , the amendments proposed , or those introduced at the time of the discussion in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , have raised serious concerns .
If these amendments are accepted , the consequences could be unpredictable .
They pose risks not only for agriculture and the food industry , but also for nature itself .
Does it mean that genetically modified organisms will enter the EU market ?
The impact on traditional crops would be huge if 90 % of plant protection products were excluded from the market .
Ladies and gentlemen , once again I urge you to base your decision on sound scientific evidence and good practice , not on rumours and emotions .
I hope that your vote will reflect the opinion of all interested parties and that the outcome will be balanced and correct , so that agriculture is not destroyed , EU citizens are not left without European food and millions of people do not end up unemployed in the name of environmental protection .
( DA ) Madam President , early tomorrow morning I am going to the grocer 's to buy bottled drinking water .
In many countries people do this because the groundwater sources have been contaminated by pollution .
The water is subject to chemical treatment as if it were a dirty coat .
Then it is chlorinated and tastes as bad as it is expensive .
In Denmark we have a rich vein of gold underground : clean groundwater .
We drink it directly as drinking water without first sending it to a water treatment works .
It is healthier than bottled water , it tastes better and it is much , much cheaper .
However , this also means that we must watch over it and prohibit pesticide sprays in cases where the pesticide could enter the groundwater .
Therefore , Denmark prohibits 13 types of pesticide sprays , 12 of which are found in drinking water .
This is something that we would like to continue with and I therefore request that my fellow Members vote in favour of an amendment to permit protection zones .
We have already had the proposal adopted in previous regulations ; these must now be repeated in order to prevent them from being annulled .
Finally , we have received support from a large majority here in Parliament and subsequently from the President of the Commission , José Manuel Barroso .
Thank you !
We have received no support from the Danish Commissioner for Agriculture , who , together with the Danish Minister for Food , Agriculture and Fisheries ( also from the Danish Liberal Party ( Venstre ) ) , would rather support the farmers ' opportunity to ruin our drinking water .
It is sad that the Danish Agricultural Council would rather support Venstre .
It is very short-sighted to pursue slightly higher corn yields and then have to pay billions of kroner in order to purify the groundwater .
The Treaty states that polluters themselves will pay .
I have proposed this in an amendment and I request that my fellow Members support the requirements of the Treaty .
No-one has the right to poison our common earth and drinking water .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioners , the proposal for a regulation drawn up by the European Commission to replace Directive 91 / 414 / CE achieves greater harmonisation of authorisation procedures while at the same time providing for consumer protection .
However , the result obtained in the Environment Committee not only fails to have regard to the objective of greater harmonisation but unjustifiably overhauls measures aimed at protecting the consumer and the environment .
The report is based on a total lack of faith in the existing methods of agricultural production in the European Union .
Farmers , however , are not the only ones who will suffer : consumers are likely to suffer as well , because many crops will become unviable , making imports necessary , with a knock-on effect for food security .
Insufficient consideration has been given to the fact that the approval and use of plant protection products is already subject to strict controls , both by the European Food Safety Authority and by the competent authorities of the Member States .
Moreover , this proposal changes the number of active substances from 1 100 as authorised in 1991 , to 148 , which are listed in Annex I to this proposal .
Of those 148 substances , only 34 are insecticides , nematocides or acaricides , which are the substances most needed for cultivation in Mediterranean Europe where the level of attack by insects is the highest in the entire Union .
Insects are not only a menace to plants , but are also transmitters of very serious human illnesses .
The Commission proposal to divide the European Union into three zones for the mutual recognition of plant protection products should be reinstated .
Criteria for precluding pesticides must be based on proper risk analyses .
Without a risk analysis it is impossible to determine the effect of these substances on health or the environment .
Finally , I would like to point out that the dose makes the poison .

( FR ) Madam President , I have been stressing the importance of this evening 's debate because what we have at stake here today is nothing less than our vision of Europe 's farming future and the need to move away from intensive agriculture that clearly causes too much pollution , towards sustainable agriculture that will respect biodiversity .

This is a challenge to which Europe must rise for three reasons : firstly , as more scandals and more health risks are uncovered , public opinion is now set against the use of pesticides ; secondly the majority of farmers themselves want the European Union to help them change their practices so that they no longer have to choose between keeping their health and boosting their profitability ; and thirdly , bee-keepers all over Europe are calling for strict legislation to stop the sale of pesticides that have not been evaluated for their impact on bees .
It is therefore vital that the ambitious stance taken by the Committee on the Environment should be confirmed in tomorrow 's vote on the three reports by Hiltrud Breyer , Christa Klaß and Irena Belohorská .
We must confirm that health and the environment are foremost ; that specific measures are needed to protect those most vulnerable to harm ; that the most dangerous substances will be covered by the precautionary principle ; that the use of non-chemical alternatives will indeed be encouraged ; and that aerial spraying will henceforth be banned in principle .
In short , we must translate into practical action the concerns voiced by the very many men and women in Europe who - as Mrs Isler-Béguin has mentioned - have written to us urging that farming should not in future be dependent on chemicals .
( PL ) Madam President , the use of plant protection products - pesticides - is essential in certain circumstances .
In Poland there is a preponderance of small agricultural holdings , where the owners , due to insufficient finance , economise on expensive pesticides and this sometimes results in losses as a result of pests .
I am in favour of all actions to encourage the rational use of plant protection products , including advice , training , research , subsidies for modern plant protection equipment , the introduction of substitute products that help to protect the environment and health and that are compatible with farmers ' interests , instead of the use of pesticides .
Where there is a risk that the harvest might be lost , ignorance and the lack of proper assistance to farmers can lead to the uncontrolled use of pesticides .
A problem that has been with us for a long time , but which has not yet been fully resolved , is the issue of the disposal of dumps of highly toxic pesticides that exist or existed in the countries of the former Soviet bloc , as well as the recultivation of soil .
They are poisoning both the water and the soil .
This baggage could reduce the effectiveness of the measures prepared in these documents .
( PL ) Madam President , producers who are being forced to create food that looks perfect are introducing pesticides that are harmful not just to the environment and to the economy , but also to human health .
I hope that the documents under discussion will lead to an improvement in the quality of food consumed and will encourage more organic production methods , with greater use of natural fertilisers to nurture the soil .
In addition , as regards the unscrupulous and unethical practice of exporting substances known to be harmful to third world countries , I would quote a popular proverb from Poland : ' Do as you would be done by ' .
This is even more important because the dangerous pesticides come back to us in the form of foodstuffs that are purchased cheaply by wealthy countries and destroy people 's health .
In addition to the general guidelines , strategies for the sustainable use of pesticides should be developed at national level , where appropriate action can be taken .
Reductions in the quantity of plant protection products should be greater in areas where more pesticides are used .
( SK ) I highly value the fact that all three reports require the personnel involved in all phases of pesticide handling to be highly qualified .
Action plans , integrated management and strict import measures : these are also examples of what is positive in all the reports .
However , both the bans on aerial application and , alternatively , the situations where aerial application would be possible must be articulated precisely , using clear wording .
Similarly , the notion of a quantitative use reduction is not clearly defined and opens the door to many risks because of its non-selective application .
For example , the Slovak Republic applies on average less than 1 kg of pesticides per hectare while other countries apply as much as 8 kg .
This means that there are countries where pesticide use must be genuinely reduced and countries where pesticide use should even be increased .
This is why I suggest that when voting we should take into account the recommendations of the European Crop Protection Association or alternatively , at first reading , not adopt reports and and keep the balanced recommendations of the Commission .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , it is time for us to give shape to the thematic strategy for sustainable use of pesticides and it is also a good idea for us to put some of it into effect immediately .
In view of the considerable impact on food quality , public health , the environment and the sustainability of our farming - all matters of concern - our whole group , as well as our rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , have devoted a great deal of time to this package .
I should like to mention four points in particular .
Firstly , a further reduction in pesticide use is sensible .
This must then actually create less of an impact on the environment and for that reason we are against merely reducing the quantity used .
We want a reduction in the actual impact , based on a scientific risk evaluation .
Secondly , we take a similar view on non-spray zones around watercourses .
Here again we are in favour of a risk-based approach and we feel that the Member States are better able than we are to make responsible choices , based partly on the criteria laid down in the water framework directive .
Thirdly , I wonder why this Parliament , which is after all an advocate of an internal market with a high degree of protection for the consumer , health and the environment , would oppose a first step towards harmonisation in this area .
We are in favour of the idea of zones with internal mutual recognition proposed by the Commission and would also like to see voluntary mutual recognition between zones .
Finally , we are opposed to the general provision of information to neighbours advocated by Mrs Breyer in her report .
Not only is that information unnecessary for a strictly regulated activity , it also causes unnecessary anxiety and frustration .
Surely the aim cannot be to move towards a sort of private enforcement .
That is a society we do not want and do not support .
( PL ) Madam President , today 's debate is of enormous significance for European agriculture and for environmental protection .
There are many people in favour of the use of pesticides and many who are opposed .
However , I believe that the farmers ' guiding principle should be : ' as few pesticides as possible , just those that are essential ' , and the guiding principle of producers and distributors should be the precautionary principle , which should be the supreme principle as regards the lives and the health of consumers in every case where the introduction of new pesticides raises concerns , either because there is some ambivalence in the results of scientific research , or if there has been insufficient time to be able to say categorically that a given product or substance is harmless to humans and animals .
In the context of sustainable use of pesticides , I believe that the following steps should be taken : first of all , the Commission as well as Member States should provide periodic training , and advisory and educational programmes that are financed at least in part by companies that manufacture pesticides .
There should be coordinated monitoring and data collection with regard to the harmful effects of pesticides on human health and the environment , and this should include long-term research programmes and the imposition of sanctions on polluters .
A coordinated system should be set up to collect data on the production , import , export , sales , distribution and use of pesticides , and this should be accessible to the public .
Agricultural practices that promote the use of low doses of pesticides should be encouraged , which will help change the overall usage of these preparations .
Appropriate checks should be introduced and the import into the EU of agricultural food products produced with the aid of chemicals should be banned .
( NL ) Madam President , plant protection products are still essential for agricultural production and food supplies in Europe .
The big question when we in Europe take particular measures is what kind of influence this has on competitive relations with the rest of the world .
If we are too strict in Europe and cannot impose the same rules on the rest of the world , that means that we in Europe can consume products that we are unable to produce here , which seems wrong to me .
Of course it is always essential for us to continue evaluating the harmful effects , but we cannot overdo it .
I agree with everyone who says that we should concentrate on the risk and not on reducing the quantity .
The 10-metre buffer zones will also be disastrous for the Netherlands and others and should be left out of the regulation .
Finally , information to neighbours .
If something is approved , why should the neighbours also be informed ?
That is completely unnecessary regulation .
Madam President , UK pesticides were tightly controlled in 1985 .
Firms like Syngenta say that farmers should not be denied the tools they need .
These regulations move us away from the principle of good , science-based regulation .
For example , pavement weed control is 400 times more expensive without chemicals .
The golf and field sports industry says that without pesticides it is not possible to maintain the turf .
The Crop Protection Agency says that banning pesticides means between 65 % and 200 % more land under cultivation , reducing productivity .
Corbett Farms say that this year has shown the value of spraying to prevent potato blight .
Pesticides are expensive and the lowest amount is used to protect our crop .
Decisions on how and when to spray must be taken on an individual field basis .
An arbitrary reduction in use cannot be scientifically based .
Madam President , please eradicate the EU 's pestilent regulations .
UKIP will vote against .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by expressing my thanks to the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs .
It goes without saying that all of us care deeply about health and consumer protection , and the strength of feeling among the various Members of our House can be gauged from this highly charged debate .
It is nevertheless important that we really do decide on the basis of the facts and do not fly in the face of reality by creating scapegoats , as it were .
It would be very easy , especially with this legislative package , to pick on a particular occupational group and look no further .
That would be completely wrong .
It must be established from the outset that all of us in Europe need a functioning agricultural sector , which necessarily entails the use of a certain quantity of plant protection agents .
On specific aspects of the Klaß report , let me say that it is indeed a sound principle to envisage certain reduction targets , but I believe the quantitative approach adopted here is simply too rigid .
Every Member State should truly consider what it can do itself , because merely reducing the overall volume and believing this will clean up the environment is downright unscientific .
As far as the buffer strips are concerned , there is nothing wrong with the Commission 's chosen strategy of treating subsidiarity as the key element .
Every Member State should consider how it wants these buffer strips regulated .
Blindly imposing a Community-wide ten-metre border would be wrong .
Trying to find non-chemical alternatives in sensitive areas , such as habitats of rare flora and fauna , is also an approach that should be supported unreservedly .
As regards the Breyer report , it is important that we support the three-zone concept .
Restricting the scope of licences to single Member States would be an excessively narrow approach .
Special care is needed with regard to the exclusion criteria .
An unequivocal ban for CMR1-rated substances may be taken as read , but in the case of CMR2 substances I am also in favour of taking scientific data as a basis for licensing decisions .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the legislative proposal which we will be asked to vote on aims to achieve a high level of protection of human health and the environment by establishing Community models for the sustainable use of pesticides and rules for placing them on the European market .
I believe that by supporting the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety 's proposal to reduce pesticide use by 20 % in Europe , we are sending out a strong message .
We must strengthen checks on the rational use of pesticides , and , most importantly , promote research into safer alternative methods of plant protection .
At the same time , the proposal for abolition of the system of zones and mandatory mutual licensing is a balanced position .
In view of the concerns of farmers and industry , it seeks to enable Member States who so wish to implement higher levels of environmental protection in line with their local conditions .
Finally , let me mention the special need to protect secondary use .
I call on you , ladies and gentlemen , to support the proposal to create a European fund for the promotion of research .
We will thus guarantee the prosperity of farmers and maintain our special national products , which are part of European agricultural tradition and significantly boost the European agricultural economy .
Madam President , thank you for the opportunity to say a few words on these three reports .
Firstly , I believe that we in Europe need to be in a position whereby we can produce European crops and European fruit and vegetables that are safe for human consumption .
However , we need to achieve that objective in a balanced way and in a common-sense way , so that we protect human health without penalising agriculture .
What we do not want is to put restrictions in place that impact negatively on European agriculture and to end up having to import huge quantities of food with all the implications for food miles , and , of course , with little control over the quantities of pesticides used in the production of that imported food .
Secondly , I support the proposal for a risk-based assessment , which is based on science and will prove workable for Member States .
Finally , I believe a 10-metre buffer zone is a ' one size fits all ' solution and needs to be modified to allow Member States to take local conditions into consideration .
As I said earlier , not even the European Parliament can legislate for climatic conditions and soil conditions throughout the entire continent .
( FI ) Madam President , the Thematic Strategy and Framework Directive on plant protection products are challenging legislative projects and are a reflection of the fundamental challenge that EU environmental policy faces , which is how to combine the protection of the environment with that of health effectively in a policy which takes account of social realities
We need to recognise that the use of plant protection products and pesticides has major economic benefits .
The expert use of these substances is , to be honest , a crucial prerequisite for food production in the modern age .
At the same time , however , the adverse impact of plant production products on the environment , and on watercourses in particular , is a very real one .
How , then , can we use these substances in a way which still allows us to benefit from pesticides but which at the same time reduces the adverse effects ?
I come from a country where farming is a respected occupation and where domestic agriculture is regarded as important .
On the other hand , the environment is particularly fragile .
For example , Finland has almost 200 000 lakes , hundreds of thousands of other watercourses , and one of the world 's most polluted seas .
Diffuse water pollution is an immense environmental problem , and plant protection products are part of that problem .
It is a challenging equation and so it is only right that the directive should take the differences between Member States into consideration .
Obviously , we need certain EU-wide standards , but the remedies applied in Finland cannot be the same as those in Luxembourg , say .
Therefore , reason and environmental concerns dictate that we should concentrate on the targets and leave the means to the Member States themselves .
A good example of this is the ' buffer zones ' , which undoubtedly have an important part to play in the protection of watercourses .
I am confident that buffer zones suited to each situation and consistent with the Commission 's proposals are the right way forward .
If we now decide upon precisely measured limits , applying the ' one size fits all ' principle , there is a real danger that in many countries they will be jumping out of the frying pan into the fire .
Perhaps I should say , rather , that they would not be addressing the problem flexibly or satisfactorily .
( DA ) Madam President , there are some misunderstandings in some of the statements from our fellow members here today .
Therefore , I am glad to be able to speak for a second time .
There are three misunderstandings .
The first concerns a reduction target : some fellow members are saying that this is simply not possible .
There are differences between the countries and it is not possible to create a common European reduction target .
No , this cannot be done !
Nor is this what we are doing .
What we are doing is saying that the common European reduction target should be 20 % . However , this may of course mean 30 % in some countries and 10 % in others .
The national reduction target will be established on the basis of national action plans .
Therefore , it is a misunderstanding to fear this item .
A key element is that we are taking account of the fact that a gram of one pesticide can sometimes be more dangerous than an entire kilogram of another pesticide .
Therefore , we have introduced a treatment frequency index as part of this reduction obligation .
I can well imagine that the Commission will also have something to say about this when you , Mr Dimas , are able to speak again in a little while .
The second misunderstanding concerns the zones .
There is a belief that if we do not have the zones it will almost be an insult to the internal market .
No , on the contrary !
By ending this foolish idea about zones and saying that we will gradually introduce mutual data sharing we are saying that the entire EU is a zone within which we share data .
However , it is clear that we cannot talk about mutual obligatory recognition of pesticides simply because there are different geographical , climatic and environmental circumstances in each individual country .
I think that almost everyone in this House who has spoken today will be in agreement on this point .
The third fundamental misunderstanding is that it will destroy the competitiveness of agriculture .
No !
In Denmark we have reduced the use of pesticides by 50 % since the 1980s without any effect on agricultural competitiveness .
Pesticides are expensive to use and therefore , provided they are used correctly , the less they are used the better it is for competitiveness .
( SV ) Madam President , time is short and I am speaking primarily to express my support for the co-rapporteur of the Breyer report in the PPE-DE Group , Erna Hennicot-Schoepges .
I think it is very unfortunate that the majority of my group chose to ignore Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges ' advice on several important points , and not to support important proposals contained in the report .
Of course , I agree that the requirement to provide information 48 hours before spraying is impractical and would not work , but it is not reasonable to conclude that we do not need any information requirement at all .
Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges ' proposal here , as a compromise , is well-balanced .
Another important issue is the cut-off criteria for particularly sensitive substances .
Above all , in our decision we must of course be consistent with the decisions taken by Parliament in relation to the new REACH chemicals legislation .
One of the fundamental principles there was to phase out substances where it is difficult to establish thresholds for risks in the case of high-level concern substances .
Obviously we must also follow that line here , particularly as we are dealing with substances that come into contact or are liable to come into contact with things we eat .
Another issue on which I support the rapporteur , Mrs Breyer , is the proposal on zoning .
When I saw the Commission 's proposal , I immediately found it interesting to try to divide Europe into zones that are relatively similar in terms of vegetation conditions , climate and so on .
However , the proposed zoning is unfortunately too arbitrary .
I cannot support this approach and believe that the Member States must be allowed to retain a right to refuse different preparations even if countries nearby have given them the green light .
I would like to address other issues , but my time is over .
( NL ) Mr President , when I walk out of my village I am in the middle of a unique agricultural area , the green heart between big cities like Amsterdam , Rotterdam and Utrecht .
It is still green farming land at the moment , but the 10-metre buffer zone proposed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety would make it virtually impossible to farm in the area , when it is specifically farming that keeps the area green .
Last week I put it to the test , but I was hardly able to find any pieces of land between the many ditches that were 20 metres wide .
Anyone who knows a bit about the Netherlands knows that it is not only in the green heart that this is true .
It is a characteristic of Dutch farming that there are many ditches between pastureland .
That means that , with 10-metre buffer zones , the Netherlands would lose 800 000 hectares of its farmland , 35 % of agricultural area .
I am therefore asking Members not to support this proposal , also in view of the agricultural production that is necessary in Europe and the world , as the chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has said .
That does not actually mean that I do not agree with the aim of protecting nature and public health .
We all share that ambition .
I just think it can be better achieved with an approach based on risk analysis and risk reduction .
The alternative , reducing use , certainly sounds nice and simple - a 20 % reduction overall - but it does not provide the best protection for the consumer because it can be looked at only in terms of quantities and not the final effect , the final risk .
In that context , I actually find it difficult to understand the painful contortions of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , which is in favour of a 20 % overall reduction as well as a risk approach .
I have two final points .
All I will say about the licensing system is that three climate zones are preferable to 27 Member States , obviously taking national circumstances into account .
Finally , I would ask the Commission not to overlook minor crops in all these major areas of dispute .
( FR ) Madam President , pesticide residues are now everywhere : in food , in water , in the air , in our body tissue and breast milk and - most frighteningly of all - in the bodies of our unborn children .
We are only just beginning to glimpse the long-term consequences of this omnipresence of pesticide residues : they include various forms of cancer , endocrine disorders , reduced male fertility , damage to our immune systems , and degenerative diseases of the nervous system .
So , yes and yes again : let us reduce pesticide use and let us reduce it quickly . I fully support the proposals made by my colleague Mrs Hennicot on the Breyer report and , in the interests of saving time , I will highlight a further point which I consider vital and which has been discussed in the PPE Group - namely notification of people living near areas that are to be treated with pesticides .
I believe that a section of our group is being unreasonable in recommending that no such notification is required , on the pretext that if the substances to be applied have prior approval it means they are not harmful .
Aerial spraying is commonplace , particularly in forests and vineyards .
It entails a risk of substances being carried into inhabited or sensitive areas , so it must be strictly regulated .
It is essential that growers should issue advance warning of pesticide spraying to people who live close by and are thus potentially exposed .
People suffering from respiratory conditions such as asthma could be severely affected if they have no advance notice of such spraying .
Conveying and presenting the information need not imply any additional administrative burden on farmers , as some of my fellow Members have suggested .
Simple notices , stating the intended dates of the spraying , placed close to human habitation in the areas at risk , may be all that is needed .
I would like to conclude by urging that it is time to move on to a new generation of agricultural practices that respect the environment and thus play a part in modernising the farming sector .
( PL ) Madam President , the key to the sustainable use of pesticides is rational risk reduction .
We should achieve this objective by implementing the guidelines in the directive on the sustainable use of pesticides .
Each country will be obliged to prepare its own plan in accordance with the guidelines given in the directive .
Each country should be able to do this , taking into account local conditions and differences .
We differ , primarily , in the level of agricultural development , I repeat : the level of agricultural development .
Those countries that are new members of the European Union often have enormous work to do to catch up as regards the level of development .
A reduction in the use of pesticides in these countries , as compared with the present level of their use , will , in the final analysis , work against us as consumers , unless , in reducing their use , we take into account the present level of use of these products , which is relatively low .
Our landscape is different , too .
In Poland enormous areas of woodland can be protected against pests only by spraying from the air .
It is a duty to the natural environment to protect these forests , and it is Parliament 's responsibility to set out guidelines for the safe use of products that protect the natural environment .
The directive speaks a great deal about the farmer 's level of knowledge being the most important factor for the implementation of sustainable use of pesticides .
It is the responsibility of us all to support education and to create the conditions so that this information can reach every farmer .
In tabling an amendment concerning temporary national allowances for pesticides I am speaking in favour of the mechanism for exchanging older preparations for modern and safer ones as quickly as is possible .
I would ask for your support .
The guidelines in the directive should encourage rational measures and they should not discourage Member States and farmers .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , I thank the speakers in tonight 's sitting for their positive remarks .
Permit me to set out briefly the Commission 's views on certain important issues that have been raised .
Let me begin with the thematic strategy and , in particular , with the points not covered by the directive .
First of all , I am pleased that the report supports the thematic strategy for the sustainable use of pesticides .
The proposal to bring in new legislation to deal with the risky of pesticide use is particularly good .
I agree with how important more research is into the impact of the combined and cumulative use of pesticides on health .
In my opinion , the principle of substitution is vital ; it removes the most hazardous substances from the market and replaces them with safer alternative solutions , some of which are non-chemical .
Finally , the Belohorská report adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety puts forward certain additional measures which are especially positive .
Let me now turn specifically to the framework directive .
Many of the amendments adopted by the European Parliament make useful clarifications and can be accepted .
Other amendments , however , are liable to bring about undesired results .
I should like first of all to comment on the basic amendments which the Commission can fully accept in principle or in part .
The Commission partially accepts the proposal that Member States set up individual targets in their own national action plans for the restriction of the use of the most hazardous pesticides .
Indeed , setting up such targets is consistent with the directive 's general aim to reduce the risk of using pesticides .
Laying down an overall , permanent target for the reduction of pesticide use at EU level , however , in addition to national targets , is not necessary and is therefore not endorsed by the Commission .
In fact , the overall reduction of the quantity of pesticides does not necessarily entail a corresponding reduction in risk : the level of risk varies from one substance to another .
Thus action to limit risk must focus , in the main , on the most harmful substances .
The Commission can in principle accept the laying down of a minimum width for the buffer zones to be created in fields located next to water courses , because this will bring additional environmental gains .
Imposing a limit of 10 metres , however , indiscriminately and in all cases , does not seem appropriate .
The Commission would prefer Member States to have a margin of flexibility and set the appropriate width for buffer zones in line with their own geographical features .
The Commission can also accept certain useful clarifications on other issues , such as technical training and certification .
There are , however , amendments which the Commission cannot endorse .
Firstly , the Commission is convinced that mandatory adherence to common general rules on integrated pest management by professional pesticide users is a fundamental measure to reduce dependence on pesticides .
It is of important environmental benefit throughout the EU and will contribute to the development of a sustainable and competitive agriculture sector .
I cannot , therefore , accept the elimination under Amendment 86 of this exceptionally important measure contained in the European Commission 's proposal .
Secondly , the European Commission agrees to take measures to protect populations living close to fields where aerial spraying is carried out .
Nevertheless , it considers that a complete ban on the use of pesticides in so-called ' sensitive ' areas is disproportionate .
We must leave some discretion to Member States and local authorities .
If this it ever necessary , and in exceptional , rare cases , when only the use of pesticides are effective , they must be allowed to deal with risks to human health or biodiversity .
Thirdly , although the Commission has committed itself to looking into extending the directive 's scope of application to biocides , such a decision requires careful study , as well as the implementation of certain aspects of the directive on pesticides .
When more data is made available to us through the revision programme envisaged in the directive on biocides , we will be able better to deal with the use of biocides .
Fourthly , the Commission cannot support the addition of a reference to Article 152 ( 4 ) of the Treaty , since the proposed directive is clearly focused on environmental protection , which already includes public health issues .
Fifthly , although the imposition of taxes and contributions complies with the ' polluter pays ' principle , there is no effective system at the moment for differentiating tax rates according to the risk posed by each pesticide .
For this reason the Commission prefers that taxes and contributions should be imposed at Community level not at the present stage but until such a time as a study has been carried out into the issue .
Madam President , the Commission can accept 121 amendments of the 166 that were tabled ; of these it can accept 25 fully and 96 in principle or in part .
I am lodging with Parliament 's secretariat a full list of the Commission 's positions on the amendments .
Let me once again to thank all those who have contributed to this evening 's debate and in particular the rapporteurs for their work .
Thank you for your attention .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , let me begin by reminding Members of the EU 's current fundamental policy to promote and support healthy eating .
Fruit and vegetables are certainly a very important in a healthy diet .
It is very important to take this on board .
We have thus two aims today .
We need to guarantee fruit and vegetable production and this is a golden opportunity for production and to support of agriculture .
Secondly , we must ensure that fruit and vegetables are safe for consumption .
We believe that the Commission 's proposal succeeds in tackling this dual challenge in a balanced fashion .
I have followed the debate by all the MEPs with considerable interest .
The arguments put forward are serious and we will take them properly into account .
Owing to the pressure of time , I do not want to enlarge on all the issues .
Let me just touch on two or three which I believe are very important and have been raised today .
Firstly , on the subject of protecting vulnerable groups , I agree that we need to protect them , and this has been taken into account in the proposed regulation .
We are also willing to accept the amendment to the included definition of vulnerable groups , simply because it guarantees their even greater protection .
One comment I should like to make , although not directly connected with the subject under discussion , is on imported products : I stress that they are also monitored for pesticide residues thanks to another regulation on the maximum permissible levels of pesticide residues .
We have inspection rules guaranteeing consumer protection for imports too .
More generally , approval criteria are a very important part of the legislation .
Indeed , the proposal 's main aim is to protect the health of citizens and the environment .
This is of great importance and we should not forget it .
The proposed approval criteria are necessary to achieve this aim , so the Commission cannot accept any deviation from them .
It is obvious from the debate and from some of the amendments that the European Parliament also shares these aims .
Certain amendments would even strengthen these criteria .
The Commission is of the view that the proposed criteria ought to ensure a high level of protection without making plant protection unworkable or dysfunctional .
Consequently , the Commission will not be able to accept amendments which could undermine these criteria .
I come finally to the controversial subject of mutual recognition , which is brought about by dovetailing the different zones in this sector .
I believe that our proposal has been somewhat misconstrued .
First of all , let me remind you that the new proposal will introduce stricter criteria , to be implemented on a zonal basis .
We should bear this in mind , for it will ensure higher levels of protection for health and the environment. let us at the same time strive towards a single , market , internal market , thus avoiding the anomaly of a single market for agricultural products on the one hand , and a divided market for plant protection products on the other .
If we bear in mind particular features relating to climate and soil , division into separate zones is inevitable .
The issue is not , however , so simple and clear cut , hence I have predicted a possible misunderstanding .
Whereas Member States might act to protect themselves and on the other hand , during the decision-making procedure which needs the approval of the first Member State of the zone , experts from other Member States will be able to play an active part in the licensing procedure and by doing so will be able to assess the circumstances for the entire zone .
In other words , the decision will not be taken in isolation and unilaterally by a Member State belonging to the zone , but representatives of the other Member States in that zone will participate through this procedure .
They will be able to present their views and to persuade others of the particular conditions prevailing in their countries .
Let me single out water protection .
This is also a sensitive point which has been raised by a number of MEPs .
The proposal accounts for the need to protect water resources and especially the Framework Directive on Water Policy .
If it is clear from the risk assessment that under the proposed terms of use the permissible limits be exceeded in vulnerable areas , the Member State involved can and must reject the use of pesticides in that particular area .
Furthermore , if the Member State can prove that all its soil is a vulnerable area , it has the option not to approve the product in question at all .
Therefore , the special features and the need to protect water resources are taken clearly into account in the new regulation 's proposed procedure .
For this reason , the Commission , while appreciating the comments made , would not be able to accept amendments relating to the system of approval on a zonal basis .
As I have said , there are over 250 amendments , and there is no time to analyse them in detail .
I see that we still have a difference of opinions , but I anticipate that the procedure and debate will enable us to find common ground .
Klass report
The Commission can accept Amendments 2 , 3 , 6 , 17 , 26 , 49 , 52 , 53 , 60 , 61 , 66 , 68 , 76 , 94 , 95 , 97 , 103 , 105 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 109 , 111 , 115 and 117 .
The Commission can accept in principle or in part Amendments 4 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 27 , 31 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 38 , 39 , 42 , 43 , 44 , 45 , 47 , 48 , 50 , 51 , 54 , 56 , 59 , 62 , 63 , 64 , 65 , 67 , 70 , 71 , 74 , 75 , 78 , 79 , 80 , 81 , 82 , 83 , 85 , 87 , 90 , 92 , 93 , 100 , 101 , 110 , 112 , 113 , 114 , 116 , 118 , 119 , 122 , 126 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 133 , 134 , 135 , 136 , 137 , 140 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 144 , 145 , 146 , 147 , 148 , 149 , 150 , 151 , 152 , 153 , 154 , 155 , 156 , 160 , 163 , 164 and 165 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , 5 , 16 , 22 , 23 , 28 , 29 , 30 , 32 , 37 , 40 , 41 , 46 , 55 , 57 , 58 , 69 , 72 , 73 , 77 , 84 , 86 , 88 , 89 , 91 , 96 , 98 , 99 , 102 , 104 , 120 , 121 , 123 , 124 , 125 , 127 , 132 , 138 , 139 , 157 , 158 , 159 , 161 and 162 .
The Commission reserves its position on Amendment 166 .
Breyer report
The Commission can accept , or accept subject to rewording , Amendments 9 , 11 , 20 , 22 , 26 , 29 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 36 , 41 , 43 , 45 , 49 , 51 , 56 , 57 , 64 , 67 , 75 , 78 , 79 , 82 , 84 , 92 , 93 , 96 , 102,107 , 112 , 114 , 119 , 124 , 130 , 131 , 140 , 145 , 153 , 155 , 156 , 157 , 159 , 160 , 167 , 170 , 181 , 184 , 190 , 195 , 196 , 197 , 201 , 203 , 206 , 212 , 213 , 215 , 217 , 220 , 254 , 258 , 274 , 282 , 283 , 286 and 301 .
The Commission can accept Amendments 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 10 , 14 , 18 , 19 , 21 , 24 , 25 , 27 , 34 , 39 , 46 , 50 , 53 , 54 , 59 , 61 , 62 , 63 , 66 , 76 , 77 , 80 , 87 , 89 , 94 , 95 , 98 , 99 , 100 , 108 , 109 , 115 , 116 , 121 , 122 , 123 , 133 , 134 , 136 , 149 , 163 , 169 , 175 , 176 , 177 , 180 , 183 , 188 , 189 , 193 , 199 , 209 , 218 , 225 , 233 , 243 , 244 , 248 , 251 , 252 , 268 , 279 , 284 , 290 , 296 , 297 , 300 , 302 and 305 , in principle or in part .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 8 , 12 , 13 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 23 , 28 , 30 , 35 , 37 , 38 , 40 , 42 , 44 , 47 , 48 , 52 , 55 , 58 , 60 , 65 , 68 , 69 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 73 , 74 , 81 , 83 , 85 , 86 , 88 , 90 , 91 , 97 , 101 , 103 , 104 , 105 , 106 , 110 , 111 , 113 , 117 , 118 , 120 , 125 , 126 , 127 , 128 , 129 , 132 , 135 , 137 , 138 , 139 , 141 , 142 , 143 , 144 , 146 , 147 , 148 , 150 , 151 , 152 , 154 , 158 , 161 , 162 , 164 , 165 , 166 , 168 , 171 , 172 , 173 , 174 , 178 , 179 , 182 , 185 , 186 , 187 , 191 , 192 , 194 , 198 , 200 , 202 , 204 , 205 , 207 , 208 , 210 , 211 , 214 , 216 , 219 , 221 , 222 , 223 , 224 , 226 , 227 , 228 , 229 , 230 , 231 , 232 , 234 , 235 , 236 , 237 , 238 , 239 , 240 , 241 , 242 , 245 , 246 , 247 , 249 , 250 , 253 , 255 , 256 , 257 , 259 , 260 , 261 , 262 , 263 , 264 , 265 , 266 , 267 , 269 , 270 , 271 , 272 , 273 , 275 , 276 , 277 , 278 , 280 , 281 , 285 , 287 , 288 , 289 , 291 , 292 , 293 , 294 , 295 , 298 , 299 , 303 , 304 and 306 .
in writing . - Pesticides are among the most dangerous chemicals , as they are designed to kill and they are released deliberately into the environment and onto food .
Only about 1 % of a pesticide actually reaches its target .
Therefore , when we prepare legislation on the use and on the permitting of pesticides , we have to keep in mind what is in the interests of the different stakeholders .
It is in the interests of farmers to have a high harvest and good quality products with low costs .
If they can attain this goal with less pesticide , they can save on costs and provide healthier products .
It is in the interests of citizens to have safe , cheap products and pesticide-free drinking water .
Therefore , using less and safer pesticides is in the interests of almost everyone .
If we want to achieve tangible pesticide use reduction in Europe , we need effective national plans for reduction , focusing on the local circumstances and using local opportunities .
in writing . - ( HU ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we have now been debating the details of this legislative package on plant protection products for a good many months .
In this time we have examined numerous viewpoints and incorporated them into the text .
As a result of this process , I think the draft we now have before us is one that is based on compromise in many respects and that meets as many demands as it possibly could .
There are some issues , however , that should not be subject to compromise .
When people 's health is at stake , economic interests cannot be allowed to take precedence .
This piece of legislation is not about the competitiveness of Europe 's agricultural sector , but about protecting the health of European citizens .
We have also seen that current rules in individual Member States differ widely .
In my country they are among the strictest .
While here in Strasbourg we have been debating whether a buffer zone of 5 or 10 metres should be established beside watercourses , Hungary has had buffer zones of 50 metres , and in some places even 500 metres , in place for decades .
Moreover , although use of plant protection products by our farmers is 15 times lower than in the Netherlands , Europe 's intervention stores , when they still existed , were bursting at the seams with Hungarian maize .
In view of all these things , I ask my fellow Members to use their vote tomorrow to support the introduction of strict cut-off criteria .
On the basis of the compromise draft text , this would apply to a mere 29 substances out of more than 600 .
This is not too high a price to pay for ensuring that proven carcinogenic and toxic compounds stay off the menu .
Even if there are differences as a result of specific national situations when it comes to voting , we are agreed in this regard .
Let us use our vote , then , to enable us to sit down to eat with a good conscience .
in writing . - ( SK ) Just like we have medicines for people , we also have medicines for plants : pesticides can justifiably be called that since they are medicines in the fight against diseases , pests and weeds .
Of course they must be used in accordance with set rules .
Incorrect application results in organism failures that manifest themselves as cancer .
Ladies and gentlemen , our approach to this issue must be based on scientific analysis .
We must not succumb to pesticide hysteria unleashed in the European Parliament .
Food self-sufficiency in Europe is falling and this is increasing the dependence of the agri-food industry on world market supplies .
We must remember that a shortage of foodstuffs would lead to an increase in their prices .
Following a consultation with experts , I consider some amendments of EU Directive 91 / 414 / EEC and the Framework Directive on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to be unworkable .
These new components stray from the principle of focused and proportionate legislation based on a scientific approach .
I realise that we need harmonised European pesticide legislation to ensure that foodstuffs are safe .
That said , we must not prevent farmers from using the tools they need to produce safe , nutritious and accessible food .
I cannot support the reports by Mrs Christa Klaß and Mrs Hiltrud Breyer as adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
I will vote for them only if the amendments by my political group , the PPE-DE , are adopted .
Verbatim Reports ( amendment of Rule 173 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Richard Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the amendment of Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure , which deals with verbatim reports .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I rise to propose , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , that we change the way in which we in this Parliament keep a record of our debates .
We are all familiar with the verbatim report that we get the day after the debates , with each speaker 's speech rendered in their own language .
That will continue as now .
There will be no change to the record , in the original language , of what everybody has said .
What the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is proposing is to change the way in which we preserve the multilingual record of our debates .
Instead of gradually translating the debates and then , some months later , having a full written translated record in every language , we propose a switch to a system whereby the debates are electronically preserved and where any citizen can access them through the internet the very next day and see a visual record of the debate , with the soundtracks for every single language , preserved from the interpretation booths .
This will provide a more lively form of access to the debates than just a dry text .
It will be available immediately , rather than several months later .
I must confess that I was myself initially rather sceptical of this idea .
I always thought that keeping a full paper record of what everyone said , which was archived and which people could look at for many years to come , was an inherent part of being a parliament .
However , on reflection , and having listened to the arguments , I am now convinced that we can keep that multilingual access , albeit in a new form .
The problem with the old system is that the translations not only cost a substantial amount of money but also , more importantly , are only available several months later .
At the moment , they are placed on the web , where they are available electronically .
They are no longer printed in the Official Journal .
Very few people access them , look them up or use them , because of the time lag .
With this new system of preserving the debates , on ' web television ' if you like , they will be available the very next day , when they still have political immediacy and when people are still interested in them .
We were also worried that historians , who , for all kinds of research reasons , tend to look back at parliamentary debates long after we have forgotten them , might be upset that we would no longer have a printed written version but only a visual multilingual version .
We wrote to various associations of historians and others , and to my surprise they replied that they , too , thought it would be much more interesting to have a more lively record than just the printed text in translation .
Viewing a debate on a monitor gives you the flavour of that debate .
You can see the body language of the speakers , and you get much more than by just reading a dry text .
Nonetheless , our report proposes a number of safeguards .
Firstly , the plurilingual verbatim report that we already get the next day will continue .
It will be there in all the original languages , as before .
Secondly , any Member of this Parliament will have the guaranteed right to request a translation , if he or she needs it for his or her political work .
The translation of any speech must be made rapidly available to the requesting Member .
Thirdly , we provide that the Bureau may decide to ask for a written translation of a particularly important debate , which will then still be published in written form in every language .
Fourthly , when extra language versions are available anyway , because they happen to have been translated - for instance , for a formal sitting at which a head of state is speaking , and courtesy translations have been provided - they too will be placed on Parliament 's website .
Therefore , when translations are available in other languages , we will make use of them .
Finally , we ask the Bureau to look at technological developments to see if , for instance , in the future , computer translations can provide an extra tool , giving at least a rough idea of what was said in debates .
In conclusion , this is a fair proposal whose advantages outweigh the disadvantages .
It is not just a matter of costs ; it is also about being a modern parliament and making our debates accessible much more rapidly , in a form which is much more useful .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , we have a free vote in our group , so I have no authority to speak for all my colleagues .
We are again discussing the basic question whether a parliamentary service is worth the money or whether we must tighten our belt in response to the imperative of cutting costs .
Let me say at the outset that I also regard the new concept of video presentation as a good idea which should not be jettisoned .
Those people who want to have an immediate impression of our parliamentary proceedings can do so , and that is right and proper .
In my opinion , however , that is not enough , because the archiving of written records is quite simply an essential service .
Let me give you four reasons .
Firstly , all of the world 's parliaments make their plenary debates available in written form and archive them so that people can consult the records to find out what has been discussed in Parliament .
Secondly , the video recording conveys a vivid and very interesting impression , but we also know that the hectic nature of proceedings often results in oral translations falling short of the quality we need .
We know this internally from our dealings with the tabling office .
We set up a tabling office ourselves to ensure that the formulation of motions and official documentation was absolutely correct .
Because we operate so multilingually , we must exercise particular care .
We want to continue taking the same care with our records of proceedings .
Thirdly , the researchers who expressed their views on this subject may not have been fully aware of the implications , for although they might obtain a lively record , there is an underlying lack of rigour in the proposed approach .
Besides , it is far easier to analyse a plenary debate if the researcher can enter a term , be it ' pesticides ' or ' CO2 ' , and be directed immediately to a debate on the matter in question .
It would seem that this cannot be done with video recordings .
In short , I believe that keeping written records represents value for money , and I am in favour of written archives in addition to video recordings .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that from a political viewpoint the subject we are debating today is about two objectives of equal importance , as the rapporteur , Mr Corbett , has said .
On the one hand there are the technical issues : how we can better implement translation in technical terms and economise on resources ?
On the other , there is the issue of ensuring the greatest possible diversity of opinion , multilingualism and transparency in Parliament 's work .
Here I have to say that in a political assembly such as ours , which is of course multi-ethnic and political , language is of very great importance .
Language is not just a means of communication ; it is , as it were , a vehicle of culture , an expression of ideas , and long may this be so .
The technical issue must not be allowed to obscure the debate on equality and the coverage of all subjects by all the languages , and in full equality .
Let me point out that here we have another practical issue : how are we to achieve coverage in an economic way ?
Various problems arise .
The first is the relegation of the written word , a matter already referred to as important .
I think that in politics we ought to preserve the written word .
The second problem to be taken into consideration is the lasting record of our Parliament 's business .
Finally , if you will allow me to finish , Madam President : how can we make the work of our Parliament immediately available to the public , which I believe does not always have access to the internet ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , Mr Friedrich and I have tabled some amendments , which are not seeking to substitute new technology for old but to supplement the old with the new .
It seems extremely unfair to stop the practice of 50 years of publishing a written script as soon as new Member States join Parliament , and it is , I think , essential for historians , for research purposes , that we carry on with our past practice .
The printed word is the primary source and must be kept for reasons of consistency , transparency and simplicity of research at a time when we are seeking to promote the study of the European Parliament .
We should show some self-respect as an institution and maintain forever the present practice .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the Commission 's initiative to amend Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament makes me think again about the European Union .
Who is the Union for ?
Is it for ideologues or for the people ?
If it is supposed to help people , then why is something being proposed that is against their interest ?
What is it that we want to hide from people ?
Yes , hide .
I say that because the intention to limit access to information in one 's own language will mean that .
Why are citizen 's fundamental rights being breached and why are people being discriminated against on the basis of the date they acceded to the European Union or the number of people in their country ?
What is there in common between the principles of mutual respect and democracy and an attempt forcibly to bring about a situation where the inhabitants of the old EU Member States get materials , including written materials , in their own languages from the European Parliament , whilst the inhabitants of the new Member States are directed to websites to listen to recordings of debates .
At the same time no attention is being paid to the fact that , in the new Member States , there are many people who cannot afford to have the internet at home .
This affects millions of people ; millions of people would be deprived of information .
Justifying the proposed decision on grounds of costs sounds like a joke .
Does this mean that we can afford to spend hundreds of millions of euros on unnecessary administration , on maintaining two or even three buildings for the Parliament , but we cannot afford to inform the people , the taxpayers , how the Union is spending their money and what are its plans .
Ladies and gentlemen , if we have any respect for ourselves and for other people , there can be only one solution , with no machinations .
We fulfil the instructions in Rule 96 , which states : ' Parliament shall ensure the utmost transparency of its activities ' .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , time and again this Parliament has had to struggle with a very lax attitude to democracy on the part of the European Council .
This can lead to the number of seats in Parliament being increased by one without consultation , whereupon they simply speak of 750 plus one and think this keeps them on the right side of the law .
What fills me with apprehension , however , is the thought that this attitude is taking root in such a way here in Parliament that some Members are seeking to put the most trivial pragmatic considerations before the most basic of principles .
It seems so simple at first sight .
The Rules of Procedure commit us to the utmost transparency in our activities - not to any old interpretation of transparency , nor to a form of transparency tempered by pragmatism or cost-benefit calculations , but to the utmost transparency .
The audiovisual presentation does not match that description .
An audiovisual presentation can be used for propaganda purposes or provide a quick source of information , but it does not offer a serious analysis of the words spoken in this House , of the discussions and debates that take place here .
Of that there can be no doubt .
Multilingualism is a guiding principle of this Parliament , and parliamentary debates form the core of our activity .
Being in touch with the people is our foremost duty .
If we give this matter even a moment 's serious thought , we cannot deny that a parliament which sets itself apart from all other parliaments in the world by no longer archiving transcriptions of its debates is thereby sacrificing much of its parliamentary identity .
With regard to the cost factor , it would be very simple to cut costs by transcribing the interpretation of proceedings rather than translating them here .
That would also reflect the liveliness of the debate and reproduce it in the way in which it was actually understood and conducted .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , this Parliament is like the Tower of Babel , an allegory of the Habsburg Empire , which was full of sycophants .
It is the European Union 's attempt to build an international empire based on a unified creed , with federalists , liberals , cosmopolitans and sycophant humanist thinkers .
The Tower was an idea of lunatics , however .
Its ultimate failure is attributed to linguistic differences , or what is called ' multilingualism ' in the European Union .
The Corbett report seems to deny the nations of Europe to communicate effectively .
Mr Corbett 's idea to draw up Europe as a multilingual document is like waiting for Godot , which is a communicative stagnation .
The report is a way to create a diversion from a real problem .
To communicate and understand one another , we need a dialogue , not a monologue .
The only instrument for this purpose is , therefore , translation into all 22 official languages .
Otherwise we are heading towards communicative chaos .
However , as the translation of my speeches into Polish sometimes does not even render 50 % of what I have actually said , my Amendment 2 should therefore be included in the report .
I would urge all Members to vote for amendments that aim to preserve translation into all 22 languages and reject Mr Corbett 's Amendment 1 , which has been tabled as the committee amendment on the voting list .
rapporteur . - Madam President , Mr Podkański seems to be implying that the Committee on Constitutional Affairs was acting in violation of the Rules of Procedure .
The Rules of Procedure require every language to be treated equally , and what the committee is proposing is simply that , instead of a written verbatim translation in every language , we have an audiovisual translation in every language .
There is no discrimination between languages in this proposal .
It is simply a question of whether we have a written record or an audiovisual record .
In both cases , all the languages must be treated equally .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 24 October .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )

in writing . - We all know that Mr Corbett 's report on the Rules of Procedure concerning verbatim reports is a sensitive issue .
Do we want all speeches translated into all languages or is an audiovisual record in all languages accessible immediately through the internet enough ?
I will not repeat the arguments put forward by Mr Corbett , who I support in this issue .
I would just like to emphasise that we are in the heart of multilingualism .
The question is how we best endorse this core principle of the Union .
The options are spending at least EUR 10 million a year on translations that practically nobody reads , or spending that same amount on more important and urgent translations pending .
Needless to say , I opt for the latter .
Therefore I support Mr Corbett 's approach .
Community Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles ( debate )
The next item is the report by Chris Davies , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles .
rapporteur . - Madam President , let me start with an accusatory question to the Commissioner .
Some of us have pointed out repeatedly over the years that the car makers were failing to comply with the terms of the voluntary agreement to reduce emissions .
So , why is it that , some five years after this first became evident , we still do not have legislation before us requiring the manufacturers to meet the agreed targets , because with each month of delay it becomes harder to achieve the ambitions which were originally possible ?
This sets the framework for today 's debate .
Average emissions from new cars stand now at a little less than 160 g of CO2 per kilometre - a long way adrift from the target of 140 g by 2008 .
Therefore , it is not surprising that Members here want car makers to be punished for breaking their commitment .
Yet the fact is that the manufacturers have broken no laws and , however much we may wish it were otherwise , the level of emissions is where it is .
The Commission has announced that it wants to stick to the medium-term target setting that voluntary agreement of 120 g by 2012 , but says that 10 g of this will now be achieved by complementary measures .
I call this a political fudge : it has reduced the clarity of the target and encouraged some manufacturers to think that they can use biofuels as a means of avoiding significant design changes .
But , given where we are , are the target and the timetable set by the Commission still appropriate , because , of late , the reduction in average emissions has been hardly more than 1 g a year ?
The Commission suggests that this should instantly be transformed into 5 g a year .
Well , that can be achieved - and the technology exists to do it - but at what cost ?
Emission reductions must be made a priority for car makers , but they have to be achieved at the lowest possible expense .
That means giving industry specific targets and sufficient time to make the changes .
These improvements may increase the price of new cars but , then , reduced emissions mean improved fuel economy , so those who buy the cars will save money as they drive them .
Get it right and we can take action which will be good for the environment , good for the consumer and good for the future of car making .
There is a debate in this Parliament about whether , in a pre-legislative report of this kind , environmentalists should be pressing to send a strong signal to the Commission to be tough , or whether we should try to be realistic in framing measures which might actually be those that end up close to the final form at the end of the day .
That is why I am asking Parliament to break from the Commission position and recommend that the target for average emissions from new cars should be set not for 2012 but for 2015 and should be 125 g to be achieved by technical means alone .
By all means let us encourage the use of complementary measures to reduce emissions , but as an addition , not as a substitute , for these technical improvements .
For those Members who say this is not sufficient , let me just say that next month we will be voting on the CARS 21 report and , in that , the recommendation is 135 g by 2015 .
We can end up voting for one thing this month and something else next month .
If I can help bring together the different positions of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and of the Committee on Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , then I believe it will strengthen Parliament 's position and influence .
I believe that manufacturers should be set absolutely clear targets with no room for wriggling .
This report insists that failure to comply should result in the application of tough financial penalties .
I propose an internal trading mechanism to give manufacturers maximum flexibility and give incentives to the makers of low-emission vehicles .
But , ultimately , it is the penalty regime that matters and that , I suspect , will test the Commission 's resolve .
Equally important is the need to set long-term targets to reduce emissions to below 100 g by 2020 .
Given sufficient time , and an absolute requirement , I have no doubt that manufactures can achieve reductions of nearly 40 % over the next 13 years .
Finally , let me just touch upon the way in which cars are promoted .
The manufacturers always claim that they respond to consumer demand , but I do not believe this .
I believe they shape consumer demand .
Studies have shown that a very high proportion of advertising expenditure goes towards the promotion of cars on the basis of power and size and speed .
The car industry is supposed to be drawing up a voluntary code of advertising conduct but we have had our fingers burnt through voluntary codes and any such measure should be regarded with suspicion .
It is time that advertisements give consumers more details of the fuel economy and emission performance of the vehicles on sale .
This information should be upfront and not buried away in the small print .
We need to encourage car makers to compete on the basis that their cars are safe and stylish and environmentally-friendly .
Let me finish with these remarks . Europe 's car makers produce fine vehicles .
The technical expertise of the companies themselves is much to be admired , but for too long they have ignored the contribution their products are making to the threat posed by climate change .
For the sake of the planet , for the good of an industry that needs to stay at the cutting edge of world-class technology , it is time now for law-makers to steer them firmly in a greener direction .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , road transport , along with the other sectors of the economy , must contribute to efforts to reduce CO2 emissions in a bid to achieve the Kyoto Protocol targets and our future commitments for 2020 and beyond .
Road transport is the second highest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the EU .
Passenger cars alone are responsible for 12 % of the EU 's total emissions .
It is worth noting that while total emissions in the EU of the 27 Member States fell by nearly 8 % in the period between 1990 and 2005 , emissions from road transport increased over the same time period by 25 % .
Here I should remind you that from 1995 the Commission set the target of 120 grammes , and the car industry was aware of it .
Let me also remind you that there was a voluntary agreement on achieving a reduction of CO2 emissions to 140 gr per km by 2008 .
The Commission realised that this target would not be met by the car industry and the industry itself admitted this .
As a natural consequence , the European Commission carried out a re-examination last February of the Community strategy for the reduction of CO2 emissions by new cars , with mandatory legislation based on an integrated approach through which the European aim of reducing emissions by new cars to 120 gr. by 2012 would be met .
Dealing with the problem of CO2 emissions from cars is also expected to contribute to the hoped-for reinforced EU energy protection , by reducing our dependence on imported fossil fuels .
This , of course , will lead to a reduction in consumer expenditure on fuel .
Madam President , I am pleased to note that your report approves of our initiative in putting forward a legislative framework to reduce CO2 emissions by cars , and I thank the rapporteur , Mr Davies , for his efforts , as well as Mrs Harms and Mr Bulfon from the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection respectively , for their suggestions on the subject .

The report sets out ambitious targets for the reduction of CO2 and stresses that greater and more long-term progress will be needed .
The challenge is now to transform this political support into practical action .
The draft report proposes various important areas of work are , two of which I should like to comment on .
Firstly , your report points to the legitimate need of the car industry to have a time limit to be able to adjust smoothly to the new legislative arrangements .
Of course , as I have said before , this reduction strategy dates back to 1995 .
Last month at the Frankfurt Motor Show , it was clear that the European car industry had made a significant response to the challenge of our new proposal .
Within a short period of time car manufacturers have managed to put forward economically affordable technical solutions , which are significantly fuel-efficient .
I am absolutely convinced that with our revised strategy and the imminent legislative framework we will offer car manufacturers equal terms of competition .
Environmental performance will be the motivation , not competition based merely on car size or engine capacity .
We can already see the first results .
Now that petrol prices are reaching record highs , we must waste no opportunity in setting ambitious targets for the reduction of CO2 emissions in the European car industry .
That will act as a strong incentive for innovation and renewal ; it will also allow for major exports to emerging countries , where there is a great demand for fuel-efficient cars .
Secondly , your report points to the need for certain important parameters to take into account in future legislation , such as those determined by social impact and affordable prices for consumers .
Of course , fair treatment for all sides is very important .
I want to stress that we firmly intend to propose legislation to assess the situation of all car manufacturers and avoid any unjustifiable distortion of competition .
The overall target will be apportioned between car manufacturers in a sustainable and socially just manner .
The integrated approach that we are proposing will help the sector to prepare for the challenges ahead and will avoid an unfair burden on specific enterprises or on the sector as a whole .
These preliminary comments conclude what I have to say . Thank you for your attention .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , may I say to Mr Davies that we should recall clearly why we have to discuss stringent binding emission limits .
The reason is that , following a voluntary agreement concluded between the Commission and the car industry more than ten years ago , the latter has knowingly and wilfully failed to meet its targets .
The present situation , as we know , is not down to bad luck or an unforeseeable turn of events but to decisions taken by the senior management of manufacturing groups .
For that reason , Mr Davies , I am somewhat stunned at the clear message you have now sent through your amendments - which I saw for the first time today , although they may have existed for longer - that , in spite of what was decided in the Environment Committee , you no longer have any interest in exerting pressure on the innovative potential and innovative power of the car industry in Europe
My opinion is that we can only achieve Europe 's climate targets through the strict limits that were originally proposed by the Commission .
It is also my opinion - and you rightly addressed this point , Mr Dimas - that we shall not be able to obtain security of energy supply for our transport needs unless we ensure without delay that cars become more efficient , because we cannot stand by and watch as oil that is valuable and hard to come by continues to be squandered on our roads .
The third point , to which the Committee on Industry , whose opinion I drafted , attaches such great importance is the need to ensure at long last that the knowledge and ability of engineers and developers in the car industry are brought into play , and that these good engineers are not further stifled by misguided management policies .
I am firmly convinced that nothing but efficient , climate-friendly and affordable but stylish cars would be on the market within a very short time and that those who are easing the pressure for innovation today by setting what are truly very soft time limits for achieving reduction targets , Mr Davies , will bear responsibility if the European car industry proves uncompetitive in the long run and if jobs are lost in car manufacturing in Europe .
It goes without saying that the global car market will change out of all recognition - assuming we accept the underlying premises of our climate policy and our UN climate policy - and that those who are now applying the brakes to the process of reducing emission limits will then bear responsibility for the car industry in Europe going to the dogs and for a situation in which we ourselves no longer take our own climate policy seriously .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( DE ) Madam President , I acknowledge the car as a universal means of transport , and I acknowledge the contribution of the car industry to the prosperity of Europeans .
I do not , however , believe in the car as a fetish .
For that reason it is incomprehensible to me that manufacturers should design cars to travel at speeds in excess of 125 miles per hour .
Building efficient , environment-friendly cars is a necessity , given all the evidence of climate change .
In addition , Europe is duty-bound to set a good example to the booming emerging markets .
It is ultimately the consumer 's choice that will determine which cars are driven in the years to come .
This is why I argued in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for transparent and more easily understandable information on the emission ratings of vehicles .
I call on the Commission to take this report as the starting point for the presentation of an ambitious legislative proposal and to act quickly .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , can I first of all thank Mr Davies very much indeed for all the work that he has put into this report , and for his extremely constructive cooperation .
I am happy , on behalf of my Group , to endorse the target of 125 g by 2015 that Mr Davies has outlined .
It is a target which , I think , is extremely environmentally ambitious , but it is also achievable by what is a very successful European industry employing hundreds of thousands of people , and we must ensure that it remains a successful European industry .
I am convinced that those European car manufacturers will continue to produce some of the most environmentally friendly cars in the world , and these new targets - which , we should never forget , are the tightest in the world - will help them to achieve even cleaner cars in the future .
But the missing link in this debate is , of course , that of consumer demand .
We must make sure that consumers are demanding cleaner , more environmentally friendly cars , and , there , the Member States themselves have a very important role to play through their tax systems , which is , rightly , a matter for them .
They can , however , considerably affect consumer demand by introducing the correct environmentally friendly taxation schemes .
We also , in my view , need contributions to CO2 reduction from all of the related sectors : from the oil companies , from the biofuel producers , from the tyre manufacturers etc . , all of whom have a contribution to make and can help us to achieve our ambitious targets .
I have also tabled some amendments to water down what I think are some very prescriptive requirements on advertisers , which Mr Davies has included in his report .
I think they are grossly disproportionate to the problem , and I am sure that , given sufficient opportunity , the manufacturers and the advertisers can come up with a binding voluntary code which would be equally effective .
I have also tabled - jointly with Mr Davies - an amendment to recognise the contribution of small-volume manufacturers who do not have a huge product range with which to average out the emissions requirements .
I hope the Commission will take those into account when formulating the legislation .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , Madam President , Commissioner , this is a matter of urgency , as we all know .
Al Gore , who rang the alarm bell , has been awarded the Nobel Prize , and it is time for the European Union to stop talking and to act , because this is not a new issue .
There was a voluntary agreement entered into by car manufacturers to achieve average emissions of 140g of CO2 per kilometre by 2008 , and that agreement was not kept .
I would remind you that the European Parliament itself fixed the target of 120g by 2005 or 2010 at the latest .
There is no justification today for backing away from those targets .
So what we need is an ambitious , unambiguous and binding directive and it needs to set targets in two stages .
First , in the short term , we need a target of 120g of CO2 for new cars and a 10g reduction to be achieved through complementary measures .
We need to move swiftly , however , and we therefore support the vote in the Committee on the Environment for the target to be achieved in 2012 , with binding steps from 2009 onwards so that by 2012 the target will be met in full for all vehicles .
As the second stage , we believe it is essential to set targets of 95g for 2020 and 70g for 2025 , with an intermediary deadline in 2016 to ensure that we are on track .
We therefore support the ambitious roadmap prepared by the Committee on the Environment because we think it succeeds in setting clearly visible standards , while at the same time confronting us with the technology gap that we need to overcome in order to meet our Kyoto Protocol commitments .
Yes , of course , it is going to be expensive and there will have to be negotiation about the price of new vehicles .
The first thing to note is that not all cars and not all manufacturers achieved the same effectiveness under the voluntary agreement .
Yes , we do need to favour small cars over large cars and we need to come up with tax measures , new practices and even bans in some cases , particularly in built-up areas , to prevent large vehicles , including 4x4s , from polluting our towns and cities all day long and producing huge quantities of CO2 .
This question is particularly important because the bigger the vehicles that manufacturers produce , the bigger their profit margins .
We therefore need to guide the market in such a way that manufacturers producing smaller , less polluting vehicles can be more profitable than those producing big high-polluting cars and , as well as setting standards , we expect the Commission to propose strategies for moving in that direction .
The last point I should like to stress is the importance of proper information for vehicle purchasers to help them pick their way through this minefield , and specifically we need to get rid of misleading advertising .
That is why my group has tabled an amendment requiring a labelling system for all cars , based on an A-G format for energy efficiency , so that all consumers can make an active choice in favour of the environment .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , when it comes to discussing CO2 emissions , we are very quick to talk about cars , simply because the way to a person 's guilty conscience is through their car .
That is why Mrs Harms , the Greens and many environmental organisations are particularly keen to talk about cars .
We are faced with a broken voluntary pledge - no doubt about that - and we therefore need regulation .
We have no alternative .
What you came here and told us , Mrs Harms , about the voluntary commitment being deliberately and strategically torpedoed by the car industry seems rather far-fetched to me .
Let me just remind you that a market comprises not only suppliers of products but also those who demand them .
We ourselves help to create demand too , and shortly , when we are driven home by the car service , we shall be using those very cars that do not meet the targets to which the car makers committed themselves .
I should like to see an initiative from the Greens .
If your intentions are honourable , please now make sure that the small cars which meet next year 's voluntary target are ordered for Parliament .
In future legislation , it is imperative for us to ensure that the desired reductions stand up to cost-benefit analysis .
The Stern report which you and the Greens like to quote , Mrs Harms , calculates that , of 13 potential CO2-reduction measures , those targeting cars at the very top of the price range are actually the least effective .
Anyone making political demands for stringent emission limits and more efficient cars must recognise that the development and production cycle in the car industry takes five to seven years .
It is by failing to recognise that , Mrs Harms , that we put jobs at risk , not by recognising it .
I am therefore pleased that our rapporteur has done just this by saying that it is unrealistic to set any deadline before 2015 .
Tomorrow Parliament will vote in favour of one of the options on the table , and it must be said that , whatever it is , whatever year is designated and whatever average value is set , it will still be more stringent and ambitious than any other regime in the world .
We should not lose sight of that .
There is an extremely fine line between carrot and stick for our car industry , and at the end of the day we must take great care to ensure that we really do export the best products and not perhaps our industry .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I think this is the right moment to inform the outside world about what this Callanan-Davies deal is .
So , what is it ?
It is delaying action from 2012 to 2015 .
We have calculated the CO2 impact : 125 g in 2015 is worse than 130 g in 2012 .
And the second part of the deal is exemptions for small-volume producers .
That is 300 000 cars a year , so that is not ' small volumes ' .
I think that what we are voting on this week , Mr Davies ' initiatives , are from a Green Liberal climate hero who has become a climate Judas .
It is really incredible : instead of using the possible centre-left majority in this House for 120 g in 2012 , siding with reactionary Tories to help the car industry in Europe to win time - that is really not the way forward .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , in the past few months my fellow Members and I have met a great many representatives of the motor industry .
I do not think there has ever been so much lobbying over a report .
The industry has used every possible argument to prevent measures limiting CO2 emissions or at any rate to delay them .
It seems that they have won over many of my fellow Members , including the rapporteur , although fortunately the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety was fully aware of its task .
Let me be clear : the motor industry is entirely responsible for this Commission proposal .
Attempts to agree on voluntary regulation were a miserable failure .
It seems that only compulsory standards are effective .
I find complaints that it all has to be done so quickly quite hypocritical , because the industry has known for years that these measures had to come .
The environment has to be cared for now , with drastic measures .
We have to do that , for ourselves and for future generations .
I am therefore urging a vote against Amendment 42 , tabled by Mr Callanan and Mr Davies .
The amendment increases the maximum amount of CO2 and postpones the agreed date of 2012 to 2015 .
That gives commercial interests priority over the environment and we absolutely cannot allow that .
What is Mr Davies trying to do to us ?

Madam President , on behalf of my colleagues in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I would like to thank Mr Davies for the way he has approached this , particularly his willingness to listen , and for a number of innovative approaches that we see in his report .

I also want to thank our rapporteur , Mr Bulfon , and to thank Mr Davies for adopting a number of our proposals in his report .
We have heard a lot of debate and discussion this evening about the car industry missing targets and about how we are going to move forward .
But I would like to echo what the Commissioner said and use the word ' incentive ' .
This programme , and to meet the programme that Mr Davies has set out , is going to need billions and billions of euros of investment in new products and is going to tie up immense resources in engineering and product development .
( Objections )
I see my Green colleagues already shaking their heads ; they seem to think that the technology is there , that overnight we can change a fundamental industry in that direction .
This is entirely unrealistic - where is the investment going to come from ?
It is going to come from the profits of the car companies .
We need to sustain those profits so that they can reinvest them .
This demand here will be the biggest change and turnaround we have ever seen in a major industry .
Let us just remember that .
Let us not just sit here and make unrealistic demands .
This is a practical approach .
But , colleagues , let me remind you - and I refuse to accept this sort of crowing - I am absolutely not a lobbyist for the car industry .
I have argued for a long time that we need to set demanding targets .
We are moving towards a legislative approach for the first time .
But you should be listening as well .
And let me just make this other point .
Ideas about complementary measures and other things : what we are talking about here is a complete change in the way that people approach transport and motoring .
These new vehicles will come on the market over a long period of time .
But actually the complementary measures we are talking about - the consumer measures , the consumer information - those are the real incentives that we need to bring in .
I am sorry to overrun , Madam President , but you will admit I was interrupted by some colleagues in an entirely unnecessary way .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , this report , which Chris Davies has drawn up on the initiative of the Environment Committee , should signal to the Commission that the European Parliament is serious about reducing CO2 emissions .
When I see the amendments on the table , I start to wonder about that .
There are three points we should bear in mind .
Firstly , from 1 January 2012 , new cars in Europe must not emit more than 120g of CO2 per kilometre .
We should not tamper with that date or the emission limit .
In 1998 the car industry made a voluntary commitment to reduce CO2-emission levels in its new vehicles .
In the light of news reports about the continuing advance of climate change , I see no reason at all for us to interfere with the deadline or the ceiling .
Secondly , future legislation must spell out clearly that the CO2 emissions of all cars must be reduced .
Large cars must make a greater contribution , but smaller cars must contribute too , so that we can achieve 120 grams by 2012 .
My third point is that cars must remain affordable for people .
I agree with the previous speaker on that .
I come from a predominantly rural area , where people are dependent on cars to get them to their places of work .
For this reason , future legislation must perform a balancing act to reconcile the needs of the environment with those of the economy .
What good are strict emission limits if people can no longer afford new cars and drive about in their ageing vehicles ?
It takes more than eight and a half years to renew the entire fleet of passenger cars on Europe 's roads , and this must be in the back of our minds when we adopt new legislation .
Future legislation on CO2 emissions from passenger cars should be guided by the need to guarantee better protection of the climate as well as affordable driving .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I could begin like one of those old jokes : I have some good news and some bad news ; which do you want to hear first ?
I will start with the good news : the European Union is leading the battle to combat climate change ; the 27 EU countries are now doing more than anywhere else in the world to halt climate change .
Now for the bad news : if the thousands of scientists around the world are right , then even this is much too little .
What then are we to do ?
The answer leaves no room for doubt : we need a paradigm shift .
It is to be commended that Mr Davies ' report highlights a number of important elements .
However , anyone who thinks that we will have solved anything by reducing carbon dioxide emissions from the ever-increasing number of vehicles we use to 120g or 95g is gravely mistaken .
In my opinion , we can and must vote in favour of this report , and at the same time we must compel vehicle manufacturers to produce smaller and more efficient engines .
We must not stop there , however .
The European Union must commit itself unequivocally to technological change in the transport sector too .
Every means available must be used to promote research and development and innovation in this field , and we must stop providing any kind of support for conventional technologies .
Member States must borrow the best solutions from each other as soon as possible to provide manufacturers and consumers with legal , economic and other incentives .
Furthermore , while we are on the subject , I do not believe , for example , that biofuels are going provide the ultimate solution to our problems , especially not the current , first-generation biofuels .
They do seem , however , to be a necessary step on the way towards alternative fuels , as are hydrogen and electric propulsion systems and many other systems that are not yet widely used or have yet to be devised .
Let us help to foster these with the present vote and future legislation . Thank you very much .
Mr President , I will not comment on this new cosying up between the British Liberal Democrats and the Conservatives , as has been displayed by Mr Callanan and Mr Davies here tonight .

Maybe it is the new leadership battle for the Lib-Dems that has been going on , since some of their new leaders even have lookalikes !
What I want to talk about is the importance of sticking with ambitious targets .
I do not think industry can have been very surprised that the Commission talked about 2012 as a date for the targets or about the level of the target , because , of course , we know these have been mooted for many years .
Back in March , the EU leaders signed up to cut overall CO2 emissions by 20 % by 2020 .
If we are going to get there , we need to bring forward legislation which helps us to get there .
So , here we are at the very first hurdle towards that , and I do not think it is time now to fail in this European Parliament .
People out there are watching .
They want to know we are serious about tackling climate change .
Of course we have to work with industry , and Mr Davies talks about punishing industry .

Nobody wants to punish industry because the car industry , as Mr Harbour has just said , is a major European industry ; it is a major employer and we have to work with them because only they can deliver these changes that we need to see .
So we need to work with them and we need to listen and I think what we need beyond everything else is a long-term project which everybody has signed up to so that everybody knows where we are going and everybody can try to get there .
Finally , on labelling and advertising . We need a clear system , a green car labelling system , that every consumer can understand , just as they understand , when they buy white goods , how those white goods work .
The white goods manufacturers of inefficient goods have actually seen their products fall off the market .
We need to see the same for cars and I hope we can work together with industry to get a green labelling system that everybody understands .
( ET ) So far our climate policy has focused principally on the energy sector .
Aviation is the next sector which will be incorporated into the European Union 's emissions trading system .
Land transport , however , has a major influence on climate change and the Davies report is a thoroughly welcome initiative .
The car industry needs clear , long-term targets for reducing the level of CO2 emissions in exhaust gases and I support Mr Davies ' approach whereby long-term limits will be established for CO2 emissions , for example for 2020 or 2025 .
The car industry has had plenty of time to reduce the level of CO2 emissions .
We should not accept continued procrastination : the technological solutions already exist .
Similarly , I hope that Parliament will support the amendment I tabled to the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Security , under which the car industry would have to reduce CO2 in exhaust emissions to 120g / km by 2012 .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the report .
When discussing the whole issue of the Community 's strategy to reduce CO2 emissions , it should be remembered that , in Europe alone , two million people are employed in the automotive industry , and another 10 million jobs are linked to this sector .
This industry represents 3.5 % of European GDP .
The export value is EUR 33.5 billion and , what is no less significant , each year motor taxes generate EUR 365 billion for Member States .
The Community 's strategy to reduce CO2 emissions will be successful only if it is thought through properly and provides sufficient time for producers to develop appropriate technological solutions .
I am in favour of introducing an appropriate transition period because the production cycle in the automotive industry is complex and needs a long time to adapt .
It would seem therefore that the best date for the introduction of the regulations would be 2015 , also because the Euro 6 Regulation will come into force in that year .
I also think that there should be an integrated approach to CO2 emissions .
Research studies have indicated that to achieve the objective of 120g / km just through improvements in automotive technology will result in an increase of around EUR 3 600 in the average price of a car , which may result in many brands of cars becoming less accessible to the average EU citizen .
For this reason , basing CO2 emissions exclusively on engine technology is the most expensive solution .
One could achieve the 120g level by introducing additional solutions , such as introducing biofuels to a greater degree than at present , as well as by introducing additional solutions in vehicles , such as signals to change gears or low resistance tyres .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , private cars are responsible for 12 % of all CO2 emissions .
We all know that .
It is clear that that sector has to make a major effort to achieve the agreed standards for 2020 .
It is also clear that we have to be ambitious and set the bar high .
It is clear , too , that car manufacturers will not be able to do that alone .
An integrated approach is needed ; they should not have to take sole responsibility .
Flanking measures therefore have to be taken .
Better air conditioning , better roads and a change in driver behaviour - in other words , all of us .
The sector deserves support from the government because the motor industry employs a large number of people , directly or indirectly .
First of all , I am therefore appealing to national governments to modify their motor taxes as a matter of urgency , so that consumers switch to environmentally friendly cars of their own accord .
Secondly , I appeal to the Commissioner , the Commission and Europe to conduct an assessment of the 2009 multiannual budget in order to invest even more research funding in new research technologies for low CO2 cars .
I know you recently announced an ambitious programme to invest EUR 500 million in hydrogen technology .
Of course that is fantastic , but it is medium-term .
Obviously solutions have to be found for the new engine technology in the short term as well .
I am sure that , whether it is by 2012 or a little later , smart car manufacturers will reach the goal of 120g much more quickly than planned . Simply because - and I do not want to be naïve - the market demands it .
In that sense the context has changed completely in the past couple of years .
It is therefore important that we approve the compromise proposals by Mr Callanan on marketing and advertising , because they are transparent .
It is a question of giving consumers clear information .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to start by expressing my appreciation for the quality of this evening 's debate .
I would like to comment , time permitting , on three of the issues you have addressed .
Regarding the ambitious level of the strategy , the Commission has proposed its strategy on the basis of a thorough impact assessment .
We have analysed the various options of a level to reduce CO2 emissions from cars , taking into account measurability , monitorability and accountability .
On this basis we have proposed to deliver the 120 g of CO2 per kilometre objective through an integrated approach .
One hundred and thirty grams will be delivered through passenger car technology and ten additional grams will be provided through complementary measures , including fuel efficiency targets for light commercial vehicles and an increased use of biofuels .
This approach towards achieving the 120 g target is , in our view , the most cost-effective combination of options , and we will thus propose legislation accordingly .
Secondly , the legislative framework implementing the integrated approach will be the central pillar of our revised strategy , but it is not the only one .
As underlined in your report , finding ways to encourage consumer demand for fuel-efficient cars will enable us significantly to reduce their environmental impact , along with the fuel bill of drivers in the European Union .
In the context of the review in the Car Labelling Directive , we will take into account the recommendations made by Parliament in the field of consumer information .
Thirdly , the Commission agrees that a longer-term strategy should be considered , in order to provide predictability to car makers .
We will thus consider the potential for progress beyond 2012 , and the 120 g objective , on the basis of an impact assessment .
In this context , the Commission will take into account the recommendations made by Parliament concerning future emission targets .
I believe I have addressed some of the main concerns that have been voiced , and I hope that Plenary will adopt a resolution which strongly supports the approach proposed by the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 24 October .
Conventional energy sources and energy technology ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Reul on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on conventional energy sources and energy technology [ http : / / www.europarl.eu.int / oeil / FindByProcnum.do ? lang = 2 & procnum = INI / 2007 / 2091 " ] .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since I have a few extra minutes , let me begin by thanking the Commission , the Secretariat of our Committee and the other rapporteurs .
It was not such an easy task , and I am grateful that we managed to cooperate in an objective manner and to seek out the widest possible common ground on what is not an entirely straightforward issue .
Our work was based on three communications from the Commission , and our aim in this report was to provide answers in the three areas covered by those communications , which we managed to do by a large majority in the responsible committee .
The starting point was a generally accepted principle that is restated in every debate on energy policy , namely the view shared by the Commission and Parliament that energy policy has three major goals - competitiveness , in other words affordable prices , protection of the environment and security of supply .
The conclusion that the solution lay in the continuing development of new and existing energy technology was certainly the easiest part of the report to deal with .
Technology is the key to the pursuit of these three goals .
In a world in which demand for energy is constantly growing while the supply of fossil fuels is steadily dwindling , it is therefore crucial that we invest in research and innovation and try to make progress in these areas .
We need only look at the potential for increasing the generation efficiency of coal-fired power stations , which averages 34 % at the present time but could be raised to 55 % through the use of state-of-the-art technology .
If a third of old plants were replaced by cutting-edge facilities , fuel consumption could be reduced by 30 % .
That is just a small example of the opportunities offered by new technology .
We also spoke about two energy sources which are very different from each other but which share the distinction of provoking the greatest political controversy .
No one doubts that the share of fossil fuels , which accounted for 79 % of gross domestic fuel consumption in the European Union in 2004 , will remain high in the foreseeable future .
However long this may continue , the fact is that we will certainly have to operate with fossil fuels for some time to come .
Coal is a major factor that plays an important role - one reason , of course , being that it is one of the few energy sources , or indeed the main energy source , that we possess in Europe , even if its availability varies between Member States .
This is a significant advantage , particularly in terms of the security of our energy supplies .
This means - and this was an important point in our discussions - that when we say coal has a future , which the Commission has thankfully described , we must ensure that the critical aspects of coal use are addressed .
One of these critical aspects is the emission of carbon dioxide .
One option is greater efficiency and better technology , and the other option is to try to use new technology to separate CO2 and store it underground - the famous carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) technology .
That is easier said than done of course , but there are indications that it works .
We have acknowledged that in this report and have advocated promoting the development of CCS technology , because it gives us a chance to go on benefiting from coal , which is a very reliable source of energy for us in Europe .
This is why we have also stressed that we need to tread warily , that carbon capture can reduce generation efficiency and that it is therefore difficult to estimate when CCS technology could come on stream .
Above all , we must do our homework and formulate the appropriate legal provisions .
The third and most controversial part of the report relates to the issue of nuclear energy .
Nuclear plants account for more than 30 % of power generation in Europe , and nuclear power has advantages that are undeniable , whatever our political views .
It is there , it is affordable , and it makes a major contribution to security of supply .
In terms of reducing CO2 emissions , it is an extremely exciting and interesting option , and I do believe it would be reckless if we simply pushed this form of energy aside and did not even consider it .
We succeeded - not without difficulty - in finding formulas to which a large majority could subscribe and which conveyed the message that airing these ideas is part and parcel of a full debate but that the decision to adopt or reject them is a matter for the Member States .
That is quite an important point , but our intention is to contribute to the area for which Europe bears some responsibility , namely security of supply .
In this respect it is a wise move to establish the High-Level Group on Nuclear Safety and Waste Management and the European Nuclear Energy Forum , and it is undoubtedly right , as postulated in the Illustrative Nuclear Programme for the Community ( the PINC paper ) , to carry this debate forward and , when we discuss investments in new technology , not to turn our backs on any potential solution .
In short , an energy mix does not mean sifting out particular sources of energy but taking all sources into consideration .
I hope we shall manage to adopt this resolution tomorrow in the form in which it was approved by a large majority in committee .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Reul on his report .

It comes as the last report from the European Parliament in the follow-up of the energy and climate change package from 10 January .
The other two reports , by Mr Vidal-Quadras and Ms Thomsen , have given the Commission valuable input for further formulation of the proposals .
The first concerns our preparation of the internal market package , and the second , the continuing work on the Directive on Renewable Energy .
I am also very grateful for the timely input Mr Reul and this House will provide in the area of energy innovation , clean fossil fuel and nuclear energy .
On many accounts , the Commission is already in line with the calls of Parliament and is working on a number of outstanding issues identified in the report .
Europe needs to achieve the important goal of combating climate change .
For that , and also for security of supply , we need low-carbon , highly efficient energy technologies .
We also need to use fossil fuels in a more sustainable way .
And it will be difficult to achieve our climate change goals without the use of nuclear energy .
Let me start by addressing the issue of energy innovation .
The Commission intends to present the European Strategic Technology Plan at the end of November .
Europe has proven to be successful in setting a regulatory framework in support of low-carbon technologies .
Targets have been agreed for energy savings and for renewable energy .
We are also building a truly internal market .
There is no doubt that these are the basis for the third Industrial Revolution .
However , this is far from enough .
If we only depend upon imported low-carbon technologies , we will fail our security of supply and competitiveness objectives .
The analyses currently under way in the Commission show that Europe is falling short in the development of low-carbon technologies .
In essence , we are not able to convert the high quality , basic research that is done in the EU into world leading technologies .
Today , we do not focus sufficiently on matching research to business developments , by building pilot and demonstration plants to get up to full commercial scale .
For Europe to lead the world in innovation for climate change and energy security , it is essential to be more efficient in the management of the resources invested in energy innovation .
We therefore need better , joint strategic planning at EU level , as well as more effective implementation of energy technology programmes and measures .
Furthermore , and as was stated in Mr Reul 's report , we have to mobilise additional financial and human resources for energy technology research and demonstration .
We have already increased the budget for energy in the seventh Framework Programme by 50 % and for the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme by 100 % .
This could not have been achieved without strong support from the European Parliament .
Member States are also going down this road , and I am convinced that the private sector will do the same , once the framework conditions are right .
This applies in particular to industrial-scale demonstration projects and early market deployment , as well as to the fundamental role of small- and medium-sized enterprises .
I will now turn to the second part of the report : the challenges associated with conventional sources of energy .
We must recognise that these energy sources will play a substantial role in the energy mix for years to come .
We share the same view : that we need to make the transition from traditional to sustainable fossil fuels .
Before the end of the year , the Commission will take further steps to address the use of modern technologies in power generation from fossil fuels .
In particular , the Commission will address the issue of the legal framework for the capture of carbon dioxide and its geological storage .
We will table a legislative proposal which aims at establishing the regulatory framework in order to provide legal certainty , and to ensure public confidence in the safety of carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) deployment .
I am also currently preparing a communication to set the political framework in support of CCS .
I agree that CCS will require significant research efforts before it can be commercially viable .
This is why CCS will be included among the strategic energy technologies in the Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
This is also why we are singling it out for communication in connection with the legislative proposal .
In parallel with continuous research and development efforts , the EU needs to move on demonstration plants .
Such projects will provide invaluable experience .
They will allow us to optimise existing technologies , and to identify and respond to the remaining challenges .
The goal is clear : to see several large-scale demonstration plants operational in the EU by 2015 , and to bring the technology to the market by 2020 .
This will not happen unless there is strong commitment from the European private sector and strong , supportive government policies .
The Commission is ready to lead , but it will be necessary to get the full support of Member States and of the European Parliament .
I will now come to nuclear energy .
I am pleased to note that your message regarding nuclear energy is fully in line with our conclusions in the communication on a Nuclear Illustrative Programme , as widely supported by the Economic and Social Committee .
I am also glad that the first meeting of the High Level Group on Nuclear Safety and Waste Management took place on 12 October .
The group has a mandate to progressively develop common understanding and , eventually , a higher level of nuclear safety .
I share the report 's view that an open dialogue on nuclear energy is essential .
For this reason , the Commission has set up a nuclear forum , on the lines of the other energy forums .
The aim of the Nuclear Forum is to enlarge the debate on nuclear energy , and to involve all the relevant players .
On 26-27 November , the first meeting of that forum , also called the Bratislava / Prague Forum , will take place .
I trust it will mean more transparency in allowing for consultation with , and between , all stakeholders .
I am pleased that the European Parliament will also participate .
I would like , once again , to congratulate the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs for their excellent report .
I thank the European Parliament for its support and cooperation .
We will use this report in our further work , and I definitely look forward to the debate .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( DA ) Mr President , excuse me , but this report is not good , and neither has the work process in connection with it been good .
Why has the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy not listened to the statements from other committees ?
On behalf of the Committee on Development I regret the fact that we have only been asked for a statement on the Commission 's carbon emissions .
Energy efficiency and savings and our most important criticisms are far too weak .
In addition , they are otherwise entirely decisive for the developing nations .
There is a huge amount of energy to be obtained through savings , and there are known technologies available , and for the developing nations at least it is much , much more important than CSS .
In general , this also applies to the industrialised nations .
In addition , why is oil being forgotten completely ?
The high oil prices are a major burden for the developing nations , particularly within the transport sector , where oil is dominant .
In addition to improving efficiency , there is a need for other transport models .
However , renewable energy is crucial if the developing nations are to develop , and it is grotesque that this is barely mentioned in the report .
The proposal is blunt , and the views of the Committee on Development are not included in any way . I would therefore like to urge everyone to address this tomorrow .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would agree with the opinion of Herbert Reul as regards diversification in electricity generation , diversification of supply and improvements in energy efficiency and usage .
The fact that natural resources are continually dwindling is nothing new to scientists working in the area of energy supply .
For years , leading research centres have been observing the level of usage of natural resources and have published alarming reports .
The findings of these reports show unequivocally that continued reliance solely on conventional methods of generating energy could , in future , lead the global economy to an energy crisis .
Dwindling natural resources means that Europe will increasingly have to import from neighbouring countries , which can result in a gradual dependence on suppliers .
We have already seen the negative consequences of such a policy on a number of occasions in neighbouring countries .
For this reason one of the principal challenges facing the European Union is diversification of energy sources as well as to work on creating new energy generation technologies .
Positive policies in this area will be beneficial not just to society and the economy , but also to the natural environment .
At this point , however , I would like to emphasise that not all countries will be able to pursue this policy in the short term .
This is linked to historical conditions that resulted in the power sector , for many years , being backward in comparison with the countries of the old EU .
For this reason , from the perspective of a citizen of such a country , I would like to point out that , as I said , Poland or the other countries in this geographical area will have to cover more ground than the countries of western Europe in modernising the power sector .
Please consider this particular point .
Taking climate change into account , the EU should become more involved in work on clean coal technology as the optimal solution for the natural environment , especially in those countries where the power sector in largely dependent on the use of coal .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report before us makes no secret of the fact that there are major arguments against conventional forms of energy .
The issue most talked about nowadays in this connection is that of climate change .
Not only do fossil energy sources contribute to global climate change , however ; they also make Europe more dependent on external suppliers .
Allow me to cite one example from Hungary to illustrate my point .
In a country where raw materials are in short supply , gas comprises 50 % of the energy mix , 80 % of this deriving from a single external source , namely Russia .
This results in a degree of dependency that not only has far-reaching social and economic consequences , but can also exert considerable influence on Hungary 's international relations .
At the same time , however , these figures and others like them show that conventional energy sources are inevitably going to play a major role in Europe 's energy supply in the decades ahead , even if renewable energies gain ground .
To state the contrary would be tantamount to sticking our heads in the sand .
Ladies and gentlemen , the contradiction between the necessity of conventional sources and the risks associated with them must , however , be resolved .
I believe Mr Reul 's report presents the necessary toolkit for doing just this .
I agree with the rapporteur that the European Union needs to focus on three fundamental objectives when establishing policy on conventional energy sources : increasing efficiency , and , connected to this , exploiting the potential of research and development , and reducing dependency on external sources .
The best example of this last point is the Nabucco project ; construction of this gas pipeline would represent a significant step towards diversification and so it is in the Community 's interests to make it happen . Thank you very much , Mr President .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , energy is a crucial factor as regards market competitiveness as well as quality of life for EU inhabitants .
For this reason , therefore , the fundamental political and economic goals must be effectiveness in the sustainable generation of energy , efficiency in terms of reductions in overall usage , as well as reliability and safety of energy supplies .
Achieving these goals will also result in a safe society .
We cannot forget how much our citizens pay , either directly or indirectly , for every unit of energy .
The competitiveness of the EU Member State 's economies depends , among other factors , on better use of regional resources in the form of fossil fuels .
This will only happen , however , when the Commission provides guarantees that the emission trading system will not hamper the replacement of existing power stations , e.g. coal-fired power stations , by more modern systems with lower CO2 emissions .
Poland has already reduced emissions by 32 % since 1988 while , over the same period , the countries of the old EU have done considerably less .
The present figure for emissions per inhabitant in Poland stands at 7 tonnes per annum , while in the old EU countries this is up to two times higher .
In these circumstances it would not be right for Poland to reduce CO2 emissions drastically by a further 30 % from next year .
This is a Commission decision that would have highly unfavourable social consequences .
My country cannot be sacrificed to the politics of climate hysteria .
It is well known that the climate has changed , is changing and will continue to change and that we have to counteract the consequences of these changes , i.e. droughts , floods and shortages of drinking water .
Justice , however , demands that reductions in CO2 emissions be linked to a per capita figure in EU countries .
It is important that emission costs should not be decided arbitrarily on the basis of reductions and unclear principles .
Competitiveness cannot be a function of false market incentives , and the price of energy has to reflect its real cost .
It would seem sensible to use all possible methods that have been tested to absorb carbon dioxide , including biological methods , and to absorb methane .
At present , however , priority should definitely be given to methods that improve the efficiency of converting primary energy into other forms based on pilot technological installations for the gasification and liquefaction of coal , as well as for the creation of hydrogen .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur Mr Reul sincerely for the fruitful cooperation in preparing this report , which demonstrates a comprehensive , balanced and long-term approach to the problems of fossil fuels and atomic energy .

First of all , I would like to congratulate Mr Reul , and my other fellow Members , who have come up with valid amendments , on their well-balanced report and all the hard work they have put into it .
All the energy sources covered in the report have been given a sufficient amount of attention , while at the same time , the importance of alternative energy sources and new energy technologies was duly pointed out .
Energy diversification is of great importance in ensuring energy security , which happens to be vital to my country , Lithuania .
This area is definitely vulnerable , as my country is fully dependant on one supplier , without any other alternative so far .
A possible solution could be the construction of a safe , modern nuclear power plant .
It would be the basis for both our political security and economic stability .
Discussions on this report involved sharing different views on the future of nuclear energy .
Although we should fully recognise the importance of alternative energy sources and their possible dominating role in the future , we should nevertheless develop a down-to-earth approach to nuclear energy and face the fact that 30 % of the energy produced in the EU is produced by nuclear power plants .
This energy contributes to the implementation of the Kyoto objectives as well as to increasing the security of energy supply .
I consider the amendments so energetically presented by the ' green ' politicians who condemn nuclear power in the name of the security of European citizens to be hypocritical , as it could contribute to the increased insecurity of other European citizens .
I would like to encourage my fellow Members to be tolerant and to support the provisions enabling each nation to decide whether it is for or against the use of safe nuclear energy .
Only by sharing our views and listening to different opinions will we be able to come to the right decision .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , speaking on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group in this debate on conventional energy sources and energy technology , I would like to thank Herbert Reul for preparing a comprehensive report on this issue .
First of all , the author of the report is right to note that the most important issue , also in terms of the future of energy generated from conventional fuels , is for the countries of the European Union to work together in this area .
Secondly , with regard to the fact that the European Union 's dependence on fossil fuel imports will rise to about 70 % by 2030 , and , in the case of oil imports , to as much as 94 % , it is essential to make maximum use of fossil fuel resources within the countries of the European Union .
Thirdly , coal is just such a resource , with Germany holding as much as 7 % of the world 's reserves and Poland 2 % of these reserves .
It is important not to call into question the extraction of this fuel and the generation of energy from it , since electricity generated from fossil fuels is still half the price of electricity generated from renewable sources .
Fourthly , because of the ecological risks associated with the generation of electricity from coal , joint European investment is needed into research in new technologies in this area , financed from funds from the European Union budget .
Fifthly and finally , support is needed for European Union countries investing in atomic energy .
In this context I would like to draw your attention to the agreement that has been drawn up for the construction of a modern nuclear power station in Ignalin , which is a joint project between Poland , Lithuania , Estonia and Latvia .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , may I say to Mr Reul that , since it has been more or less announced that the Greens do not approve of this report , I intend to focus on the points that I found most disturbing .
These are also reflected in the amendments we have tabled .
During the drafting of this report it was impossible to engage in any critical reflection on nuclear energy .
All the problems in Europe associated with the demise of the safety culture in our nuclear plants were off-limits , even though the incidents in Germany involving reactors operated by the Vattenfall company had just provided a glaring cautionary example .
Discussion of the difficulty of funding waste disposal was likewise off-limits , as was the increasing threat of nuclear material being misused to build bombs or possibly for terrorist purposes .
I must tell you , Mr Reul , that there is one thing which has truly driven me to distraction , and I shall say this before we meet in Bratislava .
It is the fact that in Slovakia now , in 2007 , the Italian ENEL company is planning to complete a nuclear plant that was developed in the Soviet Union before Chernobyl .
Construction began in Czechoslovakia in the early eighties , and two thirds of the construction work was completed .
Now ENEL intends to finish building the plant without new planning permission and without having the plans checked for compliance with European standards .
It is a disgrace .
People who sing the praises of nuclear energy have no right to go on disregarding that disgrace .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , crude oil is more expensive than ever .
This also has an effect on the price of other fossil fuels .
The cost of all forms of energy is rising , as four fifths of the EU 's entire energy consumption is fossil fuel-based .
People are not prepared to reduce consumption , so there is a need for new technologies , greater energy efficiency , carbon capture and storage ( CCS ) and new nuclear technology , including research into nuclear fusion .
After the vote in the Committee 's report , the hopes and dreams for the main alternatives are linked to CCS technology and nuclear power .
There are no guarantees , however , that liquefied carbon dioxide can be stored safely in perpetuity .
There are no signs that there might be investment in the hydrogen economy within the context of the transport infrastructure , let alone the use of electric cars running on carbon dioxide-free electricity , as is called for in the report .
It will probably take half a century to tame nuclear fusion .
All in all , the Commission 's proposal that by 2020 20 % of the energy consumed in the EU should be produced with renewable fuels is just not credible .
That will not be possible , at least not with renewable fuels produced in the EU 's own territory or in the EU 's big Member States .
The report under discussion presents far too optimistic a view because it suggests that fossil fuels will continue to be used , without any real alternatives and with no restraints at all .
They will only stop being used if something forces the situation .
We will be forced into this if natural resources run out before 2020 , but it will not happen as a result of any systematic effort on the part of the EU Member States or an EU declaration .
In fact , it will take not only volition , fine words and pious hopes , but also genuine action which challenges our present lifestyle .
Furthermore , the pricing system for electricity , where wholesale prices for electric power are determined by the power exchanges , should be rethought .
The price is always set by electricity produced at the most expensive production costs as well as that produced based on the most expensive allowances .
This is the price which all the producers get .
Unfortunately , there are no guarantees that companies will spend the excessive profits they make this way on research into energy , as it is in the spirit of the times we live in that they distribute their profits in the form of dividends to their shareholders .
Emission allowance trading is also a way to increase the profits of the electricity companies rather than reduce emissions .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the rapporteur is right to make the point that conventional sources of energy will remain indispensable for several decades to come .
He is also right to call for diversification of energy sources and supplies , for safer and more environmentally conscious energy production and for more efficient energy use .
We are somewhat sceptical , however , about the grounds on which these measures are urged .
In the first place , the stated reasons are largely a repetition of the myth that climate change is due to carbon dioxide emissions from human activity .
Yet growing numbers of scientists , while not disputing the fact of climate change , for the climate is constantly changing , are calling into question the notion of global warming , the culpability of CO2 and the idea that the human race is behind it all .
That being the case , the famous CCS ( carbon capture and storage ) technology - to which the report devotes much space but the long-term risks of which are unclear - sounds like a dodgy ' quick fix ' .
Secondly , and despite the customary allusions to the Member States having primary responsibility for their energy choices , the rapporteur cannot help trying to steer them in a certain direction .
Consider the space that his report devotes to the nuclear option - which remains entirely a matter of sovereign choice for each Member State and which cannot be considered solely from the perspective of CO2 emissions .
Finally , no mention whatever is made of globalisation as contributing to the over-use of fossil fuels .
The promotion of international exchanges of goods at the expense of shorter , local and national , supply circuits is by no means irrelevant here .
What the Commission has been doing for years through its ultra-liberal trade policy and the opening of our markets to global competition without a scrap of protection for our economies - whatever its underlying rationale - is very largely responsible for creating the problems that the Commission now claims it wants to resolve .
Mr President , there is much to commend in this report .
Of course it makes the ritual genuflection to climate change hysteria , despite the increasing doubts over the supposed link between CO2 and climate .
However , it also recognises the importance of diversifying energy supplies and of using fossil fuels , including coal , in the energy mix .
It emphasises the need for energy security , and in this context rightly points to the need for energy efficiency , for continuing use of domestic resources , including coal , and for nuclear energy - both the current use of fission and the vital research on fusion , which is the great hope for the future .
The most remarkable factor in the energy debate is the way that the Greens and their fellow travellers agonise over carbon emissions but oppose the only mainstream low-carbon-generation technology .
With oil at USD 90 a barrel , it is time for Ms Harms to recognise that nuclear power is the cheapest , safest , cleanest , most sustainable and most predictable base-load-generating technology available .
As my colleague Mr Vidal-Quadras has said , nuclear waste disposal is simply a technical problem which has now been solved .

( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to acknowledge the work of the rapporteur , who prepared a well-balanced and realistic report , which reflects the latest developments .
I also appreciate this initiative by Parliament , as it is one of the few reports dealing with conventional energy sources .
I am convinced that in the next few decades fossil fuels will continue to be irreplaceable in the energy mix : they should therefore be given due consideration .
Renewable energy sources are important , though they cannot replace conventional sources .
As stated in this report , our efforts should aim at developing new technologies which allow for energy production with less environmental impact , such as clean coal technology .
Nowadays , when we are experiencing ever-growing energy consumption on the one hand , and a lack of technologies to replace the existing energy sources on the other , an overly unidirectional orientation towards renewable sources could paradoxically accelerate the growth of Member States ' dependency on energy imports from other countries .
Because energy has become the most strategic of commodities , the debates on complete replacing conventional sources may be popular but are very irresponsible .
I regard as a triumph of common sense the fact that this report devotes sufficient attention to nuclear energy .
If we are serious about the strategy for reducing the levels of CO2 emissions close to zero , we cannot reject nuclear energy , which is without question one of the cleanest energy sources .
We should not remain alone in our efforts to reduce CO2 emissions , but strive to convince other superpowers to join us .
Unless countries such as the US , China and India take similar measures , the measures we take will not have any real impact on a global scale because they can influence roughly only one seventh of global CO2 production .
In conclusion , I would like to suggest that the rapporteur study more carefully the differences between nuclear reactors .
There is no comparison between the reactor that exploded in Chernobyl and those installed in the Czech Republic .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Reul 's report begs the important question of what direction Europe and the world are going in on the energy question .
The conflicts continue .
For how long can we contain them ?
There is no easy alternative to fossil energy , given current conditions , not even if we did what we could to save far more energy than we do now .
Oil accounts for around 37 % of the energy we use , gas 24 % and coal 16 % .
Fossil fuels thus account for 77 % of all our energy .
We know that the International Energy Agency predicts that world energy consumption will grow by more than one and a half times each year .
Consumption of fossil energy is expected to increase by even more than that because the large developing countries have little faith in wind power stations .
The developing countries account for 70 % of growth in energy consumption , and China alone represents 30 % of that growth .
The reserves of fossil fuels are therefore running out and are concentrated in fewer and fewer hands .
It will take decades to change the energy system .
Time is running out ; this is actually a race against time .
Unless we can sort out the environmental and energy problems we cannot guarantee peace .
If I could mention some areas of action : we need intensive research , product development and new technologies , and we also need to change our behaviour .
In Europe we do not even conduct intensive research , even though we are heading for greater dependence , higher prices and conflict .
I just heard that the United States of America spends five times more money on environmental research than the Union .
How is it that the Lisbon knowledge-based economy works in this way ?
Finally , it needs to be said that energy has its social dimension . Prices have risen by 50 % in just a few years .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Reul 's report is a very good and thorough report and I congratulate him on it .
I am astonished , however , at the space it devotes to coal .
Coal is undoubtedly an abundant energy source .
It is also the world 's most widespread source of fossil energy .
I am concerned , however , at its increasingly predominant role in electricity generation .
The impression is given that carbon capture and storage technology will solve the problem of greenhouse gas emissions from coal-fired power stations , but I must confess that I am sceptical .
There are coal-fired power stations all over the world : is it possible to equip them all with carbon capture systems ?
How will we manage to prevent CO2 emissions from the so-called ' clean ' coal-fired plants ?
Is there not a risk that , having already experienced the eras of wood burning , coal burning and oil burning , we might now be taking a backward step into another coal burning era ?
To conclude on a more optimistic note , the report 's strength lies , in my opinion , in its proposal for the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
The plan needs to address the necessary diversification of energy sources by 2020 , 2030 and 2050 and it must also reflect the importance of resource use at regional level .
( PL ) Mr President , of the energy sources listed in the report , it is only coal , whether it be hard coal or brown coal , that is available in large amounts within the European Union .
By and large , we have to import the other energy fuels .
Energy requirements will increase in line with growth .
At present it is not clear how successful we will be in developing production from renewable energy sources or from hydrogen batteries , but these too need energy supplies .
For this reason , despite enormous efforts , we should not give up on coal too quickly as an accessible source of energy .
We are not doing enough to develop clean energy from coal .
More resources should be put into processing coal and into improving the efficiency of boilers and generators .
We must maintain energy security and one of the elements of this is the coal that is available in nearly all EU countries .
We cannot afford to dislike our natural riches .
Finally , I would like to congratulate Herbert Reul and his colleagues for an excellent and balanced report , which I fully support .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is good to see you burning the midnight oil along with us .
In Europe , we have a vast renewable energy potential .
In Scotland , we know that better than most .
As Ms Harms has said , my Group has a number of difficulties with the pro-nuclear aspects of this report .
But my own view is that we must also make sure that we do research into other , non-nuclear sources of power and research into ways to make them better .
In paragraph 47 , carbon-capture is experimental but it is promising , and in paragraph 47 we call on the Commission to lay down , as soon as possible , clear political guidelines for the promotion of research into carbon capture and storage .
Commissioner , I am delighted to hear you are going to do that .
It is important because , left to their own devices , the Member States will not come up with it .
In Scotland , we had at Peterhead a world-leading proposal for a demonstrator site .
Because of political uncertainty entirely caused by the London Government not making it a priority , the project is going ahead - and it is going ahead in California .
Europe can have a lead in this ; we can be globally significant in the research potential that we have , but we must have real action .
I am glad to hear that this report has some ideas which the Commission is taking forward .
( CS ) I would like to make 10 points regarding the report by Mr Reul .
It is an excellent and well-balanced report , which , in my opinion , is written in the spirit of Antoine de Saint Exupéry 's words about our future : our task is not to foresee it , but to enable it .
The report lists practically all the conventional energy sources , except perhaps , to please the Green Members here , for ebonite sticks and fox tails .
Jokes aside , I recognise the exhaustive manner with which the report encompasses the general regulations governing the energy sector .
As Professor Semjonov 's historical findings confirm , since prehistoric and ancient times the same basic laws have applied : on the one hand humans have tried to lower the energy intensity of technologies , while on the other hand they have strived to produce more energy .
In my opinion , today an effective combination of energy sources and diversification of gas imports is vital .
The weight of the European single market should be increased as a factor for guaranteeing the stability and reliability of supplies .
There are of course environmental risks involved , which would need to be carefully assessed .
The rapporteur , Mr Reul , refers for example to the Arctic shelves , which , according to some estimates , account for up to 25 % of new gas and oil sources .
The Commission will undoubtedly be asked to take measures to reduce the energy intensity per unit of GDP .
Another essential task is drawing up a reasonable technology transfer policy .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SK ) Allow me to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Reul , on his excellent report .
This reports captures the status quo in the area of conventional energy sources and technologies , and at the same time draws attention , in a complex way , towards many aspects of their further use in the context of both securing energy supplies and the need to continuously increase emissions .
Since there is an increasing need for energy on a global scale , the European Union cannot afford to completely eliminate fossil fuels since they play an important part in overall energy production although their reserves keep diminishing .
In spite of the fact that the European Union is on average relatively effective in producing energies from these conventional sources , some Member States could do still much more in the area of introducing and supporting new , more effective technologies and developing new , more effective cooperation units .
Nor should the Member States create needless obstacles to new investments in the use of fossil reserves through the most advanced technologies available .
Another issue I want to concentrate on is nuclear energy .
As we know , nuclear energy generates practically no CO2 emissions and I am convinced that sooner or later it will find its place even in those Member States that so far have been against it for ideological rather than pragmatic reasons .
Since new technologies , such as fourth-generation reactors , are constantly developing ( even in Russia , Mrs Harms ) , there are now options in place for further improvements to their operating safety and for safe storage of spent nuclear fuel .
To conclude , I would like to say that I appreciate that the work of the Commission shows a tangible tilt towards more a open and objective view and evaluation of the benefits of nuclear energy , resulting in initiatives such as the European Nuclear Energy Forum , the inaugural meeting of which will be held in Bratislava in November later this year , as mentioned in this House .
Europe has long been lacking such a permanent platform for discussion , contributing to the exchange of knowledge , information and opinion .
Such exchange will be useful both to the experts and the public in general , and I assume that it will be useful to the Greens as well .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to touch on two points .
The first is one on which I hope and believe we are firmly united , namely the view that conventional sources and forms of energy and technology will continue to play a major role in the future .
The idea that we can replace everything with energy from alternative sources is illusory .
We must , however , make conventional technology environment-friendlier - that is absolutely essential - and we must also ensure that conventional forms of technology become more efficient .
These are the views we share , and in these respects the report can be strongly endorsed .
The situation is perhaps somewhat different with regard to nuclear technology .
It must be absolutely clear , with no ifs or buts , that every country can choose its own forms of technology , in other words it can opt for nuclear technology or choose to get by without recourse to the nuclear option .
Another principle that must be common to all of us is the primacy of safety - not only safety in the energy production process but also , of course , safe final disposal and , what is very important in today 's world , where the significance of the global dimension is constantly growing , the non-proliferation of nuclear technology that can be used for military purposes .
I would have liked to see the report focus rather more sharply on these issues .
We have , admittedly , addressed them in other reports , and I believe Europe must set the best of examples in this field .
Regardless of what might be called the ideological stance - whether we are for or against nuclear technology - safety must be absolutely paramount .
I hope that we in this Parliament and , of course , the Commission will be increasingly vigilant so as to ensure that all safety issues , including non-proliferation , remain in the foreground , otherwise we shall be failing in our responsibility for mankind and for peace in the world .
I hope that this message might yet come across more clearly tomorrow in some amendments than it does in Mr Reul 's report .
( BG ) Geopolitical interests and the striking of balances , the level of technological development and its impact on the economy create the necessary conditions for a second chance to nuclear energy as an important element of the energy mix .
This theme is very important and topical against the backdrop of the heated debate on the climate change , the security of energy supplies and the alternative power generation solution .
In my country Bulgaria , Kozlodui Nuclear Power Plant acounted for 43 % of the total power generation in the country , contributing to the sustainable development of the economy in 2006 .
Of course , these figures pertain to the period before the closing down of units three and four of the nuclear power plant on 31 December 2006 .
Analyses reveal that in the next few decades to come the consumption of electricity will double globally .
All over the world , 31 reactors are under construction and others are in the planning phase .
This dynamic process comes to show that active efforts are being made to seek solutions in order to overcome the challenges facing modern economies , to provide inexpensive and clean energy , to cope with the climate change , to observe the greenhouse emission quotas under the Kyoto Protocol , to safeguard the security of supplies and to reduce the dependence on imported gas and oil .
And if I recall yeat another fact , i.e. currently nuclear power plants generate one-third of the elecrticity in the European Union , then I would conclude that perhaps the time for a nuclear Renaissance has come .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the report should be commended for including all sectors of the energy mix while looking at conventional sources in particular .
We certainly need to step up the effectiveness of fossil fuel use .
I am convinced , however , that there are several reasons why we cannot do without nuclear energy .
Sustainable development , preservation of competitiveness in the broadest sense , true environmental protection and emission reductions are just some of these reasons .
We are finally beginning to discuss nuclear energy without letting unhelpful feelings and emotions guide us , although some of the amendments tabled and even some of the contributions still do not bear witness to this .
I am therefore glad to hear realistic voices from the Commission and other EU institutions saying that we need to incorporate nuclear energy even in the future .
In many countries nuclear energy already represents a key source , and is a guarantee of the much-discussed notion of energy independence and security .
It seems at last that by pursuing quotas and percentages we will not end up doing what a Czech proverb describes in a colourful way as ' throwing the baby out with the bath water ' .
( ES ) Mr President , the own-initiative report we shall be voting on tomorrow is the third and final such report drafted by this House and concludes Parliament 's response to the energy review submitted by the Commission at the beginning of the year .
Our colleague Herbert Reul has done a magnificent job throughout the debate in committee and has produced a sound , consistent text which fully encompasses the concerns of the majority of MEPs .
For a long time , fossil fuels and nuclear energy will continue to be the nub of our energy mix and despite the ambitious targets we have set ourselves for renewables , the contribution that they make will not be truly significant for several decades .
Therefore , we must not temper efforts to research , develop and innovate in conventional sources since fulfilling our commitments in relation to climate change , security of supply and competitiveness involves achieving a more sustainable use of these sources .
The result of the committee vote was excellent as it highlighted the progress made in controlling the capture of carbon dioxide , in improving energy efficiency in the generation of electricity , in the contribution which synthetic fuels for transport can make , and in the competitiveness of the nuclear sector .
One Group in this House has tabled almost 40 amendments to the nuclear section seeking to change all objective and realistic references to nuclear fuels to references to renewable sources .
I would like to remind them that this matter has already been voted on at a previous plenary sitting and , allow me please to tell the Group concerned , that it is free to live in a world divorced from reality , but that we will all suffer the consequences if their obsessions ultimately mean that their arguments prevail .
The majority of the members of this House prefer to work with facts and to use those facts to draft sensible policies which do not lead our society into collective breakdown .
( BG ) Allow me , first and foremost , to congratulate the rapporteur Mr Reul on his objective and balanced report .
A major distinctive feature of the report is the clear outline of the role of conventional energy sources , the need for their increasingly efficient use through new technologies to achieve the energy security of the European Union with maximum compliance with the sustainable development goals and the combat against climate changes .
I would like to support the conclusion that the increased investment in energy technologies at the European and national levels would not only contribute to the attainment of the EU energy goals but it would also enhance its capabilities to export facilities in compliance with the higher efficiency and security standards .
I would like to single out that section of the report which deals with nuclear energy not only because of its leading place in the generation of power from conventional sources but also because of the vital importance for nuclear energy to observe the highest nuclear safety standards .
In this sense , the support to the appeal of the Commission to introduce common nuclear safety reference levels in the European Union is a crucial aspect of the report .
I would like to specially emphasize the fact that Bulgaria , which intends to build a new nuclear power plant , takes great interest in the enhanced role of the European Union in the observance of high nuclear safety standards , as well as in the creation of favourable investment conditions for these large-scale projects that call for big financial , material and intellectual resource input .
The work of the European Union , including the High-level Group on Nuclear Safety and Waste Management and the existing Nuclear Energy Forum , will contribute to the incorporation of nuclear energy into the EU policies in a more objective manner .
( DE ) Mr President , necessary though it is to enact measures to combat climate change and promote renewables , it is extremely important that Parliament should also deal with the future of conventional energy sources .
The Reul report emphasises the huge importance of coal and nuclear power to the regional economy .
We have 300 000 European jobs in coalmining alone .
Additional economic strength is provided by the power stations and through tax revenue .
Some 60 % of our electricity generation is based on European coal or nuclear power .
Of course we must increase the efficiency and safety of these energy sources . Of course we must also seek to protect the environment by developing additional legal provisions governing matters such as carbon emissions .
On the other hand , we must not turn the legislative screw so tight that coal loses its international competitiveness .
The fact is that renewable energy sources will not be able to grow as quickly as we would wish .
We face the threat of restrictions on our independence in the field of foreign policy and arbitrary actions on the part of our energy suppliers .
The only way to avoid that threat in future is with a strategic energy mix which also includes coal and nuclear power .
( ET ) If climate change is to be brought under control it is important to reduce carbon emissions from combustion of fossil fuels to near zero .
However , in order to prevent and mitigate the unwanted effects of climate change action must be taken now .
Clean coal technology may prove to be possible , but we cannot pin all our hopes on it at present .
The European Union must significantly reduce current greenhouse gas emissions and that must remain the cornerstone of our climate policy .
I am pleased that the European Parliament Temporary Committee on Climate Change has recently approved a strong line for our negotiations at the Bali Climate Conference in December .
Where clean coal technology is concerned , the funds currently available for the necessary research can of course be increased because the matter must be researched .
However , we cannot spend decades waiting for research findings without doing anything else and therefore we must now concentrate on measures which must be implemented immediately , namely reducing CO2 emissions , energy-saving measures and a general transition to renewable sources of energy .
The vote of the ITRE committee has resulted in too great an emphasis on nuclear energy in the Reul report and there has been too little discussion of renewables .
Therefore I fully support the amendments tabled in the House , as they help to balance the report .
In particular I call upon you to support the proposed amendments recommending that the European Commission make renewables the central focus of its own European Strategic Energy Technology Plan .

Mr President , first I must commend Mr Reul for skilfully steering his report through about 200 committee-stage amendments to provide this House with a very balanced , consistent and honest report that is highly relevant to the challenges we face today and in the future .
Many of those defeated amendments have reappeared at the last minute , and we in plenary must throw them out again .
These amendments damage not only the report : in the end , they damage the environment that some of the proposals claim to represent .
I use the word ' honest ' most deliberately , because Mr Reul has used real words like ' coal ' and ' nuclear ' , rather than hiding behind the generalities of what might or might not be sustainable or renewable , and it is clear that we will continue to rely on burning fossil fuels for generations to come .
Of course we support renewables .
We do so because they provide necessary , clean energy .
However , in most Member States , renewable energy can meet neither our environmental targets , nor our accelerated energy demands , nor our need to remain competitive in global markets .
As responsible politicians , we must discard the dogmas of the past and recognise that all clean technologies have their role to play .
Quite simply , we must retain and advance the nuclear share - and we will still not be doing enough .
In my country , Bulgaria , we were needlessly required to close 2 000 MW of safe , clean nuclear power .
( ES ) Mr President , despite the ambitious targets we have set ourselves , it would appear that we all agree that conventional sources of energy will continue to be an important part of our energy mix .
Therefore , nuclear energy will also continue to play an important role as it is still necessary in order to ensure security and stability of supply in many countries .
To that end it is reasonable for research to be carried out in areas where nuclear energy 's weaknesses are more apparent such as safety or treatment of waste , but we should note that the report clearly endorses the idea that the nuclear option falls within the exclusive competence of the Member States , as Mr Reul noted at the outset .
However , it would appear that some people intend Europe to entrust its future almost exclusively to nuclear energy , making the development of renewables , increased efficiency or research subordinate to it .
There is one small detail which we should ponder : what are the public 's views on this ?
We have very much taken the reality of the situation into account but , of course , we must have clear priorities and in that regard it should be noted that the importance of the Strategic Energy Technology Plan which the Commission is due to submit to us soon is one very important aspect of this .
We believe that the main objective should be to reduce the cost of renewables , to improve the energy efficiency of buildings , industry and transport , and to make progress in low carbon technologies .
Europe and the Member States should make these objectives their political priority and the focus of their efforts to build a future energy policy .
( RO ) The gross energy production in the European Union is achieved based on various energy sources : 31 % nuclear energy , 29 % coal , 19 % gas , 14 % sources of renewable energy and 5 % oil .
Romania produces 13.5 % of its energy from oil , 15.3 % from coal and coke and 5.9 % is hydroelectric and nuclear-electrical energy .
As regards nuclear energy , it is essential to ensure its security and , especially , adequate waste treatment .
Generation IV nuclear energy systems will allow better nuclear waste management and decrease its quantity .
Nevertheless , an extremely important element for environmental protection should refer to the treatment of water used to cool reactors .
For this reason , the investments in the security and treatment of radioactive waste should be a priority for the countries that generate nuclear energy .
The Black Sea region is extremely important for diversifying the European Union 's sources of energy .
The region has a strategic importance , not only for the transportation of hydrocarbons from the Caspian Sea region to the European Union , but also for the coal resources existing in Romania , Bulgaria , Turkey , Ukraine and Russia .
It is important for the coal industry to provide work safety and health conditions .
As long as coal is a source of energy , it is important to have the necessary investments in order to provide workplace safety .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the rapporteur and all the shadow rapporteurs .
It is a particular achievement of this report that the European Parliament has realised beyond any shadow of a doubt , and accepted , that ideological concerns cannot override environmental and economic necessity .
Some of the current Member States have attempted to do just this over the past half-century but , as we know , were unsuccessful .
It was in 1956 that Hungary abandoned the vain political notion that it could be a country of iron and steel .
Fortunately the European Union has not had to go to such extremes to realise and acknowledge that we will need all our knowledge and all our resources if we are to meet our energy requirements securely in the 21st century .
This calls for the maximum possible diversification in terms of both sources and technologies .
Ideology cannot decide what sort of footing Europe 's energy supply will rest on in 10 , 20 or 50 years ' time ; science must decide .
The politicians ' role is to demand safety , coordinate sources , and increase public acceptance .
For this task I wish all of us - as Hungarian miners would say - ' jó szerencsét ' , may we come out safely at the end of the day !
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as was mentioned , this is the third report on the Commission decision and the later decision of the European Council .
The Vidal-Quadras report has helped us formulate the internal market package .
The Thomsen report will have a huge influence on our proposals on renewables .
I can also promise that we will follow the vote on the Reul report very carefully , because the outcome of that report will influence the approach to CCS - first of all the legal proposal and also the report - and also our Strategic Energy Technology Plan and our future policy , as far as the Euratom Treaty gives us a mandate for nuclear energy .
That is why this vote will be very carefully followed by the Commission .
At the same time I would like to emphasise a couple of points .
It was mentioned that we need to modernise the energy sector .
If I recall - now , in 2007 - the first debate in 2004 , I believe we have achieved a lot .
Definitely , security of supply and climate change are closely related , with perhaps just one major difference at this stage , which is the cost for carbon sequestration , but I believe oil price developments will help .
At the same time , weather challenges were mentioned .
We do not invest in sufficient resources .
We should really decide on priorities .
Without massive investment in research and development in the energy sector , we will not succeed .
I believe the three-year debate was very helpful to prepare the ground .
But now it is really time to address the issues .
How can one claim , for example , that some Member States are dependent on third countries when the Structural Funds are not being used for energy at all , or practically not at all !
I would say also the part in national budgets for research and development is small .
So these are the crucial issues to deal with .
I am afraid that not much time is left until we have some serious perturbation in the market .
So , we need to act , and to act now , on the basis on which Parliament has worked so far .
There was also mention of one particular issue : that we need sufficient energy resources .
Sufficient resources need energy demand management .
Here again , Parliament has moved and the Commission has moved , and at the same time I needed to start 12 infringement cases for not communicating energy efficiency action plans , the basis for action on energy demand .
With regard to demand and dependence on third countries , this is also something that we should overcome .
I think the Saryusz-Wolski report was a courageous attempt to go for it .
If one Member State is being blackmailed by a supplier , it should speak out .
Because the basic reason is that we have a common foreign and security policy ( CFSP ) that could give the necessary grounds for common action , and I believe that any country that has enough courage to blackmail any of the EU countries will think twice , or never again blackmail , if this is spoken of and discussed in the Council .
The last part of my intervention will be on nuclear energy .
It is very clear that , under the Reform Treaty , the energy mix comes under national decision-making .
That means that the decision on nuclear energy is to be made by each and every Member State .
But it should also be understood that conditions now definitely demand that the legislation in place should guarantee transparency and predictability , because it is a very long-term investment .
Mr Swoboda also mentioned non-proliferation issues .
We are looking at these , but in my opinion , it is very clear that the CFSP has priority and Euratom should fill in and help .
It is definitely the CFSP that should lead our activities on non-proliferation .
Two very concrete responses .
First of all , Mochovce .
Slovenské Elektrárne has indeed notified its intention to construct a nuclear power plant .
It is for a VVR reactor 440 / 213 but it is not of the Chernobyl type .
The Commission , in accordance with Article 41 of the Euratom Treaty , will prepare an opinion , taking full account of all the challenges this decision poses .
This will take time , but you can be assured that the Commission will perform the correct assessment and will not hesitate if we have any doubts about the safety of this equipment .
On the issue of coming here to talk about the closure of some of the nuclear units , a debate on this issue would not be productive .
This issue was agreed by the experts who prepared the ground .
It was discussed at a political level and it was agreed at government level and sealed by a referendum in all the Member States , including the countries where these reactors are .
Please do not return to this , because it distracts us from future developments .
There is no way these reactors will get the green light for prolonging their work time .
This is a dead end .
Please understand that there will be no development .
I know , perhaps , you have personal views on it , but there will definitely not be developed , at least from the European Commission .
The opinion has been formed .
It was democratically agreed , and let us keep and honour the commitment .
I greatly appreciate the report that has been drawn up .
It is a very difficult report and I believe it has got the accent right .
I hope that the vote will definitely help us finalise the paper that we are to prepare by the end of the year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 24 October .
European Statistical Governance Advisory Board - European Statistical Advisory Council ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
by Sharon Bowles , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board - C6-0348 / 2006 - and
by Ieke van den Burg , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council setting up a European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy - C6-0379 / 2006 - .
Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 2005 the Commission , with the support of the Council and Parliament , embarked on a process to reform statistical governance in the European Union with the aim of strengthening the independence , integrity and responsibility of the national statistics institutes of all the Member States of the Union and , of course , of Eurostat , the European Statistical Office .
The first aspect of this process was the adoption in May 2005 of a European Statistics Code of Practice .
Implementation of that code resulted in closer cooperation between Eurostat and the national statistics institutes and in improved reliability of statistical data gathered for many purposes ; in particular , however , I would like to refer to one objective which has been the subject of debate here over the years , namely the excessive public deficit procedure .
When it proposed the Code of Practice , the Commission also recommended that the self-regulatory focus should be counter-balanced by the establishment of a reporting system to monitor adherence to the code .
That gave rise to the idea of establishing an independent external advisory body to play an active role in monitoring implementation of the Code of Practice in the European statistical system as a whole .
At the same time the Commission noted that it was appropriate to review the operation and composition of the European Advisory Committee on Statistical Information in the Economic and Social Spheres , with the aim of making it more efficient and allowing it to play a more strategic role .
The ECOFIN Council and , more generally , the national statistics authorities welcomed both recommendations and the Commission implemented them in a dual proposal in October last year ; we are debating those proposals today with the prospect that , and I hope we will be able to confirm whether you agree with me here , they will be adopted at first reading .
To that end I would especially like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mrs Bowles and Mrs Van den Burg , on their work and the quality of their reports .
This process of strengthening European statistical governance is supplemented by a new Commission proposal adopted on 16 October , only a few days ago , to review the Regulation on the production of European statistics .
That proposal is also subject to Council and Parliamentary approval under the codecision procedure and we will therefore have the opportunity to debate it again here in the coming months .
This set of initiatives will provide the Union with a modern , reliable , efficient European statistical system capable of improving public confidence in official statistical data .
I refer once again to the debates we have often had in this House in recent years on the importance of reliable budget data , or reliable data for other national public accounts , GDP etc . , or the need to have a price index upon which the public can fully rely .
As regards the reports we are debating tonight , allow me to point out simply that from our point of view it would have been preferable if there were greater respect for the institutional balance , as envisaged , in our view , in the initial proposal , in relation to the appointment of members of the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board and the drafting and transmission of that Board 's reports .
In any event , the Commission acknowledges that the amendments to the original proposals are unquestionably important , they have the support of the Council and Parliament and they do not alter the substance of our original proposals .
In view of this , Mr President , before I close I would like to reiterate my thanks to the rapporteurs , and to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for their excellent work and for the continuous support for the Commission 's work to modernise our statistical system and make it more reliable and more robust .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this decision concerns the setting up of the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board .
Statistics are used by Member States , by the EU , internationally and by many other stakeholders for a variety of purposes .
They are used , for example , by the European Central Bank , for economic analysis ; the Commission , through Eurostat , produces statistics that are compiled from data produced by Member States .
A few years ago questions arose over the credibility of statistics being provided by some Member States to the EU institutions , and it was clear that some kind of quality control was needed .
As the Commissioner has said , in response , a Code of Conduct on statistical procedures was compiled .
In order to provide a check for consistency and adherence to the Code of Practice , each national statistical office is checked by peer review which involves another Member State and Eurostat .
As a further check , it was also proposed to introduce an independent , high-level advisory board .
It is that board , now called the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board , which is the subject of this proposal .
It is fair to say that there is a high degree of sensitivity on all sides about how intrusive the role of the Board can be .
I am grateful to the current Portuguese Presidency , and , before them , the German Presidency , and also to the Commission for being frank with me about these sensitivities .
Parliament , of course , was determined that the Board had to be more than a rubber stamp for the Commission 's report .
However , we have achieved agreement around a balanced and workable proposal which includes most of Parliament 's amendments in some form or another .
I am particularly pleased that we have been able to agree with the Council that dialogue should be encouraged , not only between the Board and this Statistical Programme Committee and the European Statistical Advisory Committee , but also with Member States ' stakeholder bodies .
The Board will report to Parliament and the Council and will include in its report an assessment of their implementation of the Code of Practice in the European Statistical System as a whole .
The Board will also advise the Commission on appropriate measures to facilitate implementation of the Code of Practice as it relates to Eurostat and to the European Statistical System as a whole .
It will further advise on communicating the Code of Practice to users and data providers and on updating the Code of Practice .
Measures to ensure the independence of the Board and involving the Parliament in the appointments have also been included .
So , after consulting the Commission , the Council selects and the European Parliament approves the nomination of the chairperson of the Board .
Parliament and the Council each appoint three members of the Board .
The chairperson is not to be a current member of a national statistical office , or of the Commission , or to have held such a post within the last two years .
We considered similar exclusions on all members but that is not really practical .
However , we have added a requirement that the Board provide a range of complementary skills and experience .
Just in case we have not got the balance right , the Board itself should be in a position to know whether it has been frustrated or not , so there is a review clause after three years .
This will give sufficient time for the Board and others to be able to indicate whether the procedures are working and effective or whether there are changes that are necessary , and this must be a serous review .
Parliament , the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission have had a very effective dialogue on this dossier , and I thank them .
I am pleased to be in a position to be able to lead this proposal through in a single reading with the support from shadow rapporteurs , whom I also thank .
rapporteur . - Mr President , let me first make two preliminary remarks .
One is that , obviously , this subject of statistics is not a very sexy subject and is always placed at the end of the agenda .
But what concerns me a bit is that there are politicians , MEPs and others who often like to complain about the provision of statistics .
But then , if there is an opportunity to really improve something , they are not really actively involved in making the situation better .
The second remark is that I hope the Commissioner , at least , will appreciate that we are having this debate .
Ms Bowles and I have said that , for us , it is not really necessary to have the debate .
But it is important to underline the fact that you have done something on statistics , and that issue deserves some attention .
So I hope you will not blame us for keeping you here at this hour .
Let me , then , congratulate you on the very concrete measures that you have taken vis-à-vis these problems with statistics , which have appeared several times in recent history .
I know that you had to do this in the political room for manoeuvre that is granted to you by the Council , because we are aware that the European Commission cannot oblige Member States to establish independent statistical offices and prescribe to them how to work and how to deal with figures and data .
Ministers and MEPs who are the loudest and firmest in complaining about the lack of reliability of the figures of others are also the ones who do not want you to mix in their business and infringe on their autonomy and their way of dealing with statistics .
This is the problem you have to deal with .
But , in this context , I think it was wise of you , Commissioner , to take a pragmatic , bottom-up approach , to focus on peer reviews and a code of practice , and to reform the governance structure of the statistics system by creating a new high level governance board , which Ms Bowles was speaking about , and by reforming the existing European Advisory Committee on Statistical Information in the Economic and Social Spheres ( CEIES ) , which dealt with economic and social statistics , into a more streamlined and smaller advisory committee with a broader mandate .
In Ms Bowles ' and my report we have tried to improve this even more , and to reinforce and strengthen the approach of the Commission .
At the same time , we have also made sure - in accordance with your proposal - that these two new bodies in the European family can function properly and with more independence from the Commission and Eurostat .
This may not have been completely in line with the Commission 's intentions ; however , I want to express my appreciation to the Director-General of Eurostat for very generously accepting the fact that we took away his voting rights in the system that we designed .
I also want to express my appreciation to the Portuguese Presidency , and to Ms Cordeiro , for the efficient way she chaired the Council working group and negotiated with us a first reading agreement on this issue .
This was a very efficient and very time- and bureaucracy-saving procedure .
So , Mr Hans-Peter Martin , who has also asked for the floor , can see an example of how we can deal in a very efficient way with this type of co-decision procedure .
Let me very briefly give some of the elements of the statistical board , which I will do in writing .
If you read the dossier , you can find where we made the changes , so I will not repeat this here but will stick to my wish that these two bodies will really bring some consciousness and some improvement in the way the statistics systems function , and will help us to really have reliable figures and base our economic activities on reliable data .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , improving the European statistical system is part of the wider task of sound economic governance in the Union , particularly with regard to adjustment of the Stability and Growth Pact .
I share the wish expressed by both the Commission and the Member States to enhance the quality of statistical information .
As I see it , determining what constitutes an excessive deficit depends on the reliability of the data .
Unreliable data puts the entire Stability and Growth Pact in jeopardy .
In return for flexibility in implementation of the pact , which was introduced under the reform adopted by the March 2005 European Council , the necessary figures must be indisputable and verifiable .
Flexibility is important too in the current context of enlargement of the euro zone .
We need to learn the lessons of past experience !
The European Union has already been obliged to review the statistics relating to a Member State 's budget deficit and level of debt ; now several Member States want to join the euro zone , so the volume of statistical information to be processed will increase , as will the number of parties involved in the discussions .
The proposed improvement to the European statistical system aims to address legitimate concerns that have been raised concerning the validity of the data which Member States supply and the system for checking them .
We need to take care that doubt is not cast over the entire statistical system and over Eurostat 's ability to verify the budget data which the Member States provide .
For these reasons I support the reform , which will result firstly in the establishment of a European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy and secondly in the creation of a European Statistical Governance Advisory Board - both bodies capable of actively helping to monitor implementation of the code of conduct throughout the entire European statistical system .
I have no hesitation in supporting the proposals made by our two excellent rapporteurs .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you have already pointed out , Commissioner , statistics are vitally important to both the European Union and the Member States in many policy areas .
If wrong decisions and unwelcome developments are to be avoided , statistics must be meaningful , reliable , open to only one interpretation and therefore comparable too .
That , unfortunately , has not always been the case .
I therefore welcome the establishment of the European Statistical Advisory Committee and the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board .
The amendments tabled by the European Parliament will , I hope , endow both bodies with the authority they will need .
Let me emphasise first of all that the Statistical Advisory Committee will be independent and that all stakeholder groups will be represented on it .
The Committee will have far fewer members than its predecessor , the European Advisory Committee on Statistical Information in the Economic and Social Spheres ( CEIES ) , and the reduction from 79 to 24 members will make it considerably more efficient .
I welcome the fact that the European Data Protection Supervisor is to be a voting member of the Advisory Committee , whereas the Director-General of Eurostat has only been granted non-voting membership .
This underlines the Committee 's independence .
Secondly , the Statistical Governance Advisory Board is a useful complement to the Advisory Committee .
The Board will monitor and , I hope , actively encourage the application of the Code of Conduct in all European statistical matters .
One can only hope that , with the aid of these two bodies , the needs of users will have a greater impact on the statistical work programme and that the Code of Conduct will strike such firm roots that deliberately or mistakenly delivered misinformation or inaccurate data will become a thing of the past .
Let me conclude by thanking both rapporteurs for their work and for their willingness to discuss contentious points frankly and constructively .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express my appreciation to Mrs Bowles and Mrs van den Burg for their reports .
We should be aware of the role played by the European statistical system , which may be the world 's best system .
We are talking here not just about the clarity of lists of figures , tables or charts .
The most important issue is the reliability and completeness of statistical data at the level of the European Union , of the Member States , and also , and this I would like to emphasise , of the regions .
For that purpose it is vital to ensure continuity of information as well as access to it .
I would add here that only statistical data that have been collected and collated in the same way , in accordance with statistical principles , can be reliable and transparent , and will not be affected by short-term interests or passing priorities .
My experience in regional policy has shown clearly that such risks exist .
For this reason we should be pleased that we have an EU statistical programme for 2008-2012 .
To make it work will , however , need appropriate funding and , above all , will require appropriate consultation , monitoring of the code of statistical procedures as well as statistics management .
This is very important in the light of the different systems used in Member States , the need to coordinate and unify them at the level of the 27 countries and statistical offices as well as Eurostat .
In this context I would like to support both the reports .
( DE ) Mr President , there is general agreement as to how important statistics are , and not just among the people who have managed to come here at this late hour .
The question is whether the aim which I presume we are all pursuing will be achieved with the measures that are being initiated here .
It made me wonder , Commissioner , when you spoke of another new regulation that was to be negotiated with us .
Perhaps you can tell us whether its provisions will also affect these advisory bodies .
The second question is this : there is always a great inherent danger with advisory bodies that they will become a law unto themselves and drag everything out .
Would it not have made more sense at the end of the day to evaluate briefly , concisely and clearly , using external management consultants where necessary , the problems that have occurred with Eurostat and then come to a rapid agreement with Parliament rather than passing the buck again and shelving the issue ?
When all is said and done , every one of us knows that the crux of the problem is the interface between Eurostat and the national statistical offices .
The best an advisory body can do is to put the problem back on the agenda , but it is certainly not going to establish real transparency and efficiency .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 24 October .
Agenda for next part session : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I should like to come back to a decision that was made yesterday afternoon .
However , I must put on record that neither the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , nor the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , or any of the other groups were informed about the wish for us to adopt a resolution on Russia this time , even though this has been repeatedly rejected in the Conference of Presidents .
We must , of course , take note of the decision .
However , I should like to record here - and we shall also inform the groups that have requested this , particularly the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe - that we are not asking for this resolution to be adopted now , but at Parliament 's next sitting instead .
I should simply like to record this here .
We must , of course , formally abide by the rules .
However , we do want to say here , out of fairness to the Greens and Liberals , that we are asking for this resolution to be adopted not this week , but at the next plenary session .
The Socialist Group will be voting on it in any case and I believe the EPP has a similar idea .

Mr President , actually I totally support Mr Swoboda , since we were not told and therefore have not prepared anything for this resolution this week .
Our group , like the PSE Group , did not know about this , and we ask you to postpone the vote to the next part-session .
Thank you , we take note of your request .
It will be passed on to the other groups as appropriate and we will see how the matter can be resolved .
Documents received : see Minutes
Written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Taxation and customs policies and the Lisbon Strategy ( debate )
The next item is the report by Sahra Wagenknecht , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the contribution of taxation and customs policies to the Lisbon Strategy .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question as to whether the Member States ' taxation policy actually helps to promote growth , employment and innovation at present can unfortunately be answered in very few words : it does not !
Growth is simply not promoted by abandoning to free fall the tax rates of highly profitable conglomerates in a Europe-wide dumping race and in return demanding cash increasingly forcefully from average wage earners , the unemployed and pensioners in their capacity as consumers .
Growth is not promoted by subjecting income from employment to a tax rate that is several times greater than that applied to income from assets , thereby making the gap between them ever wider .
Employment is not promoted when small investing enterprises are taxed disproportionately more than those tinkering speculatively in shares , bonds and financial derivatives .
Innovation is certainly not promoted as long as multinationals with gilt-edged balance sheets are able to stash away the best part of research and development funds in their accounts , while those who are actually targeted for this kind of benefit are left out in the rain .
In brief : a socially balanced perspective and development is certainly not being promoted in the EU , but is virtually being stalled while those rolling in money are being treated to more and more tax breaks and fattened up even more while those who already have little are having to dig ever deeper into their pockets .
This kind of taxation policy is fatal in terms of economic policy , counterproductive in terms of growth policy and catastrophic in terms of social policy .
I know that the structure of national taxation systems still lies , of course , within the sovereignty of the Member States on paper , but the reality is somewhat different .
The lack of EU-wide coordination actually means - even in the direct taxation sector - that national taxation systems are increasingly no longer designed at all on the basis of policy , but are formed and moulded by the ice-cold system of tax competition .
This system can involve a simple denominator : the more mobile a factor , the greater its potential for extortion against national fiscal services and the more sweeping the tax relief , of course , which it is able to enforce itself .
If government revenues are not to dry up and run out completely in this process , the sectors not able to escape taxation at all , or only with difficulty , must be taxed even more heavily almost as compensation .
Taxes are therefore shifted - from corporate profits to private income , and then from investment income to labour income , which is even less mobile , within income from highly paid employment to less well paid employees , who are also correspondingly less mobile , and generally from income and assets to consumption .
The fact that this process is in force - and has been for years and decades - can be very clearly demonstrated by the data on tax receipts and taxation rates in the EU .
Not only the legal tax rates but also the actual tax rates on corporate profits in the EU have fallen in the last decade by over 10 percentage points .
All the studies carried out on this subject confirm this .
The highest tax rates have been reduced virtually everywhere in the EU Member States .
In more and more Member States private investment income is given much greater preference over income from employment because of the transfer to dual tax systems .
Excise duty is increasing ever further - on the one hand because of ' eco-taxes ' , which often enough have no ecological steering effect at all even in the absence of alternatives , but which quite frankly fleece budgets , and on the other hand because of the fact that value added taxes are constantly increasing and in more and more countries are approaching the top end of the agreed range .
Such a development is no accident .
It is the direct result of unchecked tax competition on a uniform internal market .
It should already be leading us to believe that the upward trend of corporate taxes within the EU is broadly eclipsing those in the whole of the OECD .
This means that tax rates here have clearly fallen more than in the OECD as a whole .
This also clearly shows that the many pressures of globalisation much and happily complained about are not taking effect here , but that there are home-made pressures created within the EU and therefore also pressures that could very easily be discreetly overcome if there was a desire to do so .
Very appropriately my original report included the call not only for a common consolidated corporate tax base , which it does , of course , support , but also for EU-wide minimum tax rates on corporate profits , which should no longer be exceeded by any country thereafter .
Only minimum tax rates of this kind actually offer the opportunity to stop the upward trend in corporate taxes somewhere along the way .
My report included the call for stronger EU-wide taxation of assets and financial transactions , the call to relieve labour income explicitly in the lower and middle classes and finally the call to reverse the fatal trend of transferring direct taxes increasingly to indirect taxes and reinstigate the counter-trend .
Only a fraction of all these calls have unfortunately been retained after the vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Instead , my report bursts into a song of praise for tax competition in complete ignorance of the fatal consequences of this supposedly healthy tax competition for the revenue side of EU budgets and therefore for the situations in which millions of Europeans also find themselves .
Such changes made to the report unfortunately show very clearly whose interests are in fact close to the heart of the majority of members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and especially those of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , because it is very obvious who profits from the prevailing tax regimes in the EU .
We have now once again put forward our most important requests as amendments in plenary .
Should they fail to secure a majority there too , my group will vote against the report .
Another taxation policy in the EU that minimises the social contrasts instead of constantly reinforcing them - as the present taxation policy does - would indeed be possible and would be demanded as a matter of urgency .
This would , however , imply that the prevailing policy in the European Commission and also in the individual Member States does in fact consist of considering the interests of the majority of Europeans according to their guiding principle , instead of serving as they have done to date as executors of the interests of the élite of society .
It will simply give rise to even greater parliamentary and extra-parliamentary pressure .
We shall continue to strive precisely against this pressure so that eventually the inexpressible rhetoric of socially intolerable relationships - which characterises most reports and which also now characterises this report on taxation - is no longer capable of winning a majority in this House either .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am really pleased to be able to discuss with you the contribution of taxation and customs policy to the Lisbon Strategy .
A major priority of the European Union is to improve its competitiveness while preserving its social model .
Taxation policy has a major role to play in helping to achieve growth and employment objectives .
I welcome the essential message of your report , which is one of support for the Commission 's initiatives in the tax area .
In particular , it encourages increased efforts concerning the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) , the home state taxation pilot scheme proposal , the strategy ensuring better coordination of Member States ' tax systems particularly in the field of exit taxation and cross-border loss relief , the work undertaken by the joint transfer pricing forum , the strategy to combat tax fraud , the VAT package , the reduced VAT rates on labour intensive services and environmental taxation .
All these files are extremely important .
They are the core of the Commission 's approach to tax policy and many of them have been discussed in several committees of the European Parliament .
It is clear that European companies deserve a system of corporate taxation adapted to the degree of their actual and potential economic integration at the scale of their cross-border activities in Europe .
This is one of the keys to their future competitiveness .
It is also essential that other direct tax obstacles find a solution by coordination and not only through costly litigation .
There is only one area where I cannot follow you .
This is in paragraph 17 of the Wagenknecht report , as it stands now , where it asks for the suppression of minimum rates for excise duties and the replacement of current Community legislation in this domain by a code of conduct .
We discussed these elements in this House when dealing with the proposal on alcohol taxation and , with all due respect , I have got to say that the Commission has not changed its mind .
Community legislation on excise duties in general has an important role to play in order to reduce distortion in the internal market , to protect public health and to gear consumption patterns towards more environmentally sustainable behaviour .
The Commission strongly believes that minimum rates are necessary for the proper functioning of the internal market by providing a safety net for Member States which ensures that all Member States actually apply excise duties and that the levels are meaningful .
I hope that the tabled amendment which aims at changing paragraph 17 will be endorsed by a majority of Members .
I would like to conclude with three messages .
Firstly , you all know that my services are working very hard to table a legislative proposal on the CCCTB which I intend to present to you after the summer break in 2008 .
Secondly , in the VAT field , the Commission fully supports the Portuguese Presidency in its efforts to reach agreement on the VAT package and also to advance substantially the broader debate on VAT rates before the end of the year .
We can also work to ensure adoption of the proposal for prolonging certain derogations in new Member States on reduced VAT rates .
In addition , we will continue our intense efforts to combat VAT fraud and we will soon come forward with a proposal on the VAT treatment of financial services that will provide the sector with more legal certainty and with modernised rules .
Thirdly , we remain committed to a system of minimum rates in excise duties in order to reduce distortion and to promote fair competition in the internal market to contribute to the protection of public health and to the environment .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , sometimes , in this Chamber , we cannot really see the political differences between groups , but , on this issue , the difference is very visible , because I could not disagree more with the rapporteur on some of the points she just mentioned .
I respect the work she has done on this report , but on this issue we have totally different views on what should be done by the Commission .
First of all , this report is about the Lisbon Strategy and what we should do to restore Europe 's global competitiveness .
This is really the only way to guarantee European welfare and the welfare of our citizens .
Without taxation , this is impossible .
Taxation has a crucial role to play in this respect , in bringing competitiveness to Europe .
We must remember that overall tax levels in Europe are still above the OECD average .
In order to achieve a lower level of taxation in Europe , we need to create an environment conducive to investment .
We need more investments , more growth , and more , flourishing businesses in Europe .
Healthy tax competition has a beneficial role in this respect .
This is an economic , market-based control mechanism against rampant political decisions .
If we have fruitful tax competition in Europe , governments cannot put obstacles in the way of the single market .
That is what we want : a genuine single market without tax-made obstacles .
On the other hand , there is no evidence that fruitful tax competition would erode tax bases .
The total tax revenue has remained remarkably stable , thanks to increased economic activity .
However , the existence of 27 different tax regimes creates problems , particularly for European SMEs , which are so important to this growth .
According to a 2004 EC taxation survey , compliance for small SMEs costs about 2.6 % of their sales and 31 % of taxes paid .
So , one third of all the tax goes to compliance .
The high proportionate amount of tax compliance for small companies is a big obstacle , and that is why we need to do our best to call for cross-border loss relief , simplified customs procedures , one-stop-shop schemes for VAT , home states taxation pilot projects and so on .
We support everything that the Commission has done in this respect .
Finally , industry wishes to see a well-managed and simple tax administration system .
We need to resolve the problems of transfer pricing , loss offsetting EU-wide and avoiding double taxation , and to lower our compliance costs .
We welcome the Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base ( CCCTB ) proposal , and the fact that the Commission is stable and brings us the proposal on CCCTB , because loss-relief is only a temporary thing .
In the end , we need a consolidated corporate tax base .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Wagenknecht had the initiative to draft a report , which is proof of the political courage it took to highlight the redistributive and social dimension of taxation policy .
This document is one of the more important pieces of evidence showing that the debate on taxation policy may become Europe-wide .
The commitment to meet the Lisbon targets , the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact , the obligation to administer and redistribute tax revenue so that it meets cohesion and employment objectives , and the completion of the internal market - all these are proof enough of a political aim .
The taxation policies of Member States can no longer be based exclusively and solely on national criteria : dialogue on taxation is becoming necessary to promote greater tax coordination throughout Europe .
Given such a dialogue , which has enabled substantial cooperation between the shadow rapporteurs of all the political groups , we have concentrated on the following fundamental points .
Firstly , on the issue of tax competition , we do not believe that the object ought to be to curb the principle of tax competition , for this would be tantamount to censuring the policies of certain Member States .
Owing to the lack of common rules on tax policy issues , tax competition with its offers and counter-offers of low tax rates creates problems .
As is also the case for the other sectors of the internal market , however , tax competition can ensure competitiveness and improve the productivity of national economies , as well as that of Europe as a whole , provided that the rules curbing the growth of harmful competition obtain .
The second point we focused on was the relation between direct and indirect taxation .
A trend has recently been noticed in Member States to increase indirect taxation , in most cases to cover their fiscal deficits .
This is a burden for consumers , however , and the market remains unmonitored .
The aim of this report is to find safety measures facilitating a balanced combination of direct and indirect taxes .
We are in favour of a revision of the system of VAT and special consumption taxes .
This should not mean that it is replaced by a code of conduct not binding on all the Member States .
Commissioner , we are aware of the efforts of the Commission and the problems at Ecofin .
Nonetheless , we as members of the European Parliament must above all closely cooperate with national parliaments to debate this major fiscal policy .
I would also like to stress the importance of this report as the strategic line we should follow in making reforms in the economies of the European Union .
Regretfully , the representatives of Portugal are not with us today , when we are discussing this very important issue .
What are the main points of our report ?
The main point is that in view of changes in the economic environment we must carry out an overhaul not only of our plants and enterprises , but also of the instruments of our fiscal policy .
When referring to the Lisbon Strategy , we usually speak about expenditure policy ; very rarely do we consider taxation policy .
Without paying due attention to taxation policy we would not be able to achieve the Lisbon objectives .
What issues are to be considered ?
First of all , it is necessary to look into the ways of distributing the tax burden between the producer and the consumer .
Moreover , we cannot ignore the fact that there is one more group of people - those living on capital income .
This is known as private equity .
How do we distribute the tax burden ?
This is one of the challenges presented by the new economic environment .
Another very important question is : how do we encourage structural reforms ?
Structural reforms cannot be implemented without introducing new enterprises , as people are not able to leave their existing jobs for new work places , which could create grounds for social discontent .
New enterprises can be created only with beneficial taxation conditions .
This is one of the main points of our document .
The issue that needs to be considered is : what level of tax policy coordination is needed among the Member States ?
We are in favour of competitive taxes and we do not support the idea of introducing minimum rates .
This is because each country has its own specific economic structure and national expenditure policy .
Taxation policy must be in line with expenditure policy , but we are definitely in favour of the coordination of tax base policy and support the Commission on that matter .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I emphatically agree with Mrs Kauppi .
The disagreements between the groups here in the European Parliament on the subject of taxation policy are becoming clearer and clearer .
We must give this debate much more serious attention over the next few months .
I should like to thank the rapporteur and shadow rapporteur for the significant effort they have made in order to bring this report to a good conclusion .
A good conclusion - but not for us .
As a Group we shall not be able to accept this report in its final form .
It has some pleasant aspects , for example it describes and demands the important step towards a consolidated tax base for corporate taxes .
This is an important first step .
However , this must be accompanied by similarly clear declarations as regards harmonising minimum tax rates , because otherwise it will lead to unchecked tax competition , specifically in this area .
We also see problems under Article 17 , where the committee has unfortunately clearly stated that it is against minimum tax rates for excise duty .
This , too , is unfortunately in line with the votes of recent weeks and we greatly regret this .
We support the group here .
We believe that we have to achieve harmonisation in European excise duty and that this harmonisation must be strengthened , if anything , because otherwise we will have unchecked tax competition in excise duty .
We also think it is a problem that far too little is being said on the subjects of climate change and eco-taxes .
I , too , wish to disagree with the rapporteur here .
I believe that eco-taxes are an important instrument for meeting these challenges of climate change .
We have to do much more in this respect .
I do , however , think that the approach of focussing on nuclear energy here , or on ' clean ' forms of energy , is wrong .
It is important that we focus clearly on energy saving and energy efficiency .
These are the important answers .
When we look at the challenges facing us in the refurbishment of buildings and in the field of transport , it seems that we can genuinely meet the Kyoto aim of energy saving if a great deal more is done here .
Tax policy can make an important contribution to achieving greater energy savings and , greater energy efficiency and to genuinely meeting the challenges of climate change .
Unfortunately , this report does not reflect this position .
As I have already announced , we shall therefore not be voting in favour of this report .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , our group endorses Mrs Wagenknecht 's views in this matter , even if they are in conflict with the opinions of the majority on the Committee .
The European Union will not be the world 's leading knowledge- and technology-based economy in 2010 .
It is not , however , due to tax systems , which have continually been reformed in ways that favour big companies , that the target under the Lisbon Strategy is unrealisable .
Big companies choose transfer pricing and finding of a home for their capital as options enabling them to avoid tax .
In this they are aided by the tax havens and offshore financial centres operating in the Member States of the EU , both blots on the EU 's moral landscape .
According to the rapporteur , the Commission in its communication does not consider the effects of taxation on income distribution .
The system of flat tax which some Member States apply favours those on large incomes , while progressive income tax promotes social equality .
The Lisbon Strategy cannot be implemented in a manner which would eat away at the financial basis of the welfare society and which would be grossly unfair .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , it says this is a contribution , but it is more like a recipe , a recipe for the harmonisation of yet more taxation , which I quote here and there from the report : ' 27 different tax systems ' are an ' impediment ' ; ' coordination of Member States ' fiscal policy ' ; ' calls on the Member States to ... ensure greater fairness in the distribution of the tax burden ' ; ' supports ' the Commission in gearing ' fiscal policy towards ... environmental objectives ' ; ' increase in fuel taxes ' ; ' establish a pan-European ... corporate tax base ' .
In short , it is back to the failed policies of the 1970s .
In any case , even the British cannot get it right for all of our country .
North is not the same as the south , Wales and Scotland are different to the south-east - and that was under Gordon Brown as Chancellor for 10 years .
Surely you listened to him ; after all , you did at Lisbon last week when , as Prime Minister , you let him keep the red lines , did you not ?
Or did you ?
Later in the report , it talks about ' EU-wide coordination ' of ' direct taxation ' .
In the UK , we thought we had been promised that harmonised taxes , especially income tax , would never come .
Now , here it is in a report .
It is a bit like the Reform Treaty .
Gordon Brown keeps on saying it is not a constitution , when all the EU leaders say it is : Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing , José Luis Rodriguez Zapatero , Angela Merkel , even our own President of President said so in this Chamber a short while ago .
So why do you not get Gordon Brown to tell the truth to the British people ?
Harmonise that message !
Now , that is harmonisation I would go along with .
But you dare not do that to the British people because , when they are told the plain unvarnished truth , they will vote with their feet , right out of the EU , taking their annual EU contributions of EUR 18 billion of their own taxpayers ' money with them .
What price harmonised taxes then ?
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( RO ) The importance of reviewing the contribution that the fiscal and customs policies could bring to the development of the Lisbon Strategy cannot be questioned .
For this reason , but not only , the objective of the document we examine today , namely the Wagenknecht report , to evaluate the contribution of policies applied to the fields specified for achieving the Lisbon Strategy objectives , is salutary .
It could not be otherwise , since the Lisbon Strategy proposes generous objectives , such as promoting economic growth and designing policies that would allow European companies to create more and better jobs .
Nevertheless , reading the report , I was surprised , as a citizen of a recently acceded country , at the impression that it addresses a Union made up only of countries with developed economies , or rather , with equally developed economies , which is not true .
It is very probable for some of the measures proposed not to have beneficial results for the less developed economies , taking into account that the general laws of the single competitive market favour strong economies , to the disadvantage of the weaker ones .
Due to lack of time , I will not expand on this subject , but I consider that , in order for the report 's objectives to have beneficial results in the economies of all 27 countries , not 25 , as specified in the text , it is necessary to perform the comparative review of their economies and , according to the results , to adopt a set of actions that would create equal conditions for developing the effects proposed by the project .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , the report on the table today demonstrates , once again , the relentless attack on Member States that operate low and successful corporate tax regimes .
I do not accept that low corporation tax leads to unfair tax competition .
I believe that ensuring competitiveness is a vital element in the tax policy mix of a fully functioning single market .
Where is the Commission 's evidence to prove that CCCTB will not hamper EU competitiveness ?
Where is the proof to say that it will benefit EU competitiveness ?
Why is it that countries with low tax , low unemployment and high growth are being attacked by the Commission ?
I do not understand it .
It is absolutely farcical for the Commission to say that setting a tax base will not eventually set a tax rate , because that is already what the larger Member States are saying .
It does not stand up to any kind of scrutiny .
Attempts by large Member States to giftwrap tax harmonisation in the flowery paper of CCCTB will not be accepted by Ireland or other Member States .
The fact of the matter is that it is not the right of Ireland , or any other Member State , to play a role in setting the tax rate of another Member State .
The unity of Europe is not compromised by diversity in tax policies ; rather , the EU 's competitiveness is undermined by the wrong tax policies .
I firmly believe that the EU is best served by promoting tax competition , not tax harmonisation .
How is it that a country like Ireland , and other Member States , which changed radically their tax policies and became successful economies , are now under attack ?
What is the attractiveness of a country like Ireland , Commissioner , if you bring in this system and eventually bring in tax harmonisation ?
Because that is exactly what it is , and the only way tax will go is up .
It has already been said , by people within the Commission , that they want to see a tax regime more or less in the middle of what it is at the moment , which is approximately in the low 20 % .
What would be the attractiveness of Ireland or other peripheral countries ?
There would be not attractiveness , just high unemployment in the long ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the report we have in front of Parliament today rightly states that tax competition in the EU has led , and continues to lead , to EU-wide economic gains by way of a dynamic corporate environment .
The CCCTB could just as easily lead to a less competitive EU and should not be supported , in my view .
The EU needs to be responsive to an ever-changing global economy .
Modern competitive economies need to be flexible to meet the changing requirements of new products and services .
The CCCTB will undermine this flexibility for a number of reasons .
An EU-wide corporation tax base will be inflexible and hinder an individual country 's ability to decide its own legal fiscal strategy , based on its particular circumstances .
The CCCTB 's proponents assert that each Member State will retain its autonomy to determine its national tax rate - but will they ?
Is the CCCTB not the thin end of the wedge ?
If the CCCTB is optional , it merely increases the number of bases available to companies and makes the system even more complex .
Domestic tax law offers certainty to business .
A system that is applied in a number of Member States may lead to differences over how the provisions are interpreted , bringing about uncertainty for business .
In the remaining time available to me , I can simply make some bullet points .
First , taxation is a matter of national sovereignty for each Member State .
The right to choose the level of public spending and the funding of such expenditure is a basic function of national democratic process .
It is necessary to protect the flexibility of tax policy in rewarding enterprise and the creation of jobs and growth in the economy .
A single base would do away with flexibility .
There is no evidence to suggest that a common consolidated corporate tax base will address issues such as competitiveness , compliance costs for companies , transfer pricing and so on .
It would not simplify EU tax issues , as the so-called ' optional system ' proposed would add another layer , as I have just said .
The harmonisation of the tax base would lead to pressure on national tax rates .
Such harmonisation will only increase the attractiveness of non-EU corporate locations .
The Code of Conduct on business taxation addressed harmful tax competition .
Different tax rates in EU Member States are not harmful .
I would ask the Commissioner , when he brings forward these proposals , as he suggests , next year , to please bear this in mind .
Member States like Ireland have already given ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to thank our rapporteur here , for the quality of the work she has done and her efforts to come up with a text that , unfortunately , she does not seem totally satisfied with .
Taxation is clearly an essential complement to the construction of a true internal market , if you want the market to be more than just a free-trade area where any form of tax and social dumping is permitted .
The completion of the internal market therefore requires the harmonisation of certain rules on taxation and in the first place calls for the creation of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base .
The report put before us today opens the door to this , and I am pleased about this .
I note that a number of fellow Members are very actively against this plan , in the name of what they describe as ' fair ' competition .
Personally I believe that free , undistorted competition - and I am not a frenzied advocate of this type of competition - requires a certain amount of transparency as regards the rules .
I am surprised that countries that have benefited from massive contributions from the European Union , in the name of solidarity , are today rejecting this step , which would be an important step forward in terms of solidarity , competition and transparency .
Taxation is also a formidable tool that the EU must use if it is to implement its chosen strategies , because it does not have all that many tools .
It can have a positive impact on the cleanest energies or to achieve ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , this is a report that is heavily influenced by the compromise between the PPE-DE and the ALDE .
I believe it is largely a balanced report .
The Member States ' responsibility for taxation policies is laid down , whilst there are a number of taxes that would benefit from greater EU coordination .
In the rapporteur 's original proposal , there was thorough coordination with a strong emphasis on higher levels of redistribution .
That cannot be a way to make Europe grow or to create new jobs .
In the globalised world in which we live , it is not higher taxes that Europe needs .
Instead , I think that we who live in high-taxation countries should look at other models , such as a flatter tax .
In general , taxes should be lowered on work and raised on harmful consumption .
For example , specific environmental taxes should be introduced , as well as reasonable excise duties on alcohol and tobacco , for example , as the Commissioner says .
Here the EU must be able to act with greater accord .
This is a politically sensitive issue - we have heard that here and I am well aware of it - but it is nonetheless necessary , in my opinion .
If we are to resolve the major climate and energy challenges that we are facing , it would be irresponsible of us to rule out controlling fiscal instruments .
It is possible to achieve high growth , with high environmental and energy taxes , and at the same time reduce the overall tax burden .
Any doubters can look at the policy of the centre-right government in my home country , Sweden , if I can be allowed to be a little patriotic at the end of this debate .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , in taking the floor in a debate devoted to the impact of taxation and customs policies on the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that some of the suggestions relating to the Member States ' tax systems that are contained in Mrs Wagenknecht 's report will not have a positive impact on economic growth and employment in EU countries .
Firstly , moving away from tax competition and attempts to standardise solutions in the area of corporate income tax run counter to the principle of tax sovereignty for EU Member States .
Secondly , lowering corporate tax rates while simultaneously doing away with any associated tax relief will not just fail to bring about a reduction in budget income from this tax ; it will , in fact , increase it substantially .
This is confirmed by the situation in my country , Poland , where the corporate tax rate has been substantially reduced , yet receipts from this tax are greater with each year that passes .
Thirdly and finally , in this situation I consider the report 's suggestions relating to coordination and tax systems , including direct taxation , to be hazardous steps that will certainly not help to implement the Lisbon Strategy .
( HU ) Thank you Mr President .
What are we talking about ?
One of the key issues is whether we are a match - in terms of competitiveness - for the external tax competition , in other words for tax competition from outside the European Union , and we should not be looking for scapegoats within the European Union .
Otherwise , as several of my colleagues have stated , capital will leave the whole of the EU .
What do we agree with in this taxation policy ?
We agree that it should facilitate job creation , in other words promote labour ; we agree that we should help small and medium-sized enterprises , since these enable people to remain where they are , they help to reinforce families , and also to create jobs .
I also agree with its social policy measures , which will help tackle the demographic challenge in the European Union .
What do we disagree with ?
We disagree with over-taxing ourselves in areas relating to health , the environment or social policy instead of pursuing an anti-inflationary policy and seeking to respond appropriately to the challenges of competition .
The other thing that we must bear in mind is that the European Union has expanded and become highly heterogeneous .
We expect everyone to maintain budgetary discipline in their independent fiscal policy , but at the same time we want to minimise the instruments for doing this .
If convergence is our primary goal , then in indirect taxation for example , such as excise duties , if we are to get anywhere , we should be obliging not only countries operating at around the minimum rate to achieve convergence , but also countries that apply much higher rates .
This is why in several instances we have proposed replacing the current approach based exclusively on a minimum rate of excise duty by some kind of ' code of conduct ' steering Member States along the same path .
As regards common capital or the common tax base , I would like to say this : it would be a serious problem if this entailed punishing competitive countries , if the minimum rate were to be introduced .
I am also apprehensive about what will happen as regards movement of capital when the common tax base is established .
Will it not mean that profits from subsidiaries in the new Member States , for example , will constantly be reclassified in the accounts as profits of the parent company instead of being invested locally ?
Combating fraud is also very important , and I wish the Commission good luck with this .
It is on the right track , since the most important thing is to regularise the black economy and take steps to combat crime . Thank you very much , Mr President .
( PL ) Mr President , the main aim of the Lisbon Strategy is to increase the competitiveness of national economies .
A high level of competitiveness enables economic growth to be accelerated and new jobs to be created , and makes it possible to fund important social aims .
Unfortunately the current tax system in EU Member States does not favour implementation of the Lisbon Strategy .
The burdens placed on employment law and economic activity are too great , tax rates are too differentiated , and the regulations are too complicated .
At the same time the tax system is burdened with an excessive number of functions and tasks - economic , fiscal , social or environmental .
For taxes to aid competitiveness , they must above all create incentives to work , to develop economic activities and to innovate .
To this end taxes , especially direct taxes , should be set at a moderate level , avoiding unnecessary differentiation of rates and excessive progression .
Since direct taxes exert a stronger , negative impact on production and employment , we must make greater use of indirect taxes when planning budgetary income .
In relation to the debate , Mr President , I wish to express my concern that there is too much ideology and politics , and too little real economic knowledge .
The best example is the concepts that are used here , such as fiscal dumping or social dumping .
There is no objective standard for taxation , and it is therefore not possible to accuse those states that apply low company taxation levels of fiscal dumping .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on a difficult and fundamentally successful operation to introduce the necessary amendments to the initial text , which was the original address .
Initially it was being suggested to us not only that the European Union should get involved in establishing the principles of corporation tax , but also that these taxes should be raised , against world trends .
It is a good thing that we have avoided this .
For similar reasons we should take a critical view of the support evinced in the text for tax base harmonisation .
A Community tax base is a blow to tax competition in the EU , with all the associated negative consequences .
Its introduction would limit Member States ' efforts to optimise corporation taxation against the Lisbon targets .
In political terms this would burden the EU , which , in its own properly conceived interest , should refrain from trying to influence the shape of tax systems in Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this debate has been very interesting and most of the contributions have been encouraging .
Like you , I am persuaded that our efforts to dismantle tax barriers in the internal market are worthwhile sustaining .
I am particularly grateful for your support concerning the important project of the CCCTB and I look forward to your forthcoming own-initiative report on the common base .
As far as some of the critical remarks are concerned , I intend to send a personal letter to those honourable Members of Parliament who have expressed their objection , which I appreciate .
It would be fair to answer them in written form as I do not want to take too much of your time .
I am pleased that most of you share my view that taxation policy has a major role to play in attaining many of the EU 's policy objectives , and in particular growth , employment , competitiveness and sustainability .
Thank you for your attention and for your support .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank many people for keeping within their time and also thank everyone , I hope , for their understanding , which has enabled us to close the debate five minutes early and therefore to be able to listen to everyone , instead of what happens on other occasions , when before an important debate or a vote we are unable to listen to what our colleagues have to say .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - We all ought to agree that the simultaneous existence of 27 national taxation systems seriously hampers the blooming of the full advantages of our single market .
Moreover , there is indeed a genuine opportunity to reinvigorate the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy through EU-wide taxation and customs measures that would make the Union a more attractive place to invest and work .
In extending and deepening more competitive markets , we should use all tools available , including more investment-friendly fiscal and custom policies , in order to boost employment , R & D investments and the development of environmentally friendly technologies .
In this respect , we warmly welcome the own-initiative report drawn up by Ms Wagenknecht , which aims at setting up the necessary fiscal framework to encourage risk and innovative investments in order to achieve the objectives of growth and employment .
The advantages of simplifying and harmonising the taxation systems in the Union as a whole are obvious as not only it will help reaching the Lisbon objectives - through greater tax incentives for investments - but , furthermore , it will help achieve EU market integration by lifting remaining obstacles to the completion of the single market .
( The sitting was suspended at 09.55 a.m. and resumed at 10.10 a.m. )

Results of the informal summit of heads of state and government ( Lisbon , 18-19 October 2007 ) ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the results of the informal summit of heads of state and government in Lisbon .
May I give a warm welcome to the President of the EU Council and Prime Minister of Portugal , José Sócrates . A very warm welcome this morning to the European Parliament !
An equally warm welcome , of course , to the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , and thank you to him for his work at the European summit .
Ladies and gentlemen , before we begin the debate I should like - and I do not wish to jump ahead at all - to thank the Portuguese Presidency sincerely for its enormous input and for the success achieved on Thursday night at around 1 a.m. when it approved the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
This is a great result for the European Union and a great result for us all .
On behalf of the European Parliament , I should like to add that without the European Parliament , we would not be where we are today .
This is also a great result for us all because the Treaty was and is the top priority for the European Parliament if we are to come out ahead and be victorious in this Treaty .
With these congratulations to the Portuguese Presidency , and also to the Commission - and I see Commissioner Wallström here , who has also made a significant contribution , next to the President of the Commission - it gives me great joy now to hand over to the President of the EU Council , José Sócrates .
A warm welcome to the European Parliament !
Mr President , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to dedicate my first words today to the memory of a friend of mine .
In memory of MEP Fausto Correia , who died a few days ago .
He died young .
His death is of course a great loss not only to the European Parliament but also to the Portuguese Socialist Party .
Fausto Correia was a man of fine political and human qualities .
You all had the opportunity to get to know him .
He was an intelligent politician , open and always committed to noble European ideals .
But I would like to lay special emphasis here on his human qualities of generosity , companionship and tolerance .
Indeed , it is our human qualities that give meaning to our political life .
His passing is a personal loss to me , the loss of an old friend , with whom I shared many moments of my life , and I will miss him very much .
Ladies and gentlemen , when I presented the programme of the Portuguese Presidency to this plenary three months ago , I stated very clearly what would be the main challenge - the top priority - of the Portuguese Presidency : to draw up and reach an agreement on the new Treaty , putting an end to the six years of impasse in the institutional debate in which the European Union was immersed .
Today , therefore , it is with great satisfaction that I address the house to present the agreement reached by the Intergovernmental Conference on 18 October .
This agreement was the basis for the new Treaty of Lisbon .
The Treaty will be signed on 13 December in the city whose name it will bear .
The Portuguese Presidency began with the task of transforming the mandate that we inherited from the German Presidency - which as I have said before was of exemplary clarity and precision - but to transform that mandate into a new Treaty .
That was our mission .
The agreement we have reached confirms that the method and timetable we set out at the start of our Presidency were right .
It was necessary - as I told you here at the start of the Presidency - to make the most of the June Council to endeavour to complete the Treaty not in December , as some advocated , but in October , at the informal Council , and we were right .
The truth is that we held the fastest Intergovernmental Conference in the history of the European Union on a treaty revision .
We began on 23 July and completed it on 18 October .
When the history of this Treaty is written we will understand better the importance of that political decision , of not leaving until the end of the year the task that we were able to complete earlier .
Europe needed a quick agreement and that is what it got .
Europe needed a sign of confidence and that is what it got .
Europe needed to turn towards the future and that is what it has done .
We worked speedily with all the Member States which , without exception , showed a constructive spirit and a will to overcome the remaining difficulties .
This enabled us to present a full text of the Treaty on 3 October , and brought us much closer to our goal .
The issues that remained for the Lisbon Summit were limited , though obviously politically sensitive .
In this context , our strategy was to try to reach an agreement on the first day of the summit .
This seemed to us not only possible but also highly desirable as it would send a strong signal to Europe .
The signal that the EU is capable of taking rapid decisions , even decisions that everyone acknowledges are difficult .
Moreover , it was very important that we should be able to resolve these institutional issues on the first day of the informal Council and , on the second day , right after that decision , to discuss globalisation and how Europe should tackle global issues .
In Lisbon it was therefore possible to reach agreement on the following issues , enabling us to finalise the agreement on the Treaty :
First the Ioannina clause , and in the agreement a solution was reached at two levels :
a declaration relating to the system for decision-making in the Council by a qualified majority that clarifies the actual Ioannina safeguard mechanism ;
in addition a protocol that determines how this mechanism for consensus in the European Council may be amended or revoked .
As I have had the opportunity to say before , the Ioannina issue , as I saw it in the agreement at the last Council , required this clause to be mandatory by law , but not to be in the Treaty .
The solution that we adopted , a declaration plus a protocol guaranteeing that the decision on Ioannina can be amended only by consensus , seemed to us to be the solution that was most true to the spirit of the last agreement .
Thus we provided guarantees on the Ioannina compromise without undermining the integrity of the process of qualified-majority decision-making .
There was also a need to resolve a political issue regarding the number of Advocates-General in the Court of Justice .
A declaration was agreed to the effect that the Council would approve any request from the Court of Justice for the number of Advocates-General to be increased by three ( eleven instead of eight ) .
In that case , Poland will have a permanent Advocate-General and no longer take part in the rotation system , while the existing rotation system will involve the rotation of five Advocates-General instead of the current three .
As for the appointment of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , we agreed on a declaration to the effect that the European Parliament should take part in the appointment process even in the first stage , from January 2009 , through appropriate contacts .
The Conference also approved a declaration clarifying the delimitation of competences between the Union and the Member States as provided for in the Treaties .
Finally , the issue of the composition of the European Parliament .
As you know , Article 9a of the Treaty on European Union has been amended to state that the number of MEPs shall not exceed seven hundred and fifty , plus the President , i.e. 751 , maintaining degressive proportionality .
Two declarations were attached to that amendment :
one stating that the additional seat in the European Parliament will be attributed to Italy ;
the other guaranteeing that the European Council will give its political agreement on the composition of the European Parliament , based on the proposal from Parliament itself .
The Council therefore accepted the criteria put forward by Parliament and went ahead with what it considered an acceptable adjustment , with a view to adapting the current framework during the 2009-2014 period .
Apart from the issues that I have mentioned , the concern of the Portuguese Presidency was also to build into the Treaty those rules and exception clauses that were in the mandate , naturally respecting the positions of the Member States that wanted to obtain them , but always concerned to avoid detracting from the Community decision-making process and the overall coherence of the Treaty .
Thus we have a new Treaty .
It is a new Treaty and a good Treaty .
A Treaty that resolves the crisis of the past and puts Europe in a position to set its eyes on the future .
A Treaty with significant advances , some of which I would like to highlight , if I may .
This Treaty adopts , without alteration , the enlargement of the European Parliament 's participation in the legislative process , as well as the innovations in the budgetary process , thereby enhancing the Union 's democratic legitimacy ;
This Treaty improves the decision-making process , specifically by extending qualified-majority voting to the area of freedom , security and justice ;
Again in the area of freedom , security and justice , this Treaty enshrines the necessary legal bases for the development of more effective immigration and asylum policies , as well as police and judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism and organised crime that strengthens security for our citizens ;
This Treaty clearly lists the areas in which the Member States have transferred powers to the EU ;
This Treaty strengthens the supervisory role of the national parliaments .
However , among all the advances contained in this Treaty , there is one point that I would like to highlight in particular : this Treaty explicitly gives legally binding force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , due to be proclaimed by the European Union 's three institutions on 12 December .
In addition is the EU 's accession to the European Convention on Human Rights and the fact that a solution has been found to the issue of the legal framework of European citizenship , as requested , moreover , by the representatives of Parliament .
Regarding external relations , the new institutional framework created by the Treaty - notably the addition of the post of High Representative and Vice-President of the European Commission for Foreign Affairs - is a reflection of Europe 's foreign policy ambitions , that will allow Europe to play a more prominent role on the international stage and give it the means to cooperate effectively with our partners .
Ladies and gentlemen , the negotiations were tough and demanding , but Europe succeeded .
Europe succeeded and achieved the crucial objective of having a Treaty that asserts European values and strengthens Europe as a global economic player , and of putting in place more effective institutional conditions to enable Europe to play its role .
Europe therefore emerges stronger from this Summit .
Stronger to face global issues .
Stronger to take up its role in the world .
Stronger because it has sent a signal of confidence to our economy and to European citizens .
The Lisbon Treaty now demonstrates that Europe is ready , confident and self-assured .
The Lisbon Treaty has once again made Europe ready for a new era .
Allow me to thank the European Parliament and its President , Hans-Gert Pöttering and its representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference - Elmar Brok ( PPE-DE ) , Enrique Barón-Crespo ( PSE ) and Andrew Duff ( ALDE ) .
On behalf of the Portuguese Presidency I would like to thank you for your excellent collaboration in our work , your constructive suggestions , but mainly for your constant commitment to Europe reaching an agreement and to its reaching agreement quickly .
( Loud applause )
I would also like to thank the European Commission , especially the President of the Commission , to whom the Presidency is hugely indebted over these months for his valued assistance in bringing the negotiations to a successful conclusion . Thank you very much , Mr President .
( Applause )
However , I must also express my deep gratitude to the General Secretariat of the Council , especially its Legal Services and its Director-General , Jean-Claude Piris .
On behalf of the Presidency , I would like to thank them for their hard work , skill and dedication .
They did an absolutely magnificent job .
I would also like to thank all the representatives of the Member States who took part , at various levels , in the Intergovernmental Conference .
The Presidency will not forget the spirit of cooperation , commitment and openness that everyone displayed in seeking the best solutions .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me now to give very personal thanks .
I would like to thank the Foreign Affairs Minister , sitting next to me , Luís Amado , the Secretary of State , Lobo Antunes , and all the Portuguese diplomats who gave their best during this period to ensure that it would be remembered , without doubt , as one of the great achievements of the EU Presidency .
Ladies and gentlemen , having achieved the goal of finalising the Lisbon Treaty , the Heads of State or Government were able to devote the morning of day two to debating the external dimension of the Lisbon Agenda and how Europe should respond to the challenges of globalisation .
It was an excellent debate , featuring the valued contribution of the President of the European Parliament .
It was also a debate looking to the future .
The President of the European Commission presented an important contribution to the discussion , based on the communication on ' The European Interest : succeeding in the age of globalisation ' .
This document was highly praised by the Heads of State or Government .
The main points covered in the debate were the financial markets in the light of the recent turmoil , and climate change in view of the Bali Conference .
Among the various conclusions that could be drawn from the debate , I would like to highlight one : the idea that pervaded the debate on that Friday morning , that Europe is now equipped - and even duty-bound in some areas - to lead the globalisation process ; be it in the reciprocal opening-up of markets , improving environmental , social , financial and intellectual property standards , or strengthening strategic cooperation with our international partners .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to say one last thing before I finish .
It is true that 18 October ended with an agreement on the Lisbon Treaty , but that day also began with another important agreement that I would like to tell you about here : the agreement between the European social partners on the new challenges for the labour market .
This was also an important agreement .
Through this agreement , the social partners set an example of constructive engagement , responsibility and social dialogue .
A good example of attention to the need for dialogue , of the need for reform in a globalised and constantly changing world .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to end on a personal note .
In political life it is rare that we have the opportunity to serve our country and serve Europe at a critical moment .
I feel honoured to have had that opportunity .
I would like to thank you , from the bottom of my heart , for the support from all the benches that I have always had in this House .
However , our work is not finished .
We have much to do .
For my part I would like to assure you that the Presidency will continue to work with the same commitment , energy and conviction that we began with and to work for a stronger Europe and a better world .
( Loud applause )
Many thanks , President-in-Office , for your report and for your work .
Ladies and gentlemen , you have heard about the composition of the European Parliament and the report by the President-in-Office did not discuss the voting rights of the President of the European Parliament .
I shall therefore emphasise here once again that this was not about the European Council either .
The President of the European Parliament will , if he agrees , make use of his rights , of course .
No-one can take that away from him and the European Council has not taken it away from him either .
I should like to state this here for the record .
I should now like to ask the President of the European Commission , José Manuel Durão Barroso , to be kind enough to speak to us .
President of the Commission . - ( PT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Summit was a summit of a united Europe of solidarity .
The EU has emerged from a period of six years of discussing institutional issues and from the divisions caused by those debates .
We have reached agreement on the Lisbon Treaty .
First of all I would like to pay a sincere tribute to the work of the Portuguese Presidency , and especially to the determined leadership of Prime Minister José Sócrates .
I would also like to extend these compliments to all of his team , whose skill and dedication I witnessed almost on a daily basis .
It is also right to acknowledge the remarkable work of the German Presidency , especially of Chancellor Angela Merkel when she succeeded in defining a mandate , a clear and precise mandate that was the basis for the Intergovernmental Conference .
However , it is also true that without the determination and competence of the Portuguese Presidency we would not now be celebrating the fact that we have transformed a mandate into a Treaty .
Allow me to say that it is of special significance that the Treaty will be signed on 13 December in Lisbon at the Jeronimo Monastery , precisely where the Treaty of Accession of Portugal to the European Community was signed .
Twenty years after Portugal 's accession to the European Community , Portugal seems to be repaying Europe for everything it has done for Portugal by helping Europe to overcome this impasse .
Prime Minister , Portugal has every reason to feel proud of its work , of the work of the Portuguese Presidency in concluding the Treaty of Lisbon .
Let me also salute the European Parliament for its commitment during the IGC .
Throughout this process the European Parliament showed a strong political will to resolve the institutional issue , being determined to reinforce European democracy .
I wish in particular to pay tribute to the role of President Pöttering and the delegation of the European Parliament - Mr Brok , Mr Barón Crespo and Mr Duff - and to thank them for the constructive relationship they had with the Commission .


This was , indeed , exemplary cooperation , and I think we both made a contribution to very important advances in the new Treaty , namely the issues of citizenship .
The Treaty of Lisbon is the first Treaty of the enlarged Union .
It is the first time in the history of European integration that states which were once divided by a totalitarian curtain together negotiated and reached agreement on a common European Treaty .
It is appropriate that we all remember today the importance of the Berlin Declaration , which celebrated not only the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome but also the emergence of a free and re-united Europe .
Let me recall today some of the predictions we have heard during the last two years .
In 2005 , after the two negative referenda , we heard some people saying that the European Union of 25 or 27 would never agree on a Treaty , whatever its content .
There were far too many different national interests to allow the Union to reach a consensus , some sceptics said .
In 2007 , critics said that Member States would never agree on a mandate .
Then they said that a mandate from the June European Council would never be respected .
On my way to Lisbon last week I was still hearing some critics saying that it would be very difficult , if not impossible , to reach an agreement and that delegations had even booked hotels until Sunday morning - maybe expecting to benefit from the very nice weather in Lisbon and Portugal .
The fact is that 27 Member States reached a consensus , respected the mandate and agreed on a Treaty - and all of this on the Thursday night , after dinner .
The success of Lisbon tells us that the European Union is , indeed , tougher than it looks , with a strong ability to recover from setbacks .
I am proud to say that the European Union today is alive and delivering .
The Commission is happy with the results of the IGC .
The two non-negotiable conditions set by the Commission were fully respected .
On the one hand , the Lisbon Treaty has clearly advanced from the current status quo .
I always said that the Commission could not accept a solution less ambitious than the Nice Treaty .
In fact we wanted as much progress as possible .
On the other hand , we fought hard to keep the competence of the Commission intact , and to keep the Community method at the centre of the European Union .
There were , let us be honest , certain attempts to reduce and to weaken the competence of the Commission .
Let me be clear , there is no European integration without strong European Institutions , and I believe this treaty will reinforce the European Institutions , not weaken them , because if you want the European Union to have an increased capacity to act , you need strong , effective , democratic and accountable European Institutions .
The Treaty of Lisbon will reinforce the democratic nature of the European Union .
First , thanks to the efforts of the European Parliament , there is now a clear definition of what European citizenship means .
Second , the Reform Treaty also gives legal force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which will be a central part of the system of checks and balances in our Union of Law .
Together with President Pöttering and Prime Minister Socrates , we will proclaim the Charter in the European Parliament before the signature of the Reform Treaty .
The solemn dignity of the Charter will thus be properly recognised here in Strasbourg .
Third , the European Parliament will have a greater role in the legislative process of the Union .
The fourth democratic advance introduced by the reformed Treaty regards the rights of national parliaments , which will reinforce the principles of accountability and subsidiarity .
However , the central feature of the democratic nature of the Union remains the European Parliament .
One of the things I most enjoy when I am in Strasbourg is to listen to the many political leaders and political figures from all over the world addressing this plenary on their aspirations for democracy , and their strong beliefs in freedom and individual rights .
That really is one of the vocations of the European Parliament - to be the House for the voices of freedom in this world .
It is something that should make all Europeans proud .
When you hear those voices , you also realise what we have achieved in Europe , because once we also had people in European cities , marching for the same democratic rights .
We should be very proud to live on a continent where , thanks to the European Union , we can enjoy fundamental rights , and we will say that together when we approve the Reform Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The European Union faces many challenges , both internal and external .
Our citizens want results .
The Treaty of Lisbon will turn a new page in our ability to deliver , and will reinforce our capacity to act .
In particular , the Treaty will introduce substantial advances in the area of justice and home affairs .
The Reform Treaty will also reinforce the European Union 's cohesion in external affairs .
I personally attached the highest importance to one of the most important innovations in this Treaty , which is , precisely , the creation of a High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Policy who will at the same time be Vice-President of the Commission .
This is a great opportunity for the European Union to act in a coherent and united manner in the world .
Our internal prosperity , our freedom and our security depend on the capacity of the European Union to act decisively at the global level .
With the Reform Treaty , Europe will have the conditions and instruments to shape globalisation and not to hide from globalisation .
We should not miss this opportunity .
I know that some committed Europeans are not happy with the number of opt-outs .
The Commission and I would obviously have preferred to avoid those opt-outs and specific arrangements .
However , diversity is a central feature of the European Union , and sometimes it requires political and institutional compromises .
I would prefer to have specific opt-outs for specific countries than to be forced to lower the overall level of ambition of our Treaty and our Europe .
The crucial point is that despite our diversity , we remain united regarding fundamental goals , fundamental values and fundamental principles .
We have many tasks ahead : economic reform , growth and jobs , the reinforcement of social cohesion , our focus on innovation , our proposals on energy and climate change , and our programme for justice , freedom and security .
We need to keep proving that we are not engaged in institutional navel-gazing and show that we are dealing with the real issues facing Europe .
A great signal also came from the social partners on the very day of the beginning of our summit , when the social partners at European level agreed on an analysis of the labour market in Europe , and in general terms welcomed the concept of flexicurity .
This showed that the social partners also want to work with us in this proactive attitude towards globalisation .
Regarding Lisbon , we also made progress on the second day of our summit .
We discussed the great issue for the European Union in the 21st century , which is to promote the European interest in the age of globalisation .
Our discussion was the natural complement to concluding the Reform Treaty .
The message was clear : after concluding the negotiations on the Institutions , let us put those discussions behind us and face the real issues that are of most concern to our citizens , where they want to see us delivering concrete results .
We had a very positive debate .
The paper presented by the Commission , based on the concept of the European interest , was fully endorsed , and the decision was taken to work on a declaration on globalisation for the December European Council , to show that tackling globalisation is a common thread in much of the European Union 's work today .
The Heads of State and Government welcomed the concept of the fifth freedom : freedom of circulation of researchers and ideas , which is a cornerstone of our response to globalisation .
That is particularly important , as we are engaged in crucial debates about Galileo and preparing to implement the European Institute of Technology .
I truly welcome the spirit in which that debate was held .
It was clear that we now need to reinforce the external dimension of the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs .
It was clear that , without further commitment from the Member States on issues regarding education , innovation , research and technology , we would not succeed .
I think it is also fair to say that all Member States recognise the need for a European-level approach and that we need more action at European level if we really want to succeed in the age of globalisation .
This Commission has argued all along that institutional reform is important , but that we also need delivery of results , side-by-side .
As the Commission said in 2005 and 2006 , that twin-track approach was the way out of the institutional stalemate .
In Lisbon we achieved the strategic objective : we agreed on a Reform Treaty .
Now it is crucially important to achieve a further goal , which is the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty before the European elections in 2009 .
I believe there is , indeed , a new political confidence in Europe .
The last polls demonstrate the highest support for the European Union since 1994 .
The political climate is right to move ahead .
The IGC and the Lisbon Informal Council demonstrated that , when European Institutions and Member States cooperate , we are able to solve what seem to be even the most complicated and most challenging problems .
It is my wish that the spirit of Lisbon which brought us a consensus on the EU Treaty will inspire the European Union in the year to come towards a successful ratification process .
We need it for a strong European Union that delivers results for its citizens .
Many thanks , Commission President .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it is primarily my own satisfaction and that of my group that I would like to express .
Satisfaction at the result obtained last Thursday in Lisbon , and satisfaction at the road Angela Merkel set out on and Mr Sócrates continues to travel .
By equipping itself with the institutional tools it needs to function , Europe is finally acquiring the means to meet the major challenges of the 21st century .
That was our wish .
For this reason , we have supported this text since the start of its preparation , though as you know , most of us would have preferred a still more ambitious text .
This Treaty is arousing criticism here and there .
Personally I welcome the agreement reached in Lisbon , as it signals the start of a new European dynamic .
Simplified Treaty , Reform or Reforming Treaty , Modified or Modifying Treaty , the name matters little .
What matters is not the box itself but what is in the box .
This Treaty will be officially signed in Lisbon on 13 December .
That is an excellent date . The number 13 has always brought me luck .
Look at my date of birth ; I was born on the 13th , so it is excellent .
It will then have to be ratified by all the Member States before the 2009 European elections .
Some have already made it known that the process will begin the day after the signature in Lisbon , and I am delighted about this .
To the heads of state or government of the European Union I would just like to say that it is important for this Treaty to be the basis of a European project founded on the true membership of its citizens .
The EU institutions and Member States must try to achieve this by explaining , then by explaining and finally by explaining some more .
What does this mean ?
It means giving substance to the provisions of the Treaty that affect the democratic life of the Union .
The citizens ' initiative and the involvement of the national parliaments mean that information will have to be provided about the content of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which enshrines the essential rights of European citizens .
However , it also means providing better information to our citizens about who the elected representatives in this Parliament are - there will be 751 of them in 2009 - and what they do .
It means explaining how qualified majority voting , which will become the rule , will enable Europe to act in new areas such as judicial and police cooperation , environmental protection , economic policy and immigration .
It also means explaining to our partners on the international stage that a High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , who will also be Vice-President of the European Commission from 1 January 2009 , will be the primary contact , along with the President of the Council , who will be elected for two and a half years and will facilitate cohesion and consensus within the European Union so it can finally speak with one voice .
If the Treaty of Lisbon promises that the European Union will be more democratic , more transparent , more effective and more capable of acting as a single political entity on the international stage , it is to its citizens that this needs to be explained first of all .
Thanks to this Treaty , Europe will finally be able to move from discussion to action .
It will be able to begin far-reaching and necessary reforms to effectively combat crime and terrorist threats .
It will also be able to affirm its role as a world leader in the fight against climate change .
Ladies and gentlemen , when dealing with our international partners on such important challenges , we cannot allow ourselves to get caught up in unproductive divisions any longer .
The journey that began in Berlin , that has stopped over in Lisbon and will pass through Ljubljana and Paris , is heading in the right direction because it is finally laying foundations for consistent European policies ; policies that should aim primarily for the protection , well-being and prosperity of citizens who are demanding even more of Europe , as our Polish friends who turned out en masse to vote have shown us .
For them and for all the others , let us live up to expectations .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking Mr Sócrates and Mr Amado .
They have had a difficult task , a very difficult task .
On behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I would say to them that they have completed this task most excellently .
Congratulations , Prime Minister !
( Applause )
Europe is facing major challenges - not only from now on , but for many years already .
For years now we have constantly been debating the same problems .
The gap between rich and poor is getting bigger and bigger - within the European Union and throughout the world , between our continent and other continents .
Social justice at home and social justice throughout the world is one of the major challenges for the EU .
The states that belong to the United Nations and are island states have been crying out for help in the United Nations for years .
Several of these states know that if climate change continues as it is and sea levels rise , they will be no more within the foreseeable future .
There is nothing theoretical about climate change , but there is something practical that demands immediate action by the European Union .
We are facing challenges .
You have rightly embraced one of these challenges in your Presidency : the challenge on the African continent .
As super-rich Europeans , we cannot look on as this continent dies , either from civil wars or from Aids .
The Portuguese Presidency was therefore well advised to focus on Africa .
We - as Europeans , as states and as Parliament - are being asked to face up to this issue and have been asked to do so , ladies and gentlemen , not just for a few years now , but for a very long time .
Since 2001 , however , the European Union has primarily concerned itself not with these challenges , but with constitutional issues .
This has taken far too long !
It is good that this is now over , that the constitutional framework is finally in place so that we can now take on the political challenges on this basis .
The great success of the past weekend is that we are now finally able to concentrate on what needs to be done politically and on what the people expect from us .
Therefore , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there were some encouraging signs last weekend .
The summit with the social partners is a step in the right direction .
Capital and labour must be able to speak to one another again on an equal footing .
For us Socialists , this is one element of this new draft Constitution - it should not be called this , and I must say that it has lagged far behind the Constitution - that social justice is practised here in Europe through greater co-determination on the part of the European Parliament .
Nothing can be done in terms of a qualified majority without us Socialists , without the Left in Europe .
I would therefore say that this Treaty will help Europe 's legislation to become more social , based on the aims you have agreed with the social partners at this summit .
With future majority decisions , this finally gives us the opportunity - in agricultural policy as well , by the way - to tackle the reforms that we have long been reminding everyone about .
These reforms are also necessary because anyone who wants to appear credible at the world trade round - at the Doha Round - and in Bali will at some point have to say : yes , we need a reform of EU policy on subsidies .
This , too , is becoming possible with this Treaty .
There are challenges that we must face .
The President of the United States is talking about a Third World War and we are talking about whether the President of the European Parliament does or does not have voting rights !
This is the kind of disproportionality that needs to be brought to an end in Europe .
The draft Treaty will also be able to stop this .
I believe we have taken a great step forward with this Treaty .
Europe is becoming more democratic , Europe is becoming more transparent and the institutions are becoming more effective .
We in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have to concede that we have not achieved everything we would have liked , and to those who are now screaming again that this is now in fact the Constitution - I read in some British newspapers that a few of our fellow Members are asserting that this is essentially the Constitution - I must unfortunately say that they have neither read the Constitution , nor have they read this Treaty .
This Treaty lags far behind the Constitution .
However , it is clearly more than Nice !
Therefore , progress is not always made in the direction we would like .
Sometimes it takes more time .
One thing can be said , however : what is now on the table is better suited in terms of democratic policy , social policy and in terms of the institutions to giving us the capability and making us fit to effectively tackle the worldwide social challenges that are facing us .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament is able to approve this Treaty , as are all my group 's delegations , and this was the result of our debate yesterday .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is fitting that the Reform Treaty should be signed in the city which Caesar once named ' Felicitas Julia ' , because it has overcome years of attack , siege , even last-minute subterfuge , to emerge bloodied and bruised , yet more or less intact , as the blueprint for a more democratic and transparent European Union .
So Felicitas , Jose .
May your name , like Caesar 's , forever be associated with the historic changes you wrought in Lisbon - changes like normalising codecision , ending the tyranny of Council vetoes , placing energy , and justice and home affairs , under democratic scrutiny : these changes give our Union the capacity to confront the challenges of globalisation .
( Laughter )
It is a pity that the Treaty is not simpler to digest , but - after being butchered by the ballpoint pens of civil servants from 27 Member States - what would you expect ?
Your famous poet Fernando Pessoa once wrote : ' No intelligent idea can gain general acceptance unless some stupidity is mixed in with it ' .
Well , in this case , the culprit was national interest , which watered down , or rendered indecipherable , policies and practices that are in all of our interests .
Some of the national horse trading you engaged in made it look like comedy descending into farce : deciding that Austrian universities can break the law for another five years while the policemen look the other way , or creating two classes of European citizen : those with fundamental rights and those without .
Or suggesting that the President of the European Parliament should forsake his right to vote ; or , indeed , that Council has the right to determine Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
But the real tragedy is this : we saw not a single national leader return home flying the flag for Europe .
Instead , they crowed about the opt-outs and the derogations and the exclusions which disfigure the text before us today .
How do you guys expect to convince the people if you sound so unconvinced yourselves ?
If the poverty of aspiration implicit in a minimalist treaty is reflected in your poverty of enthusiasm ?
Look , it is your right to act as you choose , but it is also your responsibility .
The only thing this Parliament need regret amongst the many successes is the process .
The codes of transparency and democracy which drove the Constitutional Convention were a good deal preferable to secretive summits , and backroom deals in the wee small hours of Thursday morning .
Issues of such importance should not be decided in such a kamikaze manner .
( Applause )
Nonetheless , again : congratulations .
I propose a toast , with my glass half full : two cheers for the Lisbon Treaty .
Let us hope its advances move us forward faster , and convert cynicism into renewed belief .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , the Union 's leaders are to be congratulated for reaching agreement on the new EU Treaty .
Decisions will be easier to take within the EU institutions at EU level .
That is exactly what the new Treaty will do .
The EU works well when Parliament , the Commission , and the Council are all pulling together in the new spirit .
Mr President , whilst others may say what happened at the Lisbon Summit was shocking , I am of the firm belief that the elected representatives that are the governments of the peoples of the Member States of the European Union are entitled to defend what they see as the rights of their people within that Union .
I think that when we look at the overall example that has been given with this Lisbon Summit , we can see positives from it : we can see movement forward being made and , most importantly of all , an opportunity for a new zone and a new area of the development of the European Union to come into play , in particular with those areas where codecision now reigns on issues of environment , globalisation , research , education and the necessity of the response of the European Institutions to an ever-increasing speed of change within the world .
But there are also difficulties - and some colleagues have referred to them - in the area of justice and home affairs , for instance , where Ireland had to look for a specific opt-in and opt-out with regard to certain areas .
That does not mean that we are against more cooperation and coordination .
In fact , our role within Europol and within Eurojust in dealing with drug trafficking and tackling cross-border crime has been ahead of most .
We are working with eight other countries in the Maritime Organisation Analysis Centre to combat cocaine trafficking .
But I think the one and most important issue , when we speak about democracy and ratifying this Treaty , is that the ratification process is another step towards informing the people and public of Europe of what we can do .
Unfortunately , in only one country - my own country , Ireland - will there be a referendum .
I would appeal to colleagues when we speak about the future development of Europe not to make the same mistake that President Prodi made when he was President of Commission by saying that this is only the first step towards a further treaty and further treaties which will bring about change , because the people who vote in the referendum ask the question : what is the point in voting on this treaty if we have to vote again on another one at some future date ?
Allow us , where we have to connect democratically with the people , to tell them exactly what is in this Treaty and , most importantly of all , let this be a welcome to small and medium-sized countries of what can be achieved by defending their interests and rights .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance has always been a staunch supporter of the compelling need for a European Constitution , of a brief , strong text , an expression of European democracy and of the cohesion of its peoples .
We supported the Constitutional Treaty - albeit with its enormous defects - and today we hope that this confused thing , we cannot call it a simplified treaty because frankly that is a joke , which today you have presented to us , is ratified so that we can proceed , Mr Crowley , to the next stage .
We will not join in the glorification of this result , which contains only backward steps compared with the Constitutional Treaty .
Fortunately , Prime Minister Sócrates , the IGC was short .
I do not know , had it been longer , what other masterpieces of clarity the Council and its legal and diplomatic service would have given us .
Therefore , mercifully it was short .
What matters to us today is to denounce those responsible for this situation , which we consider highly unsatisfactory : first of all , the European Convention and its President , who systematically refused to include in time on the agenda the breakdown of the dogma of the veto on amendments to the Treaty and today is paying the price with the systematic dismantling of his work and oblivion .

No one , including Prime Minister Sócrates , has recalled the work of the Convention , here ; the pro-European advocates of not having referendums , who find themselves today empty-handed , with less democracy , more nationalism and more confusion .
The British Government and the British media system , which with all of its airs of pragmatism and reliability , in reality have shamefully given in to the howls of Murdoch 's tabloids and - after helping to make the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Constitutional Treaty much , much worse than what it could have been - have managed today to persuade public opinion that to have fewer rights , less protection , less transparency and less democracy is a great victory .
This Parliament and the Commission , which have decided to remain silent for two years pending a miraculous initiative from Mrs Merkel , the European Council and the governments who have decided to snatch away the process of reform of the treaties from public opinion and national parliaments and to play the card of entanglement and confusion to save what could be saved .
President , ratifications have now started , a process during which the Greens will not lie to public opinion .
This text contains positive elements , but it is full of traps and spanners in the works .
We will work so that the ratification and application of the new Treaty do not leave aside the fact that the path towards a truly free , open and democratic Europe is not over and that this is only a small stage , and is not even that glorious .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , General de Gaulle said of Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing : ' His problem is the people ' .
This statement would apply rather well to the European Council today .
Once again , at the summit , the 27 Member States showed themselves to be very adept at horse-trading .
The Prévert-style inventory of concessions granted to all the recalcitrant Member States deserves a mention .
This is the cost of getting everyone to agree , from the descendents of the EU 's founding fathers to the most inveterate Euro sceptics .
In the end , only two or three things seem untouchable , and in the European Council nobody has thought of touching them .
For example , the restrictive framework that the European Union 's economic and social policies must fit into : an open market economy with free competition , the issue of credit by the European Central Bank , the orientations of the Stability Pact , strict respect for freedom of movement of capital , the gradual removal of everything investors consider a barrier to trade , and the concentration of key powers in the institutions , which are inaccessible to citizens , national parliaments and even governments themselves , particularly in smaller countries , and indeed the dimensions assumed by military aspects in the European Union 's foreign policy .
These are ' red lines ' , as they say in English , which must not be crossed according to the EU 's ruling circles .
The problem is that it is precisely at these issues that most of the questions and criticisms from our people are directed , and it is the persistent absence of answers to these questions , the repeated refusal to hear these criticisms , that is fuelling the crisis of confidence that the European Union is suffering from among our fellow citizens .
Furthermore , if the members of the European Council had opened the windows of their meeting room on 18 October , they would have been able to measure the strength of this disaffection in person , as expressed on the streets of Lisbon by the largest demonstration seen in Portugal in the last 20 years , and I think that neither Mr Sócrates nor Mr Barroso will contradict me on this point .

The ultimate challenge for the European Union - we read in the Commission Communication at the Lisbon summit - is to explain to citizens what the European Union represents for Europeans .
Always explaining , never taking account .
Always communicating , never having open debates and therefore , with greater reason , not having referendums .
Yes , the European Council 's problem is the people , but without the people there would be no future for a great European ambition .
Surely this question really deserves to be discussed openly one day ?
That is what I am asking you .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this is not the first time that I have heard the President of the Commission and Heads of State come to this Chamber after a summit in the ancient city of Lisbon , proclaiming the whole thing to be a fantastic success and an example of how successful the European Union is .
Yes , you remember , Mr Barroso , don 't you ?
The Lisbon Agenda .
Here I was , seven years ago , being told that , because of that weekend meeting in Lisbon , we were about to become the most high-technology economy in the world with full employment and high growth rates .
Well , as we know , we are 75 % of the way through and the thing has crashed in ruins .
I would not , if I were you , be too complacent about the summit you had in Lisbon last week either because , for once , the national parliaments will have their say .
This , of course , is unusual because , generally , national parliaments do not have much to do any more , as the EU Institutions have usurped them .
However , the national parliaments will have their say and there is a real chance that we will get more referendums than just in Ireland .
Of course that is the one thing that you people do not want , isn 't it ?
You loathe democracy so much now that you actually call it populism .
You treated the French and Dutch referendums with contempt and you refused to take no for an answer .
You are the Euronationalists , dangerous people who will stop at nothing .
What that summit in Lisbon represented was a giant deceit and an attempt to impose upon the peoples of Europe a constitution just by dropping that word and repackaging it , when it actually has all the same proposals .
It is absolutely disgraceful that you are doing this , but I have hope and faith that in Westminster , the Mother of Parliaments for once will do her job and the British people will get a referendum .
We have heard enough from the political classes of Europe .
It is time that in Britain and in many other countries of Europe we heard what the people have to say .
You cannot push on with this project without the support of the people .
Let the people speak .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two and a half years after the French and the Dutch rejected the European Constitution , in Lisbon on 19 October the European Council adopted the simplified Reform Treaty , which is a very bad name for it since it has been made more complex and only marginally ' reforms ' the rejected Constitution .
In short , they are trying to pull the wool over our eyes and convince us that this text has nothing in common with the previous one , to avoid facing up to the people of Europe with a referendum .
You seem to be saying that this is too serious a matter to be entrusted to the people .
Well , we think the exact opposite .
Insofar as this is a cut-and-paste of the European Constitution , it deserves to be put to a referendum on ratification in each country , starting with France and the Netherlands .
Only a referendum can cancel what another referendum has decided .
Today , without trying to be party political , I am launching a big petition in my own country to try to make the French President who initiated the European mini-treaty do a U-turn and offer a referendum .
This is about the future of our respective nations , their sovereignty , independence , identity and freedom .
We cannot , for example , give responsibility for representing us abroad to a High Representative , any more than we can watch our seat on the United Nations Security Council being challenged in the name of the legal personality of the European Union .
Or allow our judicial and legislative corpus to be dismantled by judges in Luxembourg .
The parties to such a denial of democracy would carry a heavy burden of responsibility before history .
( SK ) At the Meeting of the Heads of State and Government last week , a Treaty was agreed that should adapt the European institutions to a new situation and improve the existing Treaties .
Since the present structure of the European Union is vastly different from what it was in 1957 , we have to adopt a new European document ; we need clear new rules .
I fully support this process .
In order to be trustworthy , the European Union must guarantee human rights and fundamental liberties to its citizens .
These values are mentioned several times in the preamble and in the articles of the Treaty , and the Union is founded precisely on the values of respect for human dignity , freedom , democracy and equality .
I regret very much that although in Article 3 of the new Treaty we profess to act strictly in accordance with the principles of the United Nations Charter protecting human rights , in the same breath we refuse to include the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union in the Treaty .
I am generalising on purpose because I do not wish to point the finger at individual Member States that refuse to express their opinion on this important issue .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is absent from the Treaty and I regret this .
Does the Charter not endorse human rights , enshrined in constitutional traditions and common to all Member States ?
I believe that the Members of this Parliament currently play a very important role in the process of reforming the Treaty ; they defend the opinions of the people of Europe and they should act as a catalyst for consensus in areas such as human rights .
Congratulations to you , Mr Socrates and Mr Barroso .

European Parliament representative at the Intergovernmental Conference . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office , Commission President , ladies and gentlemen , the German Presidency has succeeded in drawing up a mandate and the Portuguese Presidency in achieving acceptance of it and implementing it .
For this you have my thanks .
Because of the discussions of recent days about a number of minor matters it has been forgotten that this Treaty is a breakthrough in democracy and the capacity to act , because the European Parliament now has 95 % of legislation in a codecision procedure , because the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure has been removed and full rights are available in the budget sector and in the agricultural sector , the European Parliament has something to say on third country treaties and on ratifications , the European Parliament elects the Commission President and without the European Parliament , the Commission and the High Representatives do not take up office .
It is the case that democracy and the capacity to act have been created with the removal of the third pillar and that with the new decision-making methods in the Council for the expansion of codecision , the capacity to act has been improved .
Codecision and qualified majority decision-making are now the rule in legal terms .
This is a reversal of matters , which is of great significance .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights and legal personality are there and furthermore the United Kingdom 's red lines have been preserved in their entirety because in these areas there are opt-outs in legal and internal policy .
We still have to clarify certain matters : the issues associated with Article 24 .
We must fight to ensure that the transition from one Treaty to the next is not misused by the Council with regard to the allocation of posts , such as those of the High Representatives , for instance .
We are merely able to state that there are 751 Members of the European Parliament and I see no post where there is a difference in voting rights within this text .
Furthermore , I must state that we really do have to ensure now that this text is implemented , that we translate the Constitution into reality in the way we understand this Treaty .
Mr President , allow me to make one comment . In 1994 I was appointed for the first time on behalf of this House - for which I should like say thank you - to the Westendorp Group .
This was my fourth intergovernmental conference .
When we started , we had nothing to say as Parliament .
I should like at this point to thank Mrs Guigou , Mr Tsatsos , Mr Hänsch and Mr Méndez De Vigo , as well as my two fellow Members from the Intergovernmental Conference , for their great cooperation over these last 13 years .
Recognition , too , for this continuity in the work to extend Parliament 's competence .

European Parliament representative at the Intergovernmental Conference . - ( PT ) Congratulations ; the President has lived up to his surname , working with passion and reason for the success of the summit .
Enrique Barón Crespo , European Parliament representative at the Intergovernmental Conference - ( ES ) President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I can testify as someone who was present at the end of the Intergovernmental Conference - I think that it is the first time that the President and the three representatives have been admitted to the Conference - and I can say that the Portuguese Presidency has listened to the European Parliament : firstly by restoring citizenship , something that appeared to be impossible until mid-September , and secondly , by giving proper treatment to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which also seemed impossible , and also by recognising the substantial extension of majority voting .
It is not only the European Parliament that has gained things , it is Europe , and we have helped .
The President-in-office started his speech by talking about Ioannina .
I challenge him that we should explain to the people of Europe what the Protocol is on the Ioannina Declaration , and what has surprised me most is that governments have not fought very hard in the Council to stop the introduction of the Luxembourg Compromise into the Treaty , which would mean destroying it .
More or less the same applies - and I am addressing the President of the Commission - to the subject of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
You are going to have to work very hard on that , because Parliament is going to defend its rights in order to ensure that there is an intelligent solution when the Treaty enters into force , which I hope will be the case , given that there will be a series of very interesting posts to allocate and , of course , we want to monitor this process democratically .
To conclude , Mr President , Prime Minister Sócrates said that the Treaty of Lisbon has been born .
It is still a very small child , and I hope that in December everyone signs that they want it to grow , and , above all , that everyone acts with mutual loyalty and solidarity so that this Lisbon Treaty becomes a reality .
Many thanks , Mr Barón Crespo , for recognising this task as well as the many other tasks beforehand .
European Parliament representative at the Intergovernmental Conference . - Mr President , for 26 countries , the Treaty is certainly a great step forward towards European unity and certainly rivals the Treaty of Maastricht in importance .
Of course , the Treaty lacks the simplicity of its late , lamented predecessor , but it preserves all the principal reforms .
Abroad and inside the Union , people will soon see a more effective , efficient and democratic Union .
But in one country this is not so .
The British still seem intimidated by the success of the EU and have sought , at the IGC , to reduce the scope and force of common policies in the area of fundamental rights , freedom , security and justice , and in the common foreign security and defence policies .
Why such a strategy of non-cooperation is thought to serve the interests of the British people is not clear .
Nor do Mr Farage or the Conservative Party provide a preferable or alternative solution .
It is my desire and trust that this strange , idiosyncratic British policy will prove to be as short-lived as possible .
Thank you very much , Mr Duff , for your great engagement in your responsibilities .
( PT ) President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the best way of celebrating the important result achieved last weekend , thanks to the mandate negotiated during the German Presidency and the effective commitment of the Portuguese Presidency , that I would especially like to commend , is to make effective use of the new institutional instruments and achieve better results .
Recently , European citizens have repeatedly been told , quite rightly , that we needed a new institutional framework to adapt the Europe of Nice to the Europe of enlargement .
It is now time to prove that this reorganised Europe is capable of fulfilling its new mission .
Fifty years after the signing of the Treaty of Rome the threat hanging over Europe is no longer that of war or perpetual walls of woe .
The new challenge is to face the global world in which there are ever more people consuming and producing , where borders are disappearing and no European country is really a world player .
We have to face the fears of globalisation and the technology revolution and prove that Europe , strengthened by the new Treaty , is capable of discovering new paths and creating new wealth .
Yet this is also an opportunity to devise new solutions to the new problems .
With six , twelve or even fifteen members it was easier to promote closer ties between citizens and the Community structures , but today it is the toughest of challenges .
As the EU enlarges , the centre of power is also becoming more distant from the citizen .
This adverse effect can be seen , inter alia , in the end of the rotating presidencies of the Council or the abandonment of the principle of one Commissioner per Member State .
We have to counter this adverse effect and Parliament has a decisive role in this task , to attain more transparency and less bureaucracy , more development and less unnecessary legislation , more cooperation with national parliaments and less distance from citizens , more cohesion and less inequality .
Freed from the doubts about our internal organisation , let us be a symbol of courage and let us take up the challenges of modern times .
Today we should celebrate our capacity to unite .
( PT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , satisfaction , happiness , success , victory , are words that have been used here today , and rightly so , about the informal Council in Lisbon .
Indeed , the agreement on the new Treaty was announced before midnight on 18 October .
It was a historic moment .
Firstly because of the results achieved , but also because it was done so quickly .
After a little more than 12 months of intense work and negotiation it was possible to achieve the required consensus on the first day of the Summit .
What is more , on the same day an agreement was signed with the European Union 's social partners , employers and trade unions , to modernise the labour market , an important step for the new cycle of the Lisbon Strategy .
The Portuguese Presidency is to be congratulated .
It achieved its top priority with acknowledged skill : to give Europe a new Treaty , which was a great victory .
Europe has emerged from a six-year impasse and can now concentrate on what is really important to citizens because , as Jean Monnet said , we cannot stop when the whole world around us is on the move , and the speed at which the world turns makes no allowance for a slow European response .
The Treaty will be signed on 13 December , and the ratification process will follow , which should be swift and problem-free .
As a Portuguese national I want to say how pleased I am because , once again , the name of Lisbon is indelibly linked to a decisive moment in European integration .
Thank you Prime Minister Sócrates .
You deserve thanks from Portugal and also from Europe for your determination and commitment . Europe is out of the impasse .
Thank you very much , Prime Minister .
( DA ) Mr President , fortunately the Lisbon Summit ended well .
Some excellent preparatory work was carried out by the German Presidency , and the Portuguese Presidency completed it in a professional manner .
Unfortunately , I must point out that national interests have again played a role .
This is definitely not appropriate for European cooperation .
We must now have special powers to discuss the content instead of the process . However , we have unfortunately seen depressing tendencies that suggest that we would rather discuss the process rather than the content .
However , if we are ultimately to discuss the process then I would like to state clearly that we do not need referendums to ratify the Treaty .
Referendums are simply not the solution .
Let the representative democracy do its work !
It is not because I am afraid of a no vote - far from it !
Rather it is because it is completely wrong to separate EU issues from national parliamentary elections .
The EU is and will remain a completely integral part of national policy .
Referendums are used to fire shots at a government in office .
They enable the other political parties to avoid being assessed on their EU policies . However , all political parties will of course be assessed on their EU policies , and this will happen when we go to the polls in the national elections .
However , it imposes two requirements : a requirement that we , the electorate , allow EU policy to be decisive in our choice of national politicians , and a requirement that the political parties must of course not use referendums to avoid responsibility for the European Community .
Therefore , efforts to ensure that it is the content and not the process that is given the highest priority will hopefully be successful .
( PL ) President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I am very pleased that the Treaty reform process is coming to a close .
This is not so that the proposed changes to my convictions as regards integration can be put into full effect - at times they are very remote from that .
The reason I am pleased is rather that lately we have been devoting too much time and political energy to institutions .
I am convinced that the EU 's success is not the result of the institutional set-up or the mechanics of power .
This success is the result of political will and a common vision of the future .
I hope that once ratification is concluded there will be nothing to stop us from engaging in a Europe of results , from taking more responsibility for global security , from having a more active impact on neighbouring countries , and finally from discussing EU enlargement , from winning in terms of competition , investments and growth .
Despite what has been being said over the past seven years , institutional changes are neither a complete nor a satisfactory response to these problems .
( DE ) Mr President , from Europe 's many upheavals , peasants wars and revolutions , we are all familiar with the romantic story of the fugitive being hidden in a cart-load of dung to be taken over the border and escape Richelieu 's bloodhounds and the king 's guards .
If , at the end , he is successful , he does not look very nice , nor does he smell very nice , but once he has washed , then it can be said : he is alive !
The Constitution has fared similarly .
Governments have buried it in a tangled mass of illegible , indecipherable texts of opt-outs , clauses , footnotes , resolutions , Minutes , and they have taken the Constitution beyond the limits under cover of this dunghill .
The tragedy of it is simply that they sought shelter in this constitutional treasure not from the king 's guards , but from the watchful eyes of citizens .
I have been digging in this tangled mass of texts . Yes , I have actually found all the main achievements of the Constitution on which I myself have been working for more than 10 years and I could well be fortunate .
This situation nevertheless makes me very apprehensive .
In addition , of course , as is simply the case with such adventures , whenever anyone helped the fugitive , they ripped off part of the treasure .
I have therefore also found the hands of a few governments in this dung hill .
One has secured another opt-out for itself and therefore filched a part of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , a part of Parliament 's rights , a part of data protection , etc .
The treasure arrives damaged , but generally speaking it does arrive .
We have gained a piece of Europe , we have saved a piece of Europe 's future , not with our citizens , but without our citizens , not with the parliaments , but without the parliaments , and this is a great danger .
We have gained a piece of Europe , but we have not resolved the crisis of confidence among Europe 's citizens .
There is therefore an enormous challenge ahead of this House : to regain the confidence of Europe 's citizens .
( PT ) Mr President , we regret that the Lisbon Summit took over the essence of the content of the so-called European Constitution , previously rejected in the French and Dutch referendums , simultaneously attempting to dodge the necessary democratic debate and public consultation by means of referendums .
Apart from being a deep insult to democracy and the sovereign will expressed , this demonstrates your fear of citizens ' votes on a Treaty that represents a qualitative leap in the advance of neoliberalism , federalism and militarism , increasingly eroding the economic and social achievements of workers and the poor .
However , the struggle will continue , as more than 200 000 people made clear at the impressive demonstration in Lisbon promoted by the CGPT also on 18 October . It was the largest in the past 20 years , and the Presidents of the Council and the Commission , both Portuguese , are symbolically it ignoring here .
That also goes on record in the history of this Treaty .
( CS ) Mr President , after the failure of the Constitution it seemed that the principle of democratic decision-making had once again gained the upper hand within the EU , at least for a while .
We were wrong to think that .
Very quickly the same Constitution has returned to the table under a different title .
Its authors do not even bother concealing the fact that it is the original Constitution in a slightly modified form with the intention of ignoring the people 's democratic will in a referendum .
The Treaty , which reinforces the role of non-elected officials of the EU , thereby reinforcing the democracy deficit , is creating , among other things , 105 legislative and non-legislative competences of the EU .
In 68 cases it replaces the right of national veto with majority decision-making .
It subverts the national competences in the area of foreign policy .
It hands decision-making in the EU to the big Member States , notably Germany , at the expense of the small countries .
A simple comparison shows that it is almost exactly identical to the Constitution for a European federal state rejected by the French people and buried by the Dutch .
The impertinence with which it has been returned on the table with the straight face of a poker player and now under a new Orwellian title is astounding .
A new type of utopian nationalism won in Lisbon : pan-European and EU nationalism ; nationalism without any real national , cultural and historic foundations , rooted only in the long office corridors in Brussels .
Berlaymont patriotism has claimed victory .
Those of us who represent countries that lived for nearly half a century under the communist totalitarian regime are not easily surprised by anything .
We have been accustomed to the insolence of power and contempt for the people 's will .
Not even in the CMEA , however , have we experienced such overt deception as today 's deception by the EU of the people of the Member States .
At least in the CMEA similar attempts were hidden behind the party politburos ; but that is a thing of the past .
The citizens want to decide themselves whether they will hand over their sovereign rights to a European super-state without a democratic or historical framework .
That is why I want to see a referendum .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , under the Reform Treaty , which I reject , there are winners and losers .
The reservations of Poland and Italy regarding the new distribution of seats in Parliament were resolved , except that Poland is winning other more important battles : it obtained the opt-out from the Charter of Fundamental Rights , it will have an Advocate-General at the Court of Justice and it benefits under the Ioannina mechanism .
Even Austria won a victory by being allowed to restrict access by foreign students to the country 's universities .
Romano Prodi , before entering the meeting , announced that he would fight not to lose Italy 's parity .
He ended up losing parity with France but restoring parity with the UK , boasting of the promise secured to reconsider the distribution of seats based on citizenship after 2014 .
However , we had already obtained this at the last plenary in Brussels .
What was accepted by the indolent Prodi administration were just a few crumbs from the table , as a result of which around three million Europeans with Italian citizenship are considered to be less European than the Pakistanis , Indians and Kenyans who have the good fortune to work and live in the UK , or the Cameroonians in France , who , although non-Community nationals , are counted for the distribution of seats .
We could not have expected anything better from the Italian Government , supported by a boorishly Communist left and by a deceitful and hypocritical centre-left .
As you can see , we have other reasons for not considering the Europe of these treaties as ours and for hoping that we will soon be celebrating the De profundis of the ridiculous Prodi Government .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , after a detailed reading of the Lisbon Treaty it is clear that the heads of state are presenting fundamental changes to the EU documents .
The Reform Treaty literally re-writes the EU Treaties and the founding Treaties of the European Communities .
I would like to highlight the fact that the changes do not just concern the influence of individual states on EU processes , but also the fundamental principles themselves , on which the EU was established 50 years ago .
The Reform Treaty transfers the principle of free competition from the main body of the Treaty to the protocols that are to be annexed to the Treaty .
I consider that a red flag for all democratically-minded citizens .
Ladies and gentlemen , if the EU project is to be credible , the Reform Treaty has to be put to a referendum in the Member States .
Politicians should set aside their arrogance and comfortable situation .
They have to explain the decision taken in Lisbon to the citizens and win them over to it .
Otherwise the gap between the citizens and the political elite will continue to grow .
Not only this will jeopardise prosperity ; it will also deepen the democratic deficit of the EU as a whole .
Mr President , I am grateful to the Prime Minister for his statement this morning and , whilst I note the decisions of the Heads of Government , the British people and the British Conservative Party have been consistent in their concerns about the Constitution and the very similar Reform Treaty .
The British Prime Minister has said that the Reform Treaty is not the Constitution .
His fellow leaders have disagreed .
He told us that Britain 's so-called ' red lines ' have been secured .
Like most British people I really do not understand or believe our Prime Minister on this matter .
The issue is one of trust .
Our Prime Minister gave a commitment to hold a referendum - a commitment in an election manifesto two years ago .
A referendum on this Treaty is , therefore , not only politically necessary but also a moral imperative .
The Irish Prime Minister said at the weekend about possible referenda : ' Why not let your people have a say ?
I think it 's a bit upsetting to see so many countries running away from giving their people an opportunity ' .
A few days ago , Gordon Brown said that this Treaty will mark the end of EU institutional reform for the next decade .
However , over the past 15 years we have had four treaties dealing with reform , and I doubt whether the urge to have further institutional change can be resisted .
The so-called ' ratchet clause ' , for example , would allow further national vetoes to be abolished .
On the other hand , the Conservative vision for Europe focuses on the three key areas of global competitiveness , global climate change and global poverty .
I congratulate President Barroso in particular for his determination , in any event , to pursue those aims .
However , they can be tackled with political will and do not require this Treaty .
We should remind ourselves of what the Laeken Declaration said .
It said the Union needs to become more democratic , more transparent and more efficient , but it called also for us to engage the citizens more and not just to communicate our decisions to them .
The question today is : does the Treaty respond to Laeken ?
Laeken asked the right questions .
Have we given the right answers ?
Mr President , I would like to say to the President-in-Office of the Council : what a wonderful summit .
I never doubted that you would make it , but it is one thing not to doubt and another to do it , and you did it .
Congratulations .
I do not know if colleagues know : it is a bit of a landmark in history .
On the first day , we got a new Treaty of the real world .
I know that all the maximalists here do not think it is the most beautiful treaty they have got , but the real world is not the most beautiful world you can get .
So what you need is an effective treaty , a treaty of clear values - and you have got it .
On the second day , friends , we got a direction - on the first day a treaty , on the second day a direction - which deals with what people would like us to do : the real world .
What you said on the second day was that we want a Europe leading globalisation to be more human , to be more inclusive and to base it on our social coherent values .
What you said was that the Lisbon process is not only a process for a few , but the guideline for the external direction of the European Union , which says that it is not only about being the world 's strongest economic power , it is also by understanding that the world will only be more cohesive by basing it on a social market economy .
That is what I want to underline to you today .
I want to thank the Presidency , not only for the first day but also for the second day , because the conclusion of the second day was that this European Union is not about market societies .
It is about social market economies , which means that we are frontrunners in uniting social issues with economic competitiveness .
Well done , President-in-Office - and friend , if I can say that - because that leads me to my third and last message .
Let us give the Portuguese Presidency its last summit in December : not only where a Portuguese Presidency will formally sign the Treaty , but also where we confirm the Lisbon Process in a well-done way .
So let us go .
Let us move .
That is what people expect of us .
- ( FR ) Mr President , the European Union is going to have a new Treaty .
Obviously there are some regrets that can be expressed : regrets about the abandonment in the text of the symbols of the European Union ; regrets about the opt-outs won by some countries , particularly on the Charter ; and finally regrets about the complexity of the Treaty , for which I am requesting a consolidated text so that Europe 's citizens can try to find their way around it .
That would be good .
All the same , this Treaty will give us the means to revive Europe , provided that we want to do so .
With this text , the European Union will gain the tools it needs to continue its integration , to expand and to deepen its common policies .
On energy , climate change , immigration policy , the fight against terrorism , economic coordination , foreign and defence policy and development policy , Europe can now move forward .
It will simply be a question of political will .
Nobody will now be able to use the excuse that the institutional means of action are lacking .
Now , everybody will have to face up to their responsibilities , and in saying that , besides our institutions , I am thinking in particular of the Member States .
That is good news for Europe and I hope it will be good news for its citizens .
( PL ) Mr President , contrary to the gloom-laden forecasts and baseless criticism of Poland during recent debates in this House , especially by the leader of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Lisbon Summit turned out to be a diplomatic compromise .
Both the EU and the Polish authorities perceived the potential to reach an agreement .
The EU side showed an appreciation of Poland 's importance and potential by increasing the number of Advocates General in the Court of Justice , and also by retaining the Ioannina clause .
We must hope that the compromise reached at the summit is only an introduction to consultation with the peoples of Europe .
The draft EU Reform Treaty is , in the end , too important a document to be smuggled through in the secrecy of political meeting rooms .
Let us not forget that the previous version of this treaty died in two Member States ' referendums .
Failure to allow the public to have their say once more on the future of the EU would not only be a breach of one of the EU 's fundamental values but would also provide clear evidence that those in government fear the voice of their own electorate .
Let the dictators of democracy allow the public themselves to express their will as regards the future vision of the EU .
Mr President , I represent Scotland .
My party , the SNP , forms the new Government in Scotland , and I believe it will prove to be more constructive towards participation in the European Union than UK governments have been .
I accept the need to reform the Treaties and to create more open , democratic , efficient and accountable governance .
In principle , I support an extension of QMV and codecision with the European Parliament , but the very diversity which Mr Barroso quite rightly referred to will always mean that national interests will be promoted .
We should not lose touch with our local communities by trampling over their interests , or appearing so to do .
For Scotland , there is a very real fear that the entrenchment of the common fisheries policy , as an exclusive competence within the Treaties , can only obstruct the absolute root-and-branch reform of fisheries management that I believe to be necessary .
Unfortunately , but not surprisingly , the UK Government did not raise this issue at the summit .
Yet again , Scotland 's key interests have been ignored by a UK Government .
( NL ) Mr President , the Constitution is dead .
Long live the Constitution !
How else to describe the events in Lisbon ?
We all agree that this Reform Treaty is a mere clone of the Constitution rejected by the French and Dutch ; one that , as Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing said , is even less readable than the original .
After all , referendums are to be avoided at all costs , we are told .
There is indeed one major difference from 2005 .
This time the French , Dutch and other European peoples are not being given the chance to express their opinions .
An illustration of this disdain for democracy can be found in the statements of Commissioner Wallström , who always has so much to say about bridging the gap between Europe and the citizen .
She is urging the national parliaments to ratify this text as quickly as possible .
Yet genuine respect for democracy requires that the citizens of all EU Member States be able to express their opinions on the Treaty , a text which , in numerous respects , erodes the sovereignty of the nation-states even more than is already the case .
Those responsible should not complain if this fear of citizens again goes against official Europe in the subsequent European elections .
( DE ) Mr President , gentlemen , you certainly do not have it easy at the moment !
In the countries in which referendums were promised , the Treaty is portrayed , as in the United Kingdom or in my home country , Austria , as just a minor detail , an extension of something .
In other countries , like Germany , the talk is of a total reorganisation of the Community and of a historic breakthrough .
Which is now true ?
I think we should remind ourselves again on this occasion of the words and very clear sayings of the former President of West Germany , Roman Herzog , who was after all Chairman of the Convention responsible for drafting the Charter of Fundamental Rights and who said that democracy is being eroded by the EU Constitution .
We now have it in a modified form in the Reform Treaty .
If you do not want it to be eroded , if you do not want democracy to be choked , please have the political decency at least to allow referendums , as there have been in the past - for the last EU Constitutional Treaty - even in Spain and Luxembourg .
( NL ) Mr President , President of the Commission , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , looking at the changes the Reform Treaty makes in such fields as migration , agriculture , and police and justice , and at the decisions regarding the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the euro area and the social market economy - which becomes an objective for the first time - and also regarding intergovernmental solidarity on energy , it is apparent to me that this Treaty builds on the results of the Convention and the June Summit , and gives us more clout and a great deal more democracy as political institutions .
From now on , the Union will be better equipped to provide the answers people expect of it , both internally and externally .
In the latter respect , I should like to congratulate the Council Presidency on its setting of the agenda .
President-in-Office , by letting your summit not only decide on the Treaty , but also exchange ideas about the problem of our generation - globalisation - you have sent out an important signal .
When all is said and done , it is not the institutions - institutional navel-gazing - but their policies that are important .
This brings me to a question to the President of the Commission .
Do you think that genuinely bold policymaking is possible in the period from now until the final ratification of the Treaty , or does ratification make you fear that you cannot offend people and that you must confine yourselves to ' cautious ' matters ?
In other words , can the Europe of specific projects continue in 2008 ?
Finally , two more brief questions to the Council .
President-in-Office , have you asked the Heads of State or Government for a personal political commitment to bringing ratification to a successful conclusion in their respective countries ?
I very much hope so .
Secondly , when will a coordinated text of these treaties appear ?
After all , a treaty that includes the objectives of transparency and simplification must be readable , if only out of respect for the people .
Thank you , Mr President , and thank you in anticipation to the President-in-Office and the Commission President for their answers to my questions .
( DE ) Mr President , we have the Lisbon Strategy and hopefully we are now to have the Lisbon Treaty too , and both will move Europe forward .
This Parliament , particularly the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , has been fighting and working for a new European treaty for seven years .
Admittedly we have not got the Constitution , but we do say that this Reform Treaty represents progress in every respect .
There is no single item on which we have fallen behind compared with Nice .
Everything is moving forward and bringing us further into the Union of 27 .
We also need to say this to the citizens outside .
The winners in the new Treaty are the people of Europe .
There are diverse forms of direct and indirect participation in European policy and we are in a position to solve the major problems referred to here faster and more effectively .
The winners are also the citizens ' chambers in Europe , the national parliaments and this European citizens ' chamber , this Parliament .
Democracy is not therefore being eroded - as has just been said , and which is complete nonsense - but it is the completion of European democracy , which we can actually achieve with this Treaty .
This has now been the fourth agreement .
I hope it will be the last time that the Member States have to get together for this .
Every power must now be invested in ratification .
I hope that no country says no .
It is perhaps the last chance for this Treaty .
Every no would lead to isolation , if not to that country 's self-exclusion .
We hope this will not be the case .
Every power should flow into ratification so that we have this Treaty by 2009 .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there used to be a very witty and cynical slogan written on a wall in the Milan metro that said , ' the future is not what it once was ' , a bit like the weather or food .
We live in a time when the younger generations are no longer convinced that the future will be better , as their parents once thought .
Indeed we often hear people saying that ' Europe is not what it once was ' .
A sovereignist , nationalist , anti-European way of thinking is emerging and developing on our continent . We have heard some examples of it in this Chamber this morning .
I believe that the Lisbon result is important , although more for the speed with which it was decided , which sends out a positive signal to public opinion , rather than its content , since there are still too many opt-outs and clauses , and it is still too complicated .
However , Parliament , the Commission and the Council now have another 18 months in which to restore public opinion following this crisis period .
All of us , or at least the majority of us in this Chamber , believe that Europe is the solution to globalisation concerns , and not the cause , and that we are stronger if we tackle immigration , climate change , innovation and research together .
This is what most MEPs in here think .
We now have 18 months in which to convince the 500 million citizens who live in Europe of this before the European elections .
- ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Summit obtained a single result : distancing Europe 's citizens from the European Union while making more room for lobbyists and technocratic powers .
The vision that we are fighting for - that of a Europe of the peoples , of the regions - is further and further away .
Even in our Parliament , where are the Corsicans , the people of the Valle d 'Aosta , the Basques , where are the Breton separatists , the Alsatians ?
On the distribution of seats , it is a disgrace that our country , represented by its indignant premier , Mr Prodi , should lose out to France .
Yet this was not enough for the evanescent Mr Prodi , who seemed like Alice in Wonderland in Lisbon , totally lost and misinformed .
Thanks to Mr Prodi , Italy was excluded from the declaration , from the joint declaration with which France , Germany and the UK quite rightly asked Europe to take steps to avoid a repetition of the financial turbulence resulting from the US sub-prime crisis .
According to statements made to the press about the global financial crisis , Mr Prodi said that he could not see the point of Europe 's position on lending .
The former Goldman Sachs consultant and ex-President of the Commission may act like a former consultant of a multinational bank at times , but he does not intend to worry about the momentous consequences for Italian families - including those in the north - who are burdened by costs and who cannot make ends meet ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( ES ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , the spokesperson for my Group , Mr Daul , said that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is satisfied , and this is because we have got out of an impasse , but we are not happy .
This is due to the not very pro-European atmosphere among the governments , which contrasts with the polls that President Barroso referred to concerning the will of the European people , and also because the Lisbon Treaty ultimately includes many made-to-measure elements for governments that want more and more for themselves and less and less for Europe .
President-in-Office of the Council , you referred - and I would like to congratulate you on the agreement that has been reached , because I would like to stress that I think that the agreement is important for getting us out of the impasse - you referred to three issues that I would like to highlight .
Firstly , I think that it is very important to have a formal proclamation in this House of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
This was not done in Nice , it was done in secret .
Let us now do it formally , because the Charter of Fundamental Rights , with or without opt-outs , is the DNA of the European people .
Secondly , Mr President , I am concerned about the distribution of seats in the European Parliament , because what you have adopted violates a principle that is in the Treaty , which is degressive proportionality .
Is it going to come to Parliament ?
We will see what we do , but you are well aware that what you have adopted does not provide degressive proportionality .
Finally , the High Representative .
I think you have reached a good agreement , but I think that the President of the Council , the High Representative and the President of the Commission form a package , which we will have to discuss in Parliament .
In summary , Mr President , I think that it was Paul Valéry , who was a great poet and , perhaps therefore a great European , who wrote that a poem is never finished , only abandoned .
The construction of Europe never finishes .
In this case we have , in the interests of consensus , abandoned some of the advances of the Constitutional Treaty , but we will be here to keep fighting for them .
We will also have supported them in a sentence of the preamble which , ironically , was rescued from the flames : an ever closer union between the peoples of Europe .
That is our objective , Mr President .
( NL ) Mr President , the Netherlands also shared the sense of relief on Saturday morning about the agreement reached , and for this , too , I believe thanks are due to the President-in-Office of the Council .
The new Treaty enables the European Union to progress .
The Union will become more decisive and democratic .
The European Union is back on its feet .
It can now concentrate fully on its substantive task ; back to work with an agenda ranging from the further development of the social Europe to a better-coordinated foreign policy .
This is also the best way to bring Europe closer to its citizens .
My country , the Netherlands , has seen a great deal of discussion about the nature of the Treaty that has now been adopted and about its differences from the Constitutional Treaty the country rejected in a referendum .
The conclusion was that the differences are such that a second referendum is not necessary .
The new Treaty lacks the constitutional nature of the original Constitution ; and so we , too , have no need for a further referendum .
Thus it will just be a case of normal parliamentary ratification .
The reforms that have been decided on have our wholehearted support , as they make substantial progress - particularly concerning the rights of the European Parliament - without fundamentally altering the balance between the Member States and the European institutions .
A larger Union needs different , more wide-ranging rules .
Hopefully , all Member States will now drive ratification forward , so that we can all get going with the new rules in 2009 , in order to take forward the substantive role of the Union in all areas in which our citizens have expectations of us .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by adding my own voice to the words of profound gratitude for the Portuguese Presidency .
Considerable success has been achieved .
The European Union needed a way out of the sense of defeat and failure , it needed a political dimension , and thanks to the Portuguese Presidency , it has one .
I also consider it to be of exceptional importance that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is an element of those decisions , and I would like to add here that the Charter of Fundamental Rights is the compass , the instrumentarium , of Europe .
I cannot even imagine how a country that wishes to be part of the European Union could at the same time dissociate itself from that which constitutes its moral , philosophical and political foundation .
Critical words were spoken by my colleague Mr Duff regarding the position of the British Government , which demanded an opt-out .
I am in a better position .
The Polish Government , which asked for an opt-out as the result of a decision taken by the Polish people , is leaving power .
I would like to express the profound hope that following the political change-over that has taken place in my country , and out of loyalty to the Polish tradition of solidarity , Poland will observe the Charter of Fundamental Rights in full .
Poland will accede to the Charter of Fundamental Rights in full , without any opt-out .
( FR ) Mr President , as spokesperson for the majority French party , the UMP , I congratulate the Portuguese Presidency and I am delighted with this agreement on the text of the Treaty .
It gives the enlarged Europe the rules it needs to function effectively and democratically .
As co-rapporteur on the new composition of the European Parliament , I am also pleased about the Council 's agreement with the motion for a resolution voted for by Parliament on 11 October .
The Council has thereby approved the definition we gave for degressive proportionality , the translation of this principle into figures , the use of Eurostat figures to evaluate the populations to be taken into account and the desire to find a more stable system after 2009 .
The Council 's agreement is more than a 100 % agreement ; it is a 101 % agreement , since the Council adds a seat to be given to Italy , without explaining why .
This leads me to make two comments .
The first comment is , as you said , Mr President , that all the Members of Parliament will keep the right to vote - even the President , and even the 73rd Italian - contrary to a persistent rumour spread by some of the press .
My second comment is that the 73rd seat granted to Italy departs from the principle of degressive proportionality written into the Treaty , proposed by Parliament and accepted by the Council .
We must therefore make sure that the decision to apply Article 9 a is unassailable before the European Court of Justice and for this reason the rapporteurs will be proposing a revised draft to Parliament taking into account the European Council 's wishes .
Sincere thanks to you , too , for the report on the distribution of seats , as well as to Mr Severin .
You have done great work here and we have been with you 99 % of the way .
. - ( FR ) Mr President , ' nothing is possible without men ; nothing is lasting without institutions ' .
So said Jean Monnet , and it applies very well to our situation .
Is the Treaty perfect , then ?
Of course not !
Jean Monnet has an answer for this too .
On the Treaty of Rome , he wrote that he did not ask himself whether the Treaty could have been better as it corresponded to all that was possible at the time and to the wisdom of the age .
1957-2007 .
Are we taking the risk of starting again ?
No , of course not .
There will be no third treaty .
One crisis is enough .
Two is too many .
Jean Monnet again has the answer : ' I have always thought that Europe would be made through crises and that it would be the sum of the solutions to those crises . '
That is what the Treaty is .
However , obviously not everyone agrees , since our British friends are so keen on opting out .
I live on a peninsula , so I understand island mentalities .
However , Jean Monnet experienced this in 1951 with coal and steel .
They were not interested , it was offered to them , and then they came on board .
Remember Tony Blair .
He signed the Social Protocol of the Maastricht Treaty .
We are sure to find a British colleague to sign the Charter of Fundamental Rights one of these days .
Let us be patient , and remember the Chinese diplomat who once said that he admired the wise slowness of the construction of Europe .
Let us go on .
Of course , I would like to finish by congratulating the Portuguese Presidency , and as I am a French MEP , I am proud of my Portuguese President and the circumstances that mean we now seem to have two for the price of one !
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at one blow the European Union has disengaged itself from its constitutional impasse .
The new European Union will be more capable of action , more democratic and more transparent and it will be in a position to discharge its duties more successfully both at home and throughout the world .
This is good , and congratulations to the Portuguese Presidency in this regard .
If I mention with pride that the German Council Presidency was there at the beginning of the road to Lisbon , I hope you will not mind my saying so , as a German .
Not all the problems have been solved yet .
The absurd episode surrounding the 751st seat mandate and the President 's voting rights made this clear .
There should be no question at all of the Council not being authorised to remove an elected Member 's right to vote - irrespective of position .
I am grateful that both the President as well as Parliament 's representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference have quickly and palpably made this clear .
Nevertheless , there is a problem here .
It concerns Parliament 's composition , which remains unclear as from 2014 .
I am convinced that it will involve finding a system that defines and governs Parliament 's composition according to objective criteria , irrespective of political caprice .
It cannot be true that the Council effectively distributes Parliament 's seats as if it were lord of the manor .
We have to strive towards this until 2014 .
One important advance has not perhaps been recognised sufficiently to date : the strengthening of the principle of subsidiarity .
This is a very important step in involving national Parliaments in responsibility for European legislation as far as subsidiarity is concerned .
Subsidiarity and the demand for it strengthen the Community and do not weaken it , Commission President .
We shall also be striving for this in the future .
I can merely ask the national Parliaments to make thorough use of these new opportunities !
( Applause )
Mr President , I , too , welcome this agreement , which , despite a few oddities like the extra seat for Italy , is a good package that deserves ratification and will make the European Union function better , while also improving its democratic accountability .
Let me dwell for my remaining minute on the second aspect .
Mr Kirkhope asked just now whether we have answered the questions posed at Laeken about making the EU more democratically accountable and closer to its citizens .
I would say that we have certainly moved in that direction .
Let us remember one thing : once this Treaty comes into force , no European legislation can be adopted without , firstly , prior examination by every national parliament , secondly , the approval of the Council of Ministers composed of national ministers accountable to those very same national parliaments and , thirdly , approval by this European Parliament , with its Members directly chosen by citizens specifically to deal with European issues at European level .
That is a level of accountability that exists in no other international structure .
Look at the World Trade Organisation .
Look at the IMF .
Look at the World Bank .
Look at the OECD .
You name it , nothing above the level of the nation state has that level of democratic accountability .
Those who are really worried about democratic accountability in international structures should focus on those institutions and organisations .
We should be proud of what we are achieving in our democratic European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , we do indeed have a new Treaty , and this alone is cause for satisfaction .
There is , however , something else that is more important - that the Treaty is a good one .
It is a good treaty , because it responds to the challenges that Europe is facing today .
Moreover , it also fulfils the aims that were stated as an obligation in the Laeken Declaration six years ago .
In line with those aims , the Treaty arranges and simplifies both the institutional framework and the legal system of the Union .
It democratises the European Union , among other things by reinforcing the legislative role of our Parliament .
It brings the Union closer to its citizens , and one way in which it does this is through the citizens ' initiative .
The question is , will the Union , as a result of the Treaty , have greater significance in the world and act more effectively ?
This , however , does not depend only on the institutions introduced or modified by the Treaty ; it depends primarily on the political will of the leaders of the Member States .
Should this will be lacking , all the institutional reform will have counted for nothing .
In order that the Treaty does not remain a moribund law , a moribund document , I would like to appeal for a community of political will at the time of its signing and after its ratification .
Mr President , the text of the Reform Treaty agreed at the Lisbon Summit is clear progress , a step forward in the history of European integration - I would like to call it European unification .
Therefore , it should be greeted with satisfaction .
Nonetheless , however important this step might be , it is not the last one .
In the short term it is crucial to see the Treaty ratified by all the 27 Member States .
It should now be clear to everybody that there was no plan B and there is no plan C. After ratification we must continue , in the medium and long term , with the necessary reforms and policies until a complete reconciliation between Europe 's history and geography is achieved within the framework of European transnational democracy .
In this moment of relief , it is also crucial to get rid of any democratic hypocrisy and demagogy and admit that , in this complex world , political management requires - more than ever - a professional competence which could not be the subject of referendums .
We must ask the people to decide , by ' yes ' or ' no ' , on principles and fundamentals , not on sophisticated technicalities and complicated compromises .
For the rest , we must observe the principle of the non-imperative mandate .
On the other hand , we must also admit that the progress we are celebrating today was achieved at the expense of transparency and sincerity .
The gap between peoples and us , the political leaders , after Lisbon remains at least as big as before .
Until we close this gap , we should keep the bottles of champagne unopened .
( CS ) Mr President , as a former member of the Convention on the Future of Europe , as the only national parliamentarian involved in the negotiations and as a convinced opponent of the Constitution since the very beginning I am glad to say that in Lisbon common sense has prevailed , at least to some extent .
The very concept of a European Constitution was erroneous from the beginning .
I am glad that it has been abandoned and I am glad that my country was among those who contributed to this .
The EU is not a state , it will never be one and therefore it cannot have a constitution .
It has to be built on an intergovernmental treaty , whereby the Member States , the national states , remain the corner stones of the whole process of European integration .
With regards to the content , each of us likes and dislikes certain aspects of it .
On the one hand , I am personally delighted with the reinforcement of the role of the national parliaments and the national executives through the so-called flexibility clause .
What I do not like , on the other hand , is a reduction of the national right of veto .
However , being a realist I am aware that we have reached the limits of what is possible .
What I see as important , nonetheless , is the fact that for the very first time in history of the EU an artificial concept elaborated at the green table had to some extent to be reworked after being tested against reality .
This leads me to hope that the EU will continue in the future to demonstrate that it can move away from certain concepts that prove to be unfit , such as , in my opinion , the 50-year-old obsolete federalist model .
It leads me to hope that the EU will be able to move towards a genuine , flexible , decentralised intergovernmental organisation capable of coping with the challenges of the 21st century .
Mr President , I trust , however , that Parliament will not succumb to the temptation to revive the already dead constitutional idea , because it would merely illustrate that it is an ivory tower .
( PL ) Mr President , I did not think the last week would end so successfully .
Firstly , at the Lisbon Summit we adopted a new Reform Treaty , which is an enormous success , and I warmly congratulate Prime Minister José Sócrates , President Barroso and indeed all of us .
It went off without any attempts to veto it or any additional battles over its final form .
In my view that means that the European Union has emerged from its institutional crisis .
Secondly , there is good news from my country , where the removal from power in recent days of an anti-European and far-right government is an undeniable success .
The position of the Polish people is confirmation of what I have said many times - most Poles support European integration ; Poles want Poland to be a partner , not an opponent , of the European Union .
Such events undeniably instil optimism about the future of our common European project .
I believe that the European Union is ready to meet the challenges of the future and , as Mr Sócrates correctly observed , the European Union is now a stronger and more internally cohesive structure , as well as being a decidedly more powerful partner in negotiations in international global relations .
The positions of the President-in-Office of the Council and the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy are a potent weapon which , if competently deployed , may positively strengthen the image of the European Union .
One of the most important achievements of this agreement , moreover , is that the Charter of Fundamental Rights has acquired a legally binding character .
I hope that the new Polish Government will withdraw the decision to exclude Polish citizens from the provisions of Chapter IV of the Charter , entitled Solidarity .
This Chapter contains provisions relating to employee and trade union rights that are particularly dear to the Polish and European Left .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Portuguese Presidency on an excellent result under the circumstances .
But there is one thing we need to keep in mind : the fundamental objective of the Convention on the Future of Europe is still to be accomplished , that is , to overcome the gap between institutions and European citizens .
We now have the means to apply our common European policies .
What we need is political will and determination .
Everything now centres on implementation , and there are two principles on which our implementation of this Lisbon Treaty should be based : firstly , subsidiarity .
Defining the competences of the EU is clearly a very encouraging achievement , linked with the increased role and responsibility of the national parliaments , because our citizens should perceive that the European Community will address the problems of the Community efficiently and , at the same time , abstain from intervening in their lives where it is not necessary .
The second principle concerns solidarity , which is a core value of the European Community . Agreeing on degressive proportionality in forming the future European Parliament is a clear expression of that solidarity , and I am grateful for it .
Another very important test of this solidarity will be creating the common foreign policy on energy security , as proposed last month by the European Parliament , including a special High Representative on energy serving under the new High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
Lastly , I would quote one fine expression of solidarity when President Barroso told his Russian counterpart last May in Samara that , in the EU 's understanding of solidarity , Poland and Estonia are as important as Germany and Portugal .
( PL ) Mr President , following the Lisbon Summit , the discussion of the European Treaty may be considered to be closed , as we now have one supreme aim - to ratify the Treaty as quickly and as efficiently as possible .
Parliament does have a role to play here : please bear in mind that we have greater importance under the Treaty than we had before .
There are three points to consider : the description of the role and tasks of the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the matter of his election , this being a joint decision with the European Council from 1 January 2009 .
We need to prepare for this joint decision in several areas , primarily security and the administration of justice .
Thirdly , we must hold a political debate to finalise the principles by which the President of the European Council will act , with particular reference to his relations with the European Parliament .
The most important thing , though , is ratification , and it depends to a large extent on us Members of the European Parliament .
It will take place in different ways in each country .
We must find ways of persuading citizens that this is a success not just for the Union , not just for politicians , but above all for them .
This is our main task - ratification .
Thanks and congratulations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for the excellent debate we have had on the summit and the Lisbon Treaty .
Firstly , say what you like about this new Treaty , but one thing no one can deny is that Europe is stronger as a result of this Treaty .
This Treaty affirms European values , the good values that were always the foundation of the European integration project .
This Treaty boosts the European economy and creates the conditions for Europe better to play its role in the world .
As many have observed , this is a Treaty that makes the European institutions and the political workings of Europe more democratic .
This Treaty equips the European Union of 27 for more effective decision-making .
Those who like democracy also like democracy to be appreciated as a method that allows effective decision-making , and all those who follow European political life understand that Europe needed more effective decision-making .
Finally , I would like to say to anyone who has doubts about the Treaty and Europe 's capability , please wake up to reality ; the world has already reached its conclusion on the Treaty .
Europe has become stronger , better able to respond to global challenges , better able to respond to strategic challenges , and since Lisbon the world has been looking to Europe in the hope that it will once again take up its role in the world .
No , this Treaty means progress for us .
Other people have already said it about Europe : no , do not doubt ; wake up , we are stronger .
Europe is more confident since the Lisbon Agreement and Europe is now in a position to take a stance on the future ; it can move from the defensive to the offensive .
Graham Watson was kind enough to mention Pessoa in his speech .
I would like to thank him very much for this personal kindness , as Pessoa is one of our great poets and I would like to quote Pessoa again : he once spoke about ' a nostalgia for the future ' .
I too , as a European , am nostalgic for the future and I am nostalgic for the time when Europe discussed the future , showed leadership , and I am nostalgic for those days and I believe that this Treaty provides the conditions to enable Europe to do that .
If you will allow me , Mr President , I would like to clarify two things : the first is about the President of Parliament , to tell Members that it never entered anybody 's head that the Council might propose that the President of Parliament should lose the right to vote .
The President will of course retain that right ; I do not know how this mistaken idea arose , but what the Council decided is that this Parliament will have 751 Members ( 750 plus the President ) .
Next I would like to say that the Ioannina clause has been resolved , as I always said it would be .
Ioannina must be legally binding , but should not be in the Treaty , and the solution we came up with of a declaration plus a protocol is fully in line with the mandate we were given .
I too would like to praise the previous Presidency , as I have always done and always do in the same way .
Throughout the whole process of this Treaty there were two decisive moments .
The first came last October when Angela Merkel decided to make the Treaty the main issue of her Presidency and of future presidencies .
This move required political courage and was a political risk .
At the time no one thought it had much chance of success .
I call this a decisive moment because Europe needed to get back to politics and also to get back to courage and political risk .
The other decisive moment , as I said earlier , was when we decided , taking the opportunity of the last Council , to reach agreement in October rather than leave it for December .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to finish by saying that certainly many people , and many people in Europe , who never believed in Europe are as dissatisfied with this Treaty as they would be with any other Treaty .
However , perhaps there are some who would like a different Treaty and with them it is worth having a dialogue , to tell them that at this point the alternative was either to have this Treaty or to remain in a state of institutional crisis .
I think that all who realise that a politician has to deal with reality rather than with fantasy will support what was decided in Lisbon .
As for ratification , I would like to be clear that it is the business of each country .
However , what I cannot accept as a democrat is for those who argue for national referendums to do so by trying to diminish representative democracy , challenging the legitimacy of parliamentary ratification .
( Applause )
I am a democrat and Europe is democratic , and being democrats we leave each country free to decide the best method of ratification .
Finally , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , yes , I am very proud , yes I am very satisfied , yes , I feel very honoured to have been part , along with many others , of a historic and decisive moment , the moment in which the Lisbon Treaty was born , because it means that Europe will move forward .
( Loud applause )
President-in-Office , I should also like to say a sincere word of thanks specifically to the Minister of Foreign Affairs , Luís Amado , to Manuel Lobo Antunes , as well as to Ambassador Mendonça e Moura and the Legal Service coordinated by Jean-Claude Pires .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , Ms Thyssen asked a specific question : can we make progress between now and the final ratification ?
As I said , it is by delivering results to European citizens that we can help to create the right political environment to facilitate ratification .
It would be a mistake to slow down our delivery , and it would be against the twin-track strategy central to the Commission , which stated that we should at the same time solve the political institutional matters and deliver concrete results to our citizens .
On the contrary , this Commission , and I am sure also this Parliament , should be active - and we could be even more active together - in promoting a European citizens ' agenda .
The second issue concerned communication and democracy .
Communicating about a treaty and explaining it to our public is primarily the responsibility of the national authorities .
However , it is also a task for the European Institutions .
I agree with what Mr Queiró said about the importance of the role of the European Parliament in this matter .
We in the Commission are ready to assume our responsibility in close cooperation with Member States and the European Parliament .
I agree with the points made about subsidiarity by Mr Kelam and Mr Nassauer .
It is very important to highlight the added value , in terms of democracy , of this Treaty .
It makes Europe more democratic and more accountable and places a stronger emphasis on subsidiarity .
Subsidiarity is a way to reinforce Europe and the European Institutions , not to weaken those Institutions , because by working close to the citizens they get more legitimacy and can take better decisions .
I also believe that it is right in our communication , as Mr Corbett highlighted , to explain the new democratic dimension .
We in the European Union are proud to have this kind of democratic system .
We can always make it better , but there is no other place in the world where there is such democratic participation at transnational level as the European Union .
We should also , in communication terms , make clear our reinforced capacity to act on behalf of the citizens in areas relevant to their concerns , like climate protection , energy and migration .
Those are concrete concerns for our citizens and we are addressing those concerns . In communication terms , we should also highlight the reinforced capacity to act in the international scene .
Finally , I want to highlight one point that was made clear by Mr Poignant and I thank him for highlighting the importance of Jean Monnet .
It is true that this is not a perfect Treaty , but sometimes people say we are giving up the values and the commitment of the founding fathers .
That is not true .
We are doing what Jean Monnet and many others have said , which is to build pas à pas - step by step - this common project , and we have to do it by conceding now that we have to commit to our citizens , and that we have to fulfil concrete tasks and deliver concrete results .
The Lisbon Summit , in concentrating on the Treaty and the Institutions and , on the second day , showing the way to globalisation , and the way we can together reinforce our capacity to act so that we can meet the challenge of globalisation , has indeed set the agenda for the future of Europe .
It was therefore a great success , and the Portuguese Presidency , the Member States , the European Parliament and the Commission should really celebrate this fact and look to the future with renewed confidence .
( Applause )
Many thanks , Commission President .
This debate has shown that we can believe in the future of our continent of Europe .
We shall be even more committed in working towards it . Many thanks .
The debate is closed .
Written declarations ( Article 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) My first words will be to congratulate the leaders of the Member States for the historic agreement they entered into in Lisbon , which brings to an end many years of institutional uncertainty .
I welcome the relentless work of daring , wisdom and pragmatism of the French President Nicolas Sarkozy , and Angela Merkel 's excellent German Presidency in the first half of 2007 of which put the institutional agenda on the rails .
I would like to include in these congratulations recognition of the excellent and immense work accomplished by chairman Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing .
This agreement picks up the major political advances of the old text : a stable presidency for the European Union , a person responsible for European diplomacy , and a new voting mechanism with the extension of qualified majority voting , while strengthening the powers of the European Parliament .
I am sorry that the symbols of the European Union ( the flag , anthem and motto ) have been abandoned .
This Treaty also takes account of the messages delivered by the French and Dutch people who rejected the old Treaty , in that it does not retain the character of a constitution , which the original text had , and it does not set in stone in the Treaties of the European Union a collection of European public policies that instead come under the current functioning of European democracy .
in writing . - ( HU ) I consider it to be a major step that the politicians who were present in Lisbon , conscious of their responsibility and setting aside their historical grievances , have reached agreement on a Treaty that has taken six long years to produce , and which will determine the future face of Europe and establish a framework enabling it to function efficiently .
It is important that the process of ratifying this document , due to be signed on 13 December this year , also goes without a hitch in the Member States .
It is vital that the European Parliament should continue to pledge its support for the Reform Treaty , and here again we draw Member States ' attention to the importance of the ratification process .
Hungary has always firmly supported the constitutional process and believed that sooner or later the Member States would find a common voice and succeed in moving the process of European integration forward .
As a member of the European Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , I believe it is important to emphasise that the document that has been adopted can contribute positively to making European Union foreign policy more effective , and can also enhance its effectiveness in the international diplomatic arena .
It is not only in the realm of foreign policy , however , that the Reform Treaty may be expected to bring about change , but also on numerous other issues that are vital for the efficient functioning of the EU .
For example , it opens up the possibility that the new European Parliament and European Commission that will be constituted in 2009 will be able to commence operations on a more efficient , more transparent and more democratic basis .
This joint success first and foremost required the political will to take joint action , so let us now rejoice in the Treaty , but in the interests of ensuring the success of the process we must not stop here ; we must continue in our joint efforts to ensure that the ratification process is brought to a successful conclusion .
In order to reach agreement on the Reform Treaty , too many gifts were handed out behind closed doors in Lisbon : Italy receives an extra seat in the European Parliament and Bulgaria the Cyrillic ' evro ' , Poland can continue to block the decision-making process for a number of years to come , and Austria can exclude German students from its universities .
This horse trading is medieval and runs counter to our endeavours towards greater transparency in the Union .
Nevertheless , we can be pleased that at long last , following years of debate , we have reached an agreement full stop , as this Treaty is an improvement on the current situation .
It is not the most elegant of agreements , but it does ensure more democracy in Europe .
It gives the European Parliament and national parliaments more influence , enabling European citizens to exert more direct influence on policy .
It meets the need for common energy and foreign policies .
Rigorous enforcement of the Copenhagen criteria is a necessity , and finally more democratic accountability is also afforded by the introduction of the ' orange card ' , which gives national parliaments the opportunity of contesting European legislation on grounds of subsidiarity .
The truth about the Reform Treaty is the same as that about the European Constitution .
These deeds transform the international organisation that is the European Community , as well as the union between its members that is the European Union , into a continental superstate .
They also effect a recognition of this superstate ( by accession to the European Convention on Human Rights of 1950 , the parties to which may only be states ) .
They open up a new path for the creation of a single European law without the involvement of the Member States ( through interpretation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the European Court of Justice ) .
One could spend a long time listing examples of equivalent significance .
In view of this situation , we come up against the issue of guarantees of the rights of the peoples of Europe in the new superstate , since it has so far been the Member States that constituted these guarantees for their peoples .
This problem has not been addressed at all in the Reform Treaty .
Since the rights of peoples are none other than human rights raised to the level of community life , because of the project to establish a superstate we are facing a human rights crisis in Europe .
We must therefore reject the Reform Treaty and set about doing some fundamental work on a system to guarantee the rights of peoples under the conditions of European integration .
If we do not do this , Europe will be threatened by another explosion of totalitarianism .
Agenda
Ladies and gentlemen , with the agreement of the political groups , and in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , I propose the following amendments to the agenda for the current part-session .
Firstly , I propose that the vote on the motions for resolutions tabled to close the debate on the EU-Russia Summit be moved to the next part-session in Brussels .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I rise on a point of order under Rule 166 , and with reference to Rules 45 , 77 , 89 , 113 and 155 .
We took a decision yesterday that we would have a resolution on the EU-Russia Summit this week , and my Group believes that we should stick to that .
I know there is an attempt to try to revote that decision , but I hope the House will sensibly see off such a narrow-minded approach to politics .
( Applause )
Are there any other comments ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this now also concerns fellow Members .
We were not informed about this application .
There was a communication problem here yesterday .
Neither the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats nor my group were informed of this request .
This is also the reason why we have been feeling relatively overlooked and have abstained from voting .
We have both - that is , my fellow Member , Mr Daul , and I - put forward the proposal this morning that we flesh out this resolution with care .
We note the desire for a resolution and accept it on condition that we flesh it out with care .
After the summit we shall also have all the information available , hence the deferral of the proposal until after the summit .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I do not know how strong communications are within the large groups .
We have always said that we want a resolution - the General Secretaries have been informed of this .
We have said that if you speak out against this , we shall do so at the vote on Monday morning , as is our right .
We have always said so and if this has not been relayed to you , it is not our problem , but yours .
As regards the content : a new law against extremists , for example , has been adopted in Russia in recent weeks that clearly restricts freedom of the press and freedom of opinion .
We therefore want the resolution to be adopted before the summit to enable the EU to state our position on the situation in Russia through this resolution .
We shall still be able to draw up a resolution on the results after the summit , but this Parliament , which wants to be political , should also adopt political freedom of expression by a majority before the summit in order to show mainland Russia what we think about freedom and democracy here in the European Parliament .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , we would all certainly go along with this .
Mr Cohn-Bendit has stated precisely what we are all thinking .
However , in this House there are rules of procedure , not just because we want to torment people , but because large groups with way over 200 members also have problems , which you have perhaps to a lesser extent , Mr Cohn-Bendit , in your smaller group , namely that we have to be able to consult one another .
When I add the members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and those of my group together , there are way over 450 Members in this House who need a little time for consultation .
I would therefore make the following proposal : what Mr Cohn-Bendit has said here , that we convey to the Russian side that we consider this law unfair and that it should be retracted , the Commission and the Council can pick up from here on .
This is certainly a statement of the will of the entire European Parliament , which has already been made clear through this discussion .
A resolution , however , that contains 60-70 items also has to be able to be discussed a little and only by doing so will it work .
We therefore ask for the debate , the draft resolution , and then the vote at the next sitting .
This is in actual fact a fair compromise .
Please endorse it !
Ladies and gentlemen , according to our Rules of Procedure , the point that Mr Watson has raised is correct and is well established in the Rules of Procedure .
It is evident , however , that there is a difference of opinion on this issue .
In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , we are going to resolve this issue in the only way that we can , which is on the basis that Parliament is sovereign .
We are therefore going to have two votes : the first vote will be to vote on whether you want to vote on this matter .
If the result of this vote is negative , we will leave the agenda as it is and there will be no amendments .
If you decide that you do want to vote , we will then vote on the item , as to whether or not the vote on the motions for resolutions will be postponed .
I therefore put to the vote the question of whether Parliament wishes to vote on this matter .
( Parliament decided to vote on the matter )
Consequently , I now put to the vote the proposal that I presented to you , that is , to move the vote on the motions for resolutions on the EU-Russia Summit to the next part-session in Brussels .
Those who vote in favour will be voting in favour of moving this vote to the next part-session and those who vote against will be voting in favour of keeping the agenda as it is .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Secondly , I propose that the following two reports , currently entered with debate on Thursday between 3 p.m. and 4 p.m. , be entered directly in the votes on Thursday at 12 noon :


the report by Margie Sudre , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the amended proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Madagascar - C6-0064 / 2007 - , and
the report by Emanuel Jardim Fernandes , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Mozambique - C6-0284 / 2007 - .
If there are no comments , we shall include these votes directly on Thursday in the voting time at 12 noon .
Mr President , I rise on a point of order on the same legal basis as Mr Watson .
I merely wish to point out that we have had a very important debate about the increase of democracy within the EU .
This tactic , which has , apparently , just been successful , demonstrates that democracy , even within this Parliament , needs to be extended further .
I can say - as a member of a large group , the PPE-DE Group , of which I am extremely proud to be a member - that the blame for not holding a resolution was put on other groups .
I then found out that this was an agreement by the two large groups .
Quite clearly , this is an unsatisfactory way to proceed .
I accept the decision .
My practical recommendation to you , Mr President , would be to ensure that the full verbatim account of the debate on the EU-Russia Summit be presented by the President-in-Office of the Council and the President of the Commission to President Putin at the summit - not afterwards .
( Applause )
- ( FR ) Mr President , regarding the entry of the reports on fishing , I do not know if it was an interpreting error , but you said that it would be with debate , and was on the agenda for Thursday morning .
It will be without debate .
So I think it was an interpreting error .
Ladies and gentlemen , we propose that they be entered directly in the voting time on Thursday at 12 noon .
They are currently entered with debate on Thursday between 3 p.m. and 4 p.m.

We therefore propose that they be entered in the votes on Thursday at 12 noon , without debate .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
1 .
EC-Chile association agreement ( accession of Bulgaria and Romania ) ( vote )
- Recommendation : Helmuth Markov ( A6-0361-2007 )
2 .
EC-Swiss Confederation Agreement on Scientific and Technical Cooperation ( vote )
- Report : Angelika Niebler
3 .
Community plant variety rights ( vote )
- Report : Neil Parish ( A6-0373-2007 )
4 .
Nuclear energy ( ratification by Slovenia of the Protocol amending the Paris Convention ) ( vote )
- Recommendation : Giuseppe Gargani ( A6-0369-2007 )
5 .
UN / ECE Espoo Convention ( vote )
- Report : Miroslav Ouzký ( A6-0395-2007 )
6 .
Convention on the protection of the European Communities ' financial interests ( vote )
- Report : Jean-Marie Cavada ( A6-0360-2007 )
7 .
Communication infrastructure for the Schengen Information System environment ( decision ) ( vote )
- Report : Carlos Coelho ( A6-0357-2007 )
- Before the vote :


rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , as we are running late , just three brief comments : firstly , Parliament regrets the delay in SIS II ; secondly Parliament is facing an emergency situation because if we do not decide now , the Member States may have to re-establish internal borders , which is unacceptable ; thirdly , Parliament prefers the technical solution of extending the agreement with SISNET and regards the alternative solution of the agreement with s-Testa to be a financially damaging solution , but unfortunately we have to keep both on the table to prevent the raising of borders that no one wants .
8 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( vote )
- Report : Reimer Böge
9 .
Framework directive on the sustainable use of pesticides ( vote )
- Report : Christa Klaß ( A6-0347-2007 )
- Before the vote :

Mr President , I rise on a point of order under Rule 166 , to invoke Rule 37 ( 1 ) of our Rules of Procedure .
Rule 37 ( 1 ) concerns the access to documents and provision of information to this Parliament .
In the run-up to this vote on pesticides , many , if not all , in this House have been bombarded by e-mails asking us to vote for amendments that go even further than the Commission would like us to .
These e-mails come from an organisation called Pesticide Watch , whose constituent organisations received large amounts of funding from the European Commission - indeed , part of the EUR 11.7 million spent in the last two years under the budget line relating to the Community action programme promoting non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) primarily active in the field of environmental protection and the Life + programme .
Under Rule 37 ( 1 ) , can I ask for the various exchanges between the Commission and these NGOs , who have been lobbying us on all these matters ?
This payroll lobbying has certainly led to an increase in the number of e-mails being received by MEPs , but surely it is wrong for one Commission DG to use large sums of taxpayers ' money , and abuse the role of NGOs , to try and change the views of parliamentarians and the lead Commission DG on this matter .
( Loud applause from the right )
Mr Heaton-Harris , we will pass on your comment .
10 .
The placing of plant protection products on the market ( vote )
- Report : Hiltrud Breyer
- After the vote on Amendment 243 :

Mr President , on a point of order , this is a complete fiasco and we must go to full electronic voting .
This is bloody ridiculous !
( Applause )
Mr Booth , this is not a fiasco .
There have been errors which are statistically normal in a vote of this length .
What are ridiculous are interventions such as yours .
( Applause )
- Before the vote on the legislative resolution :

Mr President , on a point of order , I do not want to prolong things , and you are too polite to say so , but there is a rule which allows the President taking a vote , when presented with a vote of this length - eight pages of thirty separate votes - to put it to the House that the report be sent back to the committee to be sifted and re-presented .
I think we should apply that rule more often .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , you have done a very good job and earned a good lunch , as have we .
We should postpone the vote until tomorrow .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , it is 2 p.m. , we should stop the vote .
I am sorry , really sorry that a report like this should reach plenary .
I propose that next time more work is done on it in committee and that in future , in the plan to reform Parliament , these rules are reviewed . We cannot go on working like this .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , I think what my fellow Member said is quite right , but he should have admitted that it was his group that did not respect the work in committee and tabled all the amendments here today .
( Applause )

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on this point , according to Mr Cohn-Bendit , the Committee decided by a very clear majority , yet the Chamber has laboured against this decision in a way that borders on obstructionism .
This is the truth of the situation .
Therefore , it is not a procedural issue , but a question of political attitude .
Ladies and gentlemen , there has been a combination of two unfortunate circumstances .
Firstly , we had a very long prior debate , which delayed the voting time , and secondly today we have had one of the largest votes in this session .
We are therefore going to suspend voting at this stage and I thank you for your cooperation .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . - ( PT ) This Convention - which aims to set out the obligations of the Parties to assess the environmental impact of certain activities at an early stage of planning and imposes on States the general obligation regarding notification and consultation on all major projects that are likely to have a significant adverse environmental impact across borders - was signed by the Community and its Member States on 26 February 1991 and approved by the Community on 27 June 1997 .
Parliament approved some amendments , notably one extending the definition of the ' public ' in Article 1 ( X ) of the Convention to clarify that the public that may participate in procedures under the Convention includes civil society and , in particular , non-governmental organisations , and one that opens the Convention for accession by non-ECE member countries upon approval by the meeting of the Parties , which deserves our support .
The other amendments seem less important to us .
In principle , I do not believe they create any problems .
We therefore agreed with the rapporteur and voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( EL ) The brief report contains serious gaps , which play down the importance of the issue .
The legislative regulations governing the protection of the environment are a compromise between the need to protect it and the demands of big business to maximize its excessive profits come what may .
Preoccupation with profit makes the competitiveness of the EU 's multinationals a priority above all the others .
The following are symptomatic of this :
i. the Kyoto Protocol , in which trade in pollutants is prominent ;
ii. the entire legislative framework , which facilitates the use and expansion of GMOs ;
iii. legislation on the monitoring of the use of chemical substances in consumer products to a permissible level .
This legislation took as many as 40 years to be completed , although it naturally has many exceptions , from 1967 ( Directive 67 / 458 / ΕEC ) to 2007 , when the REACH Regulation entered into force ;
iv. a still highly deficient legislative framework for the integrated management of radioactive waste ;
v. the distorting development of biofuels , at the expense of food crops .
Multinationals are nonetheless allowed to act anti-environmentally .
All they suffer are some fines , which represent a very small part of the additional profits coming from the destruction of the environment .
This proves the adage that he who pays the piper calls the tune .
We believe that these are serious omissions .
What is required is a brief but very meaningful and useful reference to these issues .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Convention on the protection of the European Communities ' financial interests and its protocols are on the list of conventions and protocols in the field of justice and home affairs contained in Annex I to the Act of Accession .
This Convention and its protocols were adopted in 1996 , with the aim of establishing a common base for the criminal-law protection of the EC 's financial interests , and entered into force in 2002 following ratification by the then 15 Member States .
In order to avoid wasting time and effort on the laborious negotiation , conclusion and ratification ( by 27 Member States ) of specific accession protocols to each Convention , the Act of Accession of Romania and Bulgaria introduced a simplified system for the accession to the conventions and protocols concluded by the Member States on the basis of Article 34 of the Treaty on European Union or Article 293 of the EC Treaty .
I therefore support this proposal for a Council Decision which simplifies the determination of the date of entry into force of this Convention in relation to Romania and Bulgaria .
I would like to speak about the package of two documents - the Commission proposal and the Council decision on the development of the Schengen information system infrastructure and its implementation and management .
I voted in favour of both resolutions and consider them to be very important EU legislative documents .
It is a shame that the launch of SIS II keeps being postponed .
We are so far behind schedule that it is essential to find a way out of the situation that would enable us to use the SIS 1 + network after 13 November 2008 , i.e. to extend the service provided by the SISNET network and to create a fall-back solution with the s-TESTA network .
It is now clear that the human and financial resources allocated for the implementation of SIS II will have to be shared between the three projects being developed simultaneously : SIS II , SISone4all and the installation , operation and management of a communication infrastructure .
This will have a negative impact on the implementation of SIS II .
This is why the decision on the financing of SIS 1 + and subsequently SISone4all will be of great importance : will it be financed by all participating parties or will SISNET , for example , receive funding from the EU budget ?
The correct distribution of EU and Member States ' resources will be of great significance .
However , in view of the project 's importance as regards the security of the EU , it is obvious that SIS II is the greatest priority .
We must allocate funds for EU security and the development of communications infrastructure .
in writing . - ( RO ) Only one year after its establishment , in 2006 , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is already requested .
I welcome the voting of the decision to mobilize the fund , which represents a first attempt to support our European citizens who face the challenges of globalisation .
Globalisation is a phenomenon that offers us numerous chances and opportunities , but also generates difficulties of adjustment to its consequences .
Therefore , it is very important for the European Union to be capable not only of responding to such challenges , but also to approach them efficiently by fast mobilization of the necessary financial instruments .
European citizens ' safety and confidence in the future lie at the basis of our actions and initiatives .
I am very pleased to welcome the orientation of this fund toward the field of labour and labour safety , but I also emphasize the importance of education in this field and the need to take into consideration this area , as well , in the future fund mobilizations .
At the end , I hope that in the future , in case of need , each EU Member State will benefit from the mobilization of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , whose less positive effects affect us all , including in the new Member States .
This is the only way in which we will be able to build true sustainable development over the entire EU territory .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this first ever mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The Fund was set up , following a successful campaign by the PSE Group , to alleviate the effects of globalisation on European workers .
In this instance , the fund is being used to assist approximately 900 workers made redundant in the automobile sector in France .
in writing . - ( PT ) In March 2007 , France requested the mobilisation of the EGF in respect of the redundancies of 1 345 workers of Renault SA and 1 057 workers of Peugeot SA and their suppliers .
Owing to the budgetary restrictions on this fund ( EUR 500 million a year ) , its restrictive eligibility criteria and the number of workers affected , the amount of the Community contribution awarded was EUR 3 816 280 .
Thus we can see that this comes to EUR 1 902 for each of the Renault-linked workers made redundant and EUR 1 190 for each of the Peugeot-linked workers made redundant .
The European Commission estimated that between 35 000 and 50 000 workers could benefit from this fund , but EU data indicate that the number of workers made redundant as a result of ' restructuring ' is far in excess of half a million .
The situation is all the more serious as most of these workers were made redundant as a result of ' restructuring ' regarded as ' within ' the EU , and therefore not covered by the fund 's eligibility criteria .
What is in fact required is an end to the policy of liberalisation and maximising profit that is the cause of relocations and " restructuring ” , and measures to preserve jobs .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund came into being in 2006 under the considerable influence of the defeat of the constitutional referendum in France .
Right from the start the impression was created that this was a compensation formula , linked more to the exaggerated problem of the ' delocalisation ' of jobs to new Member States than to the problem of globalisation .
As such , the Fund is a response to the fears associated with the enlargement of the European Union , essentially reinforcing them and blocking the benefits arising from the uniting of Europe in 2004 for new and old Member States .
It is no surprise that we are starting with an application from France , linked to the difficulties experienced by Peugeot and Renault suppliers , for a sum of EUR 3.8 million .
The application is properly grounded and has received full support from the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets .
I hope that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund will not become a method of typical rent-seeking , in other words an easy method of obtaining EU subsidies for businesses that are experiencing difficulties , allocated on the basis of criteria that are not very precise .
Too many European companies are facing the problem of restructuring , in the name of competitiveness in the global economy , for a Fund with an annual ceiling of EUR 500 million to be able to meet all needs .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which gives parliamentary support to the first ever distribution of funds from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , which was established with strong PSE support to alleviate the effects of globalisation on workers .
in writing . - ( PT ) The decision to use the new European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and the response to the request from the French Government is an opportunity that we should monitor carefully to check whether this fund does actually deliver the desired results .
According to what emerged from the debate held on the date it was set up , this fund aims to be an institutional reform for solidarity regarding the unforeseen and negative consequences of the globalisation process .
Obviously , the free adjustment of the market will always be a better option than State or equivalent intervention .
In any event , this fund exists in the context of the European Union and of the solutions that the majority of its Member States adopt for resolving social crises , so the challenge is to ensure firstly that the results of mobilising it are as expected and secondly that an intervention of this type does not send the wrong signals to the market , thereby unintentionally promoting solutions that eventually create even greater damage .
Since I believe and hope that this will not be the case , I voted in favour of this report .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to thank my fellow Members for the result of the vote .
This is based on the result of the report on the sustainable use of pesticides .
We have voted out the top levels here .
We have , however , focussed on training and information for users and salespeople alike .
Only the expert and skilled handling of pesticides can ensure sustainability .
The latest technology and the most up-to-date knowledge are being applied here , of course .
We support Integrated Pest Management .
The Commission is calling for Integrated Pest Management to be made compulsory for agriculture as a whole by 2014 .
We need general standards for this .
We cannot squeeze Integrated Pest Management into fixed criteria , certainly not throughout Europe .
Integrated Pest Management must always be developed flexibly .
It requires the incitements of good technical practice and it needs drive - and that drive needs to be maintained .
We must therefore discuss this once again here before second reading .
We still have the opportunity , together with the Council and the Commission , to bring this to a good conclusion so that we in the European Union can continue to make pest management actually possible .
Mr President , I feel very disappointed that Parliament has not done more today on this pesticides package .
On so many of the more radical and progressive issues , we could have gone very much further .
But the one area that I want to focus on just now is the area of residents .
They should be regarded as a specifically vulnerable group , an exposure group in their own right , and a small step has been taken today in order to do that , in the vote that we have just had in this Parliament .
People who live near schools where nearby fields are sprayed and people who work or live near sprayed fields have an enormously high exposure to pesticides .
They are exposed , on a long-term basis , to mixtures or cocktails of pesticides that are sprayed in their locality throughout the year and , in many cases , for decades .
Until now there has not been any protection for residents as a specific exposure group .
This is a major and serious public health issue , as farmers clearly cannot control pesticides once they are airborne , and studies have shown pesticides can travel in the air for miles .
I wish we had gone further in terms of our ban on all aerial spraying .
There have been many reports over the decades of acute and chronic ill-health in rural areas .
Our Parliament could have done much more in this vote today to protect people from cancers , from leukaemia , from non-Hodgkin 's lymphoma and a whole range of other diseases , and I am very disappointed indeed that we did not take up that option , which had been put forward in the Committee on the Environment .
So many of those more positive measures have , sadly , been overturned by the other groups .
But I hope that people will look at the Parliament today and put pressure on their representatives so that , when we come back to a second reading , we can try and do better by the health of people .
They expect us to do better .
We should have done better , and I am very sorry the other groups did not support us today .
( HU ) As a Member representing the Hungarian Democratic Forum ( Magyar Demokrata Fórum - MDF ) , I will be using my vote to support both of these draft legislative texts providing for stricter regulations and greater control concerning the use of plant protection products .
I believe that these provisions represent a milestone on the road towards safer and healthier food production .
Substances that pose a risk to health must be withdrawn , and the overall amount of pesticides we use must be reduced .
In Hungary , for example , the amount of chemicals used is 15 times less than in the Netherlands , say , and yet while they existed the European Union 's intervention stores were bursting at the seams with Hungarian maize .
We therefore can and must move forward in the direction of producing fruit , vegetables and other foods using sustainable levels of plant protection .
Where Member States wish to apply tougher provisions , they should continue to have the possibility of doing so . Thank you .
( CS ) Commissioner , I , too , resent the fact that human health is exposed to risk , for example during aerial spraying , and that pesticide use is constantly increasing due to a growing resistance against plant protection .
There is no doubt that we need to modernise the rules on safe pesticide use in Europe .
I regret however , that here in Parliament , through the Greens and left-wing Members , preference was given to populist proposals such as a ban on pesticide use either in full or at a local level .
I consider that to be irresponsible .
We are talking here about plant medicines and banning them would be equivalent to banning the use of drugs in human medicine .
Both are of course poisonous if used improperly : hence we must devote our efforts to promoting standards and disseminating information , rather than adopting scientifically unfounded , indiscriminate and overly bureaucratic measures .
Ladies and gentlemen , by virtue of common sense I did not support the majority of your proposals in the package .
As such I do not believe that the Klaß report as approved is very successful .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to say that I voted in favour of Mrs Klaß 's report , and one reason why I did so was because this report makes reference to tightening up the proposals put forward by the European Commission .
There is specific mention of national action plans in the context of a reduction in the frequency of application of pesticides by 25 % over 5 years and by half - by 50 % - over 10 years .
It is very important for the European Parliament to be tougher on this matter and have a greener approach than the European Commission .
I would also like to emphasise strongly that my decision was influenced by the fact that in the report that was put to the vote there is a statement to the effect that all Member States will set up buffer zones to stop pesticides entering reservoirs and drinking water .
in writing . - ( FR ) As draftsman of the opinion on water quality , I saw that pesticides were implicated in the degradation of the environment , and particularly of surface and coastal waters , because they persist over time , can be transported over long distances , and constitute a diffuse form of pollution , which is difficult to locate resulting from runoffs , direct losses in the soil and the air , the washing of plants by the rain and so on .
More generally , the current use of pesticides in our agriculture can have damaging consequences for our health .
The Commission 's legislative proposals on the use of pesticides , and procedures for authorisation and placing on the market were therefore very keenly awaited .
However , I find the targets inadequate and that is why , in Parliament 's plenary , I unsuccessfully supported the position adopted by the Committee on the Environment asking for an EU target of a 25 % reduction in the frequency of application of pesticides within 5 years and a 50 % reduction within 10 years , and buffer zones of 10 metres between fields and water courses .
I am particularly sorry that this is a first reading and that the text is likely to be watered down even more .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Klaß on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for Community action to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides because it pursues the objective of reducing the use of plant protection products and contributes to high safety standards for humans , animals and the environment .
However , I consider it essential for the possibility of aerial spraying to be maintained in situations where there is no viable alternative or where terrestrial application involves a greater hazard , although in Natura 2000 areas , in addition to the possibility of pesticides being banned , it should also be possible to restrict their use or minimise the risks involved , which presupposes a specific risk assessment .
When the 6th Environment Action Programme was adopted it was recognised that the impact of plant protection products on human health and the environment must be reduced , underlining the need to achieve a more sustainable use of pesticides and outlining a two-track approach with full implementation and appropriate revision of the relevant legal framework and developing a Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides .
Now , the rapporteur considers the title of the Commission proposal to be misleading .
The aim of the proposal is to regulate a particular class of pesticides , namely pesticides in the form of plant protection products .
Accordingly , the term ' pesticides ' should be replaced by ' plant protection products ' throughout the text of the Directive .
The Directive aims to reduce the risks associated with the use of plant protection products and on the environment and human health .
However , measures designed with this in mind must be proportionate and it must not be forgotten that it should primarily be a matter for the Member States to help reduce the risks involved in the use of plant protection products by means of national action plans .
This is the only way in which the differing conditions and situations at local level can be taken into account .
in writing . - ( FR ) I systematically voted against the whole plant protection package to signal my opposition to a dossier that was not yet ready for the plenary session .
Confronting 700 MEPs with 300 - 400 amendments , to be voted on in 3 or 4 instalments , is simply unworthy of a legislator .
We might just as well organise a lottery .
That the legislator wants to combat pesticide abuse seems laudable .
However , organising a system that is so bureaucratic as to be inefficient stems from poor legislation .
Anyway , if we want to feed a constantly increasing population the Earth cannot do without plant protection products .
Today , the European Parliament refused to accede to calls by environmental fundamentalists for unworkable rules on the sustainable use of pesticides .
The main bone of contention was the proposal by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to ban the use of pesticides within 10 metres of water bodies .
This would have disastrous consequences for administrators of public spaces and recreational areas such as golf courses in countries such as the Netherlands where much of their surface is covered by water .
The outcome of the vote is a compromise between environmental protection and workable rules for authorities and entrepreneurs .
We have a collective responsibility for precluding risks , and it is indeed true that in the use of pesticides , ' the fewer the better ' , but the rules must be realistic and workable .
If alternatives are available , they must be used , but it is wishful thinking to ban all uses of pesticides by law and think that this will be without consequences for our economy and society .
in writing . - I voted for this report as amended , which developed a reasonable compromise between preserving public safety by restricting the use of pesticides , and protecting the ability of land based industries to enhance crop production .
The precautionary principle at the heart of the approach is one I strongly support .
This lunchtime , the European Parliament has overall delivered a message that responds to the concerns of citizens in favour of agriculture being less dependent on pesticides , sustainable and taking account of the health of farmers and other users .
One step forward is the health protection section , which was totally absent from the 1991 regulation and is now clearly affirmed through recognition of the substitution principle ( as for REACH , aimed at encouraging the use of less or non-chemical alternatives ) , the priority given to the protection of the most vulnerable populations and the prohibition in principle on aerial spraying .
It was essential to plug a legal loophole regarding the phase of use by professionals and private individuals .
This will be achieved with the framework directive , which takes account of new habits and fashions in gardening : pesticides have even got into our homes and gardens !
One major regret , though , is the rejection in the Klaß report of the new approach by the Commission - known as Integrated Pest Management - which consists of allowing the use of all available agricultural techniques while giving priority to environmentally-friendly ones .
I am sticking to my guns : integrated production is common sense applied to the agriculture of the 21st century .
in writing . - ( DE ) The proposed Directive establishing a framework for Community action to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides is important , since alarming quantities of certain pesticides are still being found despite the existing framework regulations on soil , air and water .
Evidence beyond the existing regulations also gives cause for concern in arable crops and requires a political initiative .
National action plans with concrete objectives for reducing the risks and dependencies associated with pesticides are crucial here .
It is extremely regrettable that in plenary we have not followed up the amendment with the objective of reducing alarming toxic and highly toxic substances by 50 % by 2013 and reducing the use of pesticides by 20 % in the next 10 years .
This would have been an important political signal even in the given situation .
The key to the sustainable use of plant protection products is rational risk limitation .
We should achieve this aim by putting into effect the principles of the Directive on the sustainable use of pesticides .
Each country will be obliged to draw up its own plan following the guidelines defined in the Directive .
Each country should do so taking due account of local determinants and respecting any differences .
The principal difference between us is the level of agricultural development .
The countries that are among the new EU Member States often have enormous deficits to make up , especially as regards the quality and health of the foodstuffs produced .
A reduction in the use of pesticides in these countries compared with their current level of use will backfire on us consumers .
We also differ in our landscapes .
In Poland , vast stretches of woodland may only be protected against pests by treatment applied from the air .
It is our duty to the natural environment to protect the forests , while Parliament 's task is to define the principles for the safe use of products that protect the natural environment .
The Directive has much to say about the education of farmers being the most important way of implementing the sustainable use of pesticides .
It is parliament 's task to Support education and create the conditions whereby it will reach every farmer .
The Directive 's guidelines should encourage both the Member States and farmers , rather than put them off .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting against the report because there is no longer a clear line between the various amendments , which I consider important .
Pest management serves people and plant health and is not a warning sign for policy that has no scientific basis .
( DE ) Mr President , I believe we should be striving towards public health and consumer protection and I should like to offer my full support for these positions too .
There is simply no sense in us introducing impractical solutions and creating situations in which food production is no longer possible with approved funds .
For this reason I am convinced that the Breyer report cannot endure in this form and that we should amend it in this regard .
I have voted against it and am of the opinion and am glad that a much more sensible and practical solution has been found in the Klaß report and therefore in the action plans , for which I was the rapporteur in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
For this reason I hope that we are also able to improve the Breyer report considerably at second reading , because we must improve it .
( SV ) A mixed message is being sent today .
I think the most bizarre part today was Mr Heaton-Harris 's attack , which claimed that voluntary groups are trying to influence Parliament .
The big thing that has happened is that Parliament 's position has been weakened as a result of extensive lobbying by lobbyists in the pay of industry , which puts its interest in selling more pesticides ahead of protecting public health and consumers .
Fortunately they have not been entirely successful .
We still have the pesticide passport , which gives consumers a reasonable opportunity to see what they are swallowing by asking their dealers .
This protection is important and we must fight for it when we negotiate with the Council .
However , Parliament did not protect residents as the Environment Committee wanted .
They have worse protection and receive worse information than the committee wanted .
This must be rectified in other readings .
In my view we cannot continue authorising the most dangerous chemicals at the present level .
Parliament has now avoided general reduction targets for all pesticides , which is unfortunate .
However , I would like to say that we in the Green Group have now got through a report which can essentially be used for good negotiations with the Council , but there the name becomes a little silly .
Just like calling the constitution a reform treaty , it is remarkable that Parliament is dubbing pesticides plant protection products .
If all plant protection products were concerned , we could just as easily include fences in the legislation because they offer protection against roe deer .
This shows how absurd plant protection products is as a name .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Breyer on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market as it will help to ensure high safety standards for humans , animals and the environment by establishing strict but simplified procedures , and by rationalising resources .
The adopted report abides by the principle of subsidiarity , so that Member States can take account of specific national conditions , especially plant health and climate conditions , and appropriate risk-reduction measures can be adopted .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal should be in line with the reasons behind the 6th Environment Action Programme with the aim of applying current knowledge of prospective and retrospective strategies for assessing the risks and dangers to humans and the environment and to create coherency with other policies .
Thus , also in line with the Thematic Strategy for the Sustainable Use of Pesticides , the Regulation must guarantee a high level of protection for human health and the environment , giving precedence to the precautionary principle , but the measures must be proportionate and take account of the principle of subsidiarity .
Links to other policies should be brought out more clearly .
For instance , the regulation should not run counter to the aims and quality standards of the Water Framework Directive ( 2000 / 60 / EC ) and its daughter directives .
This must be ensured by regular checks .
Each Member State should retain the option of going beyond the Community standard in its fundamental standard of protection or of making decisions in product licensing in order to implement established objectives of national pesticide action plans , health programmes or environmental protection measures , based on specific national conditions .
in writing . - I voted for this report and am pleased that it combines the sustainable use of pesticides with effective health and environmental protection .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite voting in favour of the Breyer report as a whole , I considered it expedient to support a few amendments designed to modify the original draft .
It is essential that we break up the monopoly of large multinationals in the field of data sharing and access , and open up the sector to increased and fairer competition .
On the other hand , this sector is affected by geographical and environmental differences , which must be given due consideration .
What we need is greater flexibility in terms of mutual recognition and comparative evaluation of substances .
Currently in fact , small and medium-sized enterprises , which mainly produce co-formulants , are denied room for manoeuvre precisely because of the excessive power of the major industrial groups - and not just in data management and exchange either .
European legislation must absolutely take into account and support their requests to prevent their slow but inexorable disappearance from the market .
in writing . - ( FR ) Historically used to protect plants against various parasites , pesticides have transformed agriculture considerably .
Nevertheless , today we are seeing that the massive use of these pesticides in agricultural and non-agricultural environments has a damaging effect on the environment ( pollution of water , air , soil , etc . ) and also on health ( development of some cancers , fertility problems ) .
In view of this , the EU has decided to modify its legislation with a view to encouraging a reduction in the use of pesticides .
Within the framework particularly of the Breyer report concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market and the sustainable use of pesticides , I voted in favour of setting up strict criteria for all toxic substances ( neurotoxic , bioaccumulative , carcinogenic , etc . )
Similarly , out of consistency with France 's National Pesticide Plan and REACH , I also supported a 50 % reduction by 2013 in the use of extremely worrying pesticides and the replacement of the most dangerous substances with safer substitutes ( including non-chemical products ) .
Finally , in conformity with the spirit of the national debate in France on the environment , I voted in favour of a tax on pesticides to encourage our farmers to reduce their use of treatment products .
in writing . - ( DE ) Yesterday I was not able to make use of my speaking time .
The vote in the Committee on Climate Change on the Hassi report , which forms the basis for the European Parliament 's position for the UN Climate Change Conference , was taking place at the same time .
The European Union 's new policy on the use of pesticides is an important step towards better health and environmental protection .
Of particular importance in the result of today 's vote is Parliament 's clear position against the three-zone model proposed by the Commission .
The proposed system is misleading and would grossly contradict the aim of the sustainable use of pesticides .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting against the report because it has not been drawn up according to strictly scientific criteria and because I regard the zone model - in whatever version - as meaningless .
Only single authorisation makes sense in a common economic area .
I am hoping for a considerable improvement at second reading .
in writing . - There is no doubt that , despite current legislation to reduce pesticides , excessive amounts of pesticides exist in our air , water and food supply , affecting our health and the environment .
Today however , while my colleagues and I voted clearly for a reduction in pesticides in our day-to-day lives , it is important that we acknowledge the practical reality of the needs of farmers and fruitgrowers , particularly in this climate of rising food prices .
We cannot legislate in the abstract !
I have voted for a practical and balanced approach and voted against extreme amendments that would reduce our food supply , making farming ridiculously burdensome and impractical .
Let us not forget that farmers are environmentalists by nature !
Instead of a pesticide ban , the Member States will look at training and information campaigns and Best Practice and Integrated Pest Management which will benefit us as citizens , consumers and farmers .
I have voted in favour of realistic targets for Member States while acknowledging the diverse nature of 27 Member States . With regard to use , risk has to be the central factor , taking hazard and exposure into consideration .
in writing . - ( FR ) As regards the reports on the placing of plant protection products on the market and the sustainable use of pesticides , I followed the very responsible line of my political group .
Products classified CMR1 , which are scientifically proven to harm human and animal health , should no longer be authorised .
The obligation to inform all neighbours before spraying would only cause mass hysteria , leaving aside the fact that it would bring with it an enormous amount of counterproductive bureaucracy , which becomes obsolete anyway with the removal of CMR1 products from the market .
I am of the opinion that the principle of subsidiarity should be used regarding buffer zones not to be treated , to prevent additional constraints being applied to agricultural production .
I am against the creation of a special tax on authorised products because this will lead to a completely unnecessary increase in the cost of agricultural production .
I am of course against the ban on spreading plant protection products by helicopter .
It is unacceptable to ban this method which is the only viable method in certain regions where , for instance , vines are grown on hillsides .
I am delighted that my amendments relating to the unacceptable effects of plant protection products that could , among other things , have a negative impact on the behaviour of certain species such as bees and that could even lead to the extinction of these species , have been taken into consideration .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Klaß and Breyer reports on the use of pesticides because they signal progress towards better consideration of the impact on the environment and health of the use of plant protection products .
In particular I welcome the adoption of the socialist proposal to prohibit the use of pesticides in residential or sensitive areas .
I am also delighted by the adoption of our proposals on the systematic promotion of non-chemical techniques .
However , I am sorry that the European right has opposed the introduction of targets for reducing the use of these products .
There are many examples demonstrating that reduction is possible , and a gradual reduction strategy could have been introduced without endangering the industry and jobs .
Once again , the right has given preference to profits ...
However , small steps count , and these reports are a step in the right direction towards the sustainable agriculture of tomorrow and a healthier environment for our children .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 2.25 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
2008 draft general budget : Section III - 2008 draft general budget : Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX ( debate )
Before I hand over to Commissioner Grybauskaitė , I should like to express my amazement that other Commissioners , whom we have asked to be here , are not present .
There are various reasons : ostensibly our invitations have gone out somewhat too late .
This may be the case and I shall check .
I should like to remind the Commission , however , that by Interinstitutional Agreement it has to be present during the week the European Parliament is in session .
I shall check the matter and I expect that both the Commission and we as Parliament , of course , will honour our commitments under the interinstitutional agreement .
I would therefore ask the Commissioner present , Commissioner Grybauskaitė , to convey this to the Commission .
I have already said as much , incidentally , at the Conference of Presidents .
I do not wish , however , to make any one-sided accusations here , but I shall be checking the matter .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , first I wish to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets and the Committee 's members and coordinators for making it possible for us to reach an excellent compromise in a very positive atmosphere .
Parliament 's Secretary-General was also very open and cooperative when the budget was being drafted .
It is a good start to future cooperation between the administration and the Committee on Budgets .
First of all I want to say that this system of two organisations deciding on the budget - the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets - cannot continue in the future .
It is not the right approach to have the Bureau developing various new ideas and new projects .
The Committee on Budgets is either a kind of rubber stamp approving the funds , or it is a bad boy or girl who cuts them out .
That was the case here too , when there were major new increases proposed by the group chairmen , which would have gone over the famous 20 % ceiling which has been jointly agreed .
I do hope that people will listen to the Committee Chairman 's guidelines on this , because he has the right idea about how this process should be gone about in the proper way , in order to achieve concrete and fitting results .
These matters cannot be decided in two places .
It is much better if they are decided in just one .
When Parliament 's budget was being drawn up , the administration and the Bureau showed the right initiative in proposing that remaining under the 20 % ceiling should be a basic principle .
Afterwards , the group chairmen made additions to the policy rules .
One was that each Member 's assistants should receive a thousand euros more a month , making around EUR 10 000 000 in all , and there were various other increases , when in fact we had got into a situation where extra expenditure had to be cut to some extent .
This is obviously never easy , but it needs to be said that we have not made any real savings or cuts ; instead , we just tried to adhere to budgetary discipline when it came to new increases , so that the budget would not grow too large .
This is obviously important because we are spending taxpayers ' money .
We should think about what projects we should engage in and which of them are acceptable , from the taxpayer 's point of view .
Above all , we need to concentrate on the essential work which we have been elected to do here .
This is a legislative body , and so we should not be implementing projects that lie outside the scope of actual legislative work .
Let me say , however , that I happy with the joint compromise allowing Parliament an increase of just under 4 % .
That is reasonable , and in any case includes many projects which other Members here are in favour of .
I will mention some of these projects .
First , there is information policy , which is extremely important .
For this , an additional EUR nine million has been added to the reserve , to be spent on the new Web TV when the prototype has been approved .
This Web TV idea as a technical information channel is an acceptable notion , but it should not be put into effect in the way that is now being suggested .
The political groups and the Members are not to take part in monitoring the body concerned or in the everyday work involved .
The administration does not have the same sort of political honesty that people want to see as the political groups and the Members do .
I have found it very hard to appreciate the idea which has been proposed by the left that politics should be expunged from policy and that information on Parliament can come only via its administration , and not through its Members or political groups .
It is inconceivable to allow information policy to come only via the administration , and it leaves us , who have been elected to this place democratically , outside the information machinery .
Another idea connected with this subject was that concerning the local media , which was decided in plenary just before the holidays .
It was that Members should get a bit more money for inviting representatives of the local media to observe what is happening in Parliament and to interview them .
The Committee on Budgets voted against this .
I do not understand this apparent animosity towards the small local media coming from the left , as it allows us to get as close as we can to ordinary people .
Now we in the Committee on Budgets , however , have voted against this money by a majority , and we Members cannot spend any more money on inviting the local media here .
Thirdly , I would like to mention the Information Offices .
Each Member State has its own Information Office , which is a good thing , but why buy the most expensive buildings in the most expensive areas ?
Why could we not buy slightly cheaper buildings a bit further out of town and spend the relevant funds on human resources ?
We need more people to visit places of work , places of study and schools to tell people what Parliament does and why .
That is the best way to influence people , to go to them , and not buy costly buildings .
This money could be better spent .
As for the policy on buildings generally , I hope that all the institutions can together establish a common organisation to consider when and where to build and when and where to purchase property , so that we do not make decisions without knowing what others are doing and artificially raise property prices .
I just want to comment on the resolution on the proposal to reduce the number of sittings in Strasbourg .
This might be something of an eternal debate , but it has to go on until something gets done .
We also have to set an example in the reduction of emissions .
We cannot squander EUR 200 million of taxpayers ' money a year .
We must show the public that the EU has enlarged and changed , and for this we have to change .
I have not come across one good explanation as to why this hassle has to continue .
For that reason , I hope that we will have a vote on the subject so that Parliament can negotiate with the Council and so that the much needed change can take place .
Once again I want to thank the coordinators and members of the Committee on Budgets for the compromise , and I hope that it will be preserved in the vote here on Thursday and that the figures concerned will remain just as we have jointly agreed .
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Union budget for 2008 is the second in this programming period .
When the current financial framework was adopted , special priority was given to strengthening competitiveness and cohesion for growth and employment .
The Commission 's preliminary draft budget was EUR 129.2 billion for commitment appropriations and EUR 121 billion for payment appropriations .
The Council in its draft budget cut commitment appropriations to EUR 128.4 billion and payment appropriations to EUR 119.4 billion , that is to say EUR 10.3 billion under an already very tight financial framework .
The Council 's draft budget also highlighted other questions .
Under heading 1 ( sustainable growth and employment ) , payment appropriations were cut by a full EUR 1 046 million , although it was an unconditional priority of budget policy .
This autumn , Parliament also received the Commission 's letter of amendment proposing an additional EUR 262 million for external actions .
Furthermore , the Commission also proposed a review of the financial framework so that adequate funds could be set aside for the Galileo global positioning system and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology for the period 2008-2013 .
The proposal was consistent with Parliament 's resolution adopted on 20 June and the first reading on the EIT legislation .
Based on these criteria , the Committee on Budgets drafted its own proposal , which is now under discussion .
Its key elements are as follows :
The budget 's unconditional priority is heading 1 ( sustainable growth and employment ) .
Commitment appropriations have been increased , in particular for research and training under the Lisbon Strategy and for the Trans-European Networks .
Heading 1a also relates to funding for the Galileo navigation system .
When the multiannual financial framework was being drawn up , Parliament warned that Galileo was under-funded .
Now it has a deficit of EUR 2.4 billion euros , because private industry is unwilling to get involved in the project , as has happened in the United States of America .
Because the project is politically and economically important for Europe , Parliament insisted that it should go ahead and that it should be financed out of the EU budget .
A decision on this needs to be taken during this budgetary procedure .
For this reason , the draft budget had Galileo and its associated EIT appropriations outside the scope of the budget , in the form of a ' satellite change ' proposal .
A condition of its adoption is that the Commission proposal for amending the multiannual financial framework be adopted .
If that does not happen , the Galileo project will fail and EIT funding will also be in difficulties .
It is pointless continuing to finance Galileo if the Council does not have the genuine will to see it through to the end .
The Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund appropriations under heading 1b have been substantially strengthened , as the unpaid commitments under the funds - the RALs - are alarmingly high , at more than EUR 95 billion .
Back in the summer , Parliament and the Council made a joint declaration regarding the Commission 's slowness to approve functional programmes .
At present , 63 % of the programmes under the Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund remain unapproved , as do 83 % of European Social Fund programmes and 75 % of rural development programmes , even though the first programme year is already coming to an end .
The slowness of this administration seriously threatens the EU 's structural and cohesion policy and , in particular , the reconstruction of the new Member States , as the current financial framework is a massive European reconstruction project , bigger than the Marshall Plan after the Second World War .
In this draft budget , however , just EUR 22.1 billion and EUR 5.3 billion have been set aside for structural measures and rural development respectively for the new Member States .
Accordingly , the Committee on Budgets is proposing that a portion of the Commission 's relevant administrative costs should be placed in reserve , to be released as and when programmes are approved , because this process needs speeding up .
Another huge problem area relates to heading 4 ( EU as a global partner ) .
The preliminary draft budget was clearly inadequate , owing to which the Commission in its letter of amendment proposed EUR 120 million for Kosovo and EUR 142 million for Palestine .
The Council also proposed increases of EUR 260 million for the same regions .
The Committee on Budgets adopted the Commission 's approach , but added a further EUR 10 million for both Kosovo and Palestine .
To defend Parliament 's own priorities , the Committee also drafted an ' asterisk ' amendment .
It agrees a cut of EUR 40 million , which otherwise would have to be made in the Common Foreign and Security Policy , as the increase the Council proposed is an obvious area of interest for them and would jeopardise Parliament 's priorities .
The asterisk proposal also incorporates the increases called for by the Committee on Foreign Affairs for Palestine and Kosovo , a total of EUR 40 million , plus a smaller adjustment of EUR 7 million for the Global Health Fund and certain other lines .
This amendment can be adopted if the Council agrees to use the flexibility instrument .
Concerning the decentralised agencies , may I say that the Committee restored the EUR 32 million in cuts made by the Council and the personnel cuts .
We thought that cooperation went relatively well .
The most substantial change related to the border control agency , Frontex , appropriations for which were increased by EUR 30 million .
Cooperation in the field of border control and strengthening it is one of Parliament 's key priorities .
The theme of this budget is ' a budget for results ' .
It aims to promote both activity-based budgeting and activity-based management .
To this end , EUR 49 million of the Commission 's general administrative costs has been placed in reserve , to be released as and when the Commission makes proposals for studies and reports , as requested by Parliament , on the development of activity-based management , the clarification of staff accountability , and the future trend in staff numbers .
This also has to do with the declaration on executive agencies adopted in Parliament 's conciliation meeting .
It states that each new proposal must contain a cost-benefit analysis compared with the situation where the measures would be the Commission 's responsibility .
In addition , lines of accountability and responsibility in respect of the agency and the Commission should be clearly set out , and there must be an explanation of how the Commission is to take responsibility for the work of the agency and the use of funds .
We know the warning examples from history of the ' Technical Assistance Offices ' .
The sum total for the draft budget before us is EUR 129 680 billion , which is EUR 623 million under the multiannual financial framework .
Payment appropriations are EUR 124 194 , which is the equivalent of 0.99 % of the Member States ' GNI .
The figure is EUR 5 300 million under the financial framework , and so the Committee on Budgets has shown great discipline in drawing up this proposal for deliberation by the European Parliament .
The draft budget was prepared in a spirit of strong consensus and excellent cooperation .
I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Reimer Böge , for his excellent leadership , and the coordinators and shadow rapporteurs from all the political groups .
They have shown considerable flexibility and an ability to cooperate .
I also want to thank the Commission , and , in particular , Commissioner Grybauskaite , for showing a positive attitude , and also the Portuguese Presidency , which in tripartite negotiations and conciliation demonstrated a constructive attitude and deference .
Finally , I want to express my appreciation and gratitude to the Committee on Budget 's secretariat and the administrators responsible for the budget in my own group and the other political groups for the enormous amount of work they have done .
I now submit the 2008 budget for deliberation by the plenary session .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , let me start by thanking Mr Virrankoski for an excellent report and for the substantial amount of work he has done on it .
He rightly says that 2008 is year two in a seven-year financial perspective .
It is my belief that this budget is moving in the right direction to offer value for money and with payment appropriations this year set at 0.99 % GNI , it has the potential to achieve far better implementation in the coming years .
However , in order to achieve these goals , I call on the Council , in particular , to take note of Parliament 's views and to be prepared to discuss some of the issues further , and I mention four issues at this point .
Firstly , Galileo and the European Institute of Technology ( EIT ) : Parliament has given its approval to these schemes , but we still need evidence of budgetary discipline from the other institutions , and I make here three points .
Firstly , I see insufficient evidence of provision for cost over-runs and late delivery of the projects . Secondly , I see insufficient evidence of very clear lines of accountability and responsibility with these major items , particularly where contracts for work on the projects are being awarded .
Finally , I believe that the Commission should do far more to share its vision for the Galileo project and particularly the post-development phase of the project and the on-going situation .
Secondly , under Heading 4 , we already know that demand for funding for Palestine and Kosovo will extend the margin under this heading quite considerably .
This in part has been met by a reduction in funding for the CFSP .
But that will inevitably create problems during the next year and I think that some time after Parliament 's first reading we will need to have discussions with the Council and the Commission to see how we can address that situation .
Thirdly , I call on the Council to support Parliament 's efforts to oblige the Commission to comply with the screening exercise and to achieve greater efficiency in staffing levels .
This includes the decentralised and external agencies , where I fear there is need for far greater levels of accountability .
Finally , it is most important that both the Council and the Commission attach far greater urgency to the achievement of a positive déclaration d 'assurance from the Court of Auditors .
In my view , their current rate of progress is unacceptably slow and , in consequence of this , the credibility of this House is seriously undermined .
I therefore call on the Council , in particular , to show far greater urgency to address this situation .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all I would like to thank the whole of the budget team for the work they have done , especially our two rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä .

This budget procedure confirms the narrowness of the multiannual financial framework .
The amount of payments , at less than EUR 130 billion , or 0.99 % of GDP , is very skimpy and cannot support hopes for the development of European policy .
The teamwork in the Committee on Budgets means that the budgetary priorities of the political groups can be maintained , but the financial framework prevents the revival of the growth policies promised to European citizens .
Our committee took particular care over the choices made by all the parliamentary committees , but the proliferation of pilot projects is evidence of the frustration with the niggardly nature of this financial framework .
Once again , we have had to fight drastic cuts by the Council and I am happy with the compromise secured .
The Commission still needs to execute this budget correctly .
We will no longer put up with this draft budget being denatured through failures to execute and transfers of appropriations back to the Member States .
Firstly , in the 2008 budget , we do not accept the failure to use the cohesion funds .
In the Socialist Party , we have restored the Council 's dreadful cuts that affected programmes such as Culture 2007 , Media 2007 and Youth in Action .
I do not need to remind you here of the importance of these lines as the new Treaty is being put to the people of Europe .
I invite the Council to think about this ; for example , giving research or Frontex the resources they need to operate , and improving the lines of information correspond to the current concerns of European citizens .
We are also proposing additional appropriations for certain new projects to improve the capacity to accommodate refugees or for NGOs fighting discrimination .
The European budget absolutely must continue to help those fighting the scourges afflicting European society .
For the EU 's external relations , we are reducing the expenditure of the CFSP by 40 million because we have to honour our commitments and the EU 's commitments : to preserve the emergency aid reserve , help the most disadvantaged countries , support the Global Fund to fight AIDS , the World Health Fund and maintain development aid .
For Kosovo and Palestine , the flexibility instrument will need to be mobilised to provide EUR 87 million .
It is still to be deplored that heading 4 is systematically underfunded .
World poverty is growing and our budget is shrinking .
For the European Commission , I recognise that the reserve of EUR 40 million is harsh but it reflects our doubts over the effectiveness of implementing ABM .
Allow me to give you a few examples : first of all , the failure to spend the cohesion funds , the impossibility of executing the pilot projects we hold dear , such as the Erasmus-style programme for apprentices , the lack of transparency in the choices of research firms , the poor implementation of selection competitions for new officials .
The list is long and Parliament is asking to be convinced of the goodwill of the European executive .
Finally , the main one , the asterisk amendment demands that Galileo and the EIT are funded beyond the ceilings of the financial perspective .
This necessitates , forces even , a mini-revision of the financial perspective .
Parliament cannot accept the endangering of Galileo , a major challenge from a technological , economic and political point of view , and an essential strategic tool for the political powers and independence of the EU , but I am convinced of the value of Mrs Merkel 's comments in our chamber .
On 29 June , Chancellor Merkel used this African proverb to close her Presidency : ' If you want to go quickly , go alone , but if you want to go far , go together . '
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the President of the European Parliament for personally chairing this sitting and these proceedings , and for the fact that it is not taking place at midnight .
I am very pleased about that .
Commissioner , there is no doubt that the 2008 budget proceedings will be quite challenging .
However , in Parliament we stand together , and when we vote on Thursday I am fairly convinced that there will be broad support for the strategy , the Committee on Budgets and the draftsman that Mr Virrankoski has selected for the Commission budget .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports the Commission 's excellent proposals for the funding of the Galileo satellite surveillance system .
We are in favour of surplus money from agricultural schemes being used for this project instead of being returned to the Member States .
It would not be reasonable to reduce the funding for research and transport in order to find money for Galileo , as is being proposed by the EU Finance Ministers .
If the EU Member States agree that we are to have Galileo , they must also provide the funding for it without using it for other purposes .
As has already been mentioned by Mr Virrankoski , we have previously been warned that Galileo has not been allocated sufficient money ; the situation that we are now facing therefore does not come as a surprise .
The other significant controversial matter as regards the Council concerns the funds for foreign affairs policy .
We are all extremely worried about whether enough money has been allocated to Kosovo and Palestine as well .
I would like to thank Mr Virrankoski for his extensive efforts to find a compromise that enjoys broad support .
With regard to the agencies , we are satisfied that the border monitoring agency Frontex is receiving more funding , and we hope that a solution can be found to enable the European Maritime Safety Agency ( EMSA ) to get started as quickly as possible with the LRIT Data Centre , which will be established by the end of 2008 .
The rapporteur for the other institutions , Mr Itälä , has had both an achievable task and a very difficult one .
The difficult task was the Parliament budget , where it was unfortunately not possible to bring the expenses down to this year 's level plus inflation . However , in spite of this , it has been possible to keep the expenses below the 20 % ceiling .
The ALDE Group supported the original compromise between the rapporteur and the Bureau , and it is regrettable that poor coordination between the chairs of the larger groups meant that the compromise had to be reworked .
We should not see this happen again ; we can do better .
However , I am not chastising Mr Itälä .
He has made a good contribution , and I would also like to thank him for finding a reasonable solution for the Committee of the Regions , which has been subject to very severe cutbacks by the Council .
Mr President , on behalf of the UEN Group I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , and to all members of the Committee on Budgets for their efforts in drawing up the budget and their excellent cooperation .
Many thanks .
Does the second budget in the current budget perspective differ significantly from its predecessors , apart from in the size of the sums concerned ?
As ever , we have to continue the funding of expenditure from previous years , and we can change only parts of the budget .
Such significant items are the funding of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology and the Galileo project .
There is also increased funding for Palestine and Kosovo .
Significant changes are also to be found in the funding of the common agricultural policy and specialist agencies .
Are we making a big mistake in loosely matching sums to later expenditure ?
Is it feasible to do this one year in advance ?
We try , but we always have the opportunity to adjust the budget , and this is very important .
Perhaps in future we should create more items , as that will add significant elasticity to the budget .
Finally , I would like once again to express my sincere thanks to Mr Virrankoski .
Despite the very difficult area concerned , it was a great pleasure to work with him .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by stating that we have a general problem with the existing financial perspective because , from the point of view of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , the budget we have until 2013 is not really adequate for the major challenges that Europe and the current 27 Member States are facing .
I should like to state that I see within the Council a lack of European spirit where budgeting and finances are concerned .
I think we need , as we have already declared with the Lisbon Strategy , a genuine high-tech offensive for Europe , if we really want to build the path towards the knowledge-based society .
We are unfortunately running way behind on this .
I also believe that we have to do even more for research and development as well as for lifelong learning if we want to make Europe 's citizens properly fit and give them the skills to cope with globalisation .
We also have to create - and as all the polls show , the citizens of Europe are demanding this of us - a responsible foreign policy .
If , however , we want to invest more in crisis prevention and responsible action in hot spots around the world , we need appropriate resources , which we currently do not have to an adequate degree .
In relation to climate change policy , I also think that we have to show the world that well-understood climate change policy and selective growth go hand in hand .
Europe must take a major step forward here , as it is only by persuading other continents and large countries like China and India and the United States that we can draw up policy on climate change and create new jobs that we shall also win over the hearts of our citizens .
On the other hand , I think that we can , of course , economise on the European budget , on agricultural export subsidies , for example , as well as in the cultivation of tobacco and also on the costs of our meetings here in Strasbourg .
We can see that the budget is not adequate for our major , ambitious science projects like Galileo , the satellite navigation system .
Many previous speakers have already said so .
If we think this is politically correct , however , the Council must stir itself here , otherwise we shall lose contact with the United States , as well as with China and India .
With regard to the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , if we really want to show that Europe is a continent that genuinely values knowledge and wants to be a knowledge-based society , the Council will also have to do more here .
A common European will is required here , if we are to promote Europe .
In conclusion , I should like to thank all my fellow Members who have been collaborating on this budget .
It is only a compromise , but a good compromise , at least on Parliament 's side , and one we shall be defending .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is probably a wide spectrum of opinion in all the groups .
Some are happy with the Council 's strict budget policy , while other Members feel it is a barrier to achieving all that is good and fine .
The fact is that the Council 's proposal for the budget total is incredibly low compared with combined national income and that Parliament 's proposal also represents an exceptionally low level of budgetary expenditure .
Our group is unhappy with the way the draft budget raises the Union 's military profile .
Militarisation of the Union is also one of the reasons why our group cannot support the new constitution proposal agreed last week .
The constitution , like next year 's draft budget , will do nothing to strengthen the Union 's social dimension .
We are used to the idea that the Commission never fully implements the EU budget , and the Member States are used to the idea that they will have their own resources , as they are known , returned to them every year .
That will be due to the RALs resulting from delayed programmes under the Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund this year and next .
The rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , is speeding up the approval procedure for these programmes with good reason .
It is our group 's view that it is right to amend interinstitutional agreements with regard to new expenditure for Galileo and the European Institute of Technology .
There is not enough money in the budgetary framework ; instead , the membership will have to bring new money to the Union for them .
In this House , Parliament 's Bureau is not as disciplined in its budget targets as the Committee on Budgets .
It is always trying to spend 20 % of the EU 's administrative costs even if there is nowhere the money can justifiably be spent .
Such projects include the memorial to Mr Pöttering , a museum dedicated to the EU 's short history , or converting Parliament 's parking area into a spa and baths .
At the same time , the Social Democrats , Liberals and Greens voted in the Committee on Budgets on the indulgent supervision of the party support funds of the Europarties and now also of the Euro-foundations financed out of Parliament 's budget .
There was no clause stating that the use of funds should be overseen in accordance with the best practices of EU budgetary control .
My compatriots Mr Virrankoski and Mr Ville Itälä have tried , in their role as rapporteurs , to achieve a balanced outcome .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Thank you Mr President .
The honourable Members Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä have dealt with the budgetary matters very competently .
I have great respect for their work , within the given terms of reference .
But that is the problem : they are forced to work within the given terms of reference .
The EU 's budgetary process is profoundly outmoded and therefore beneath contempt .
The basic principle is always this : more money is coming in , so what are we going to invest it in ?
This is a 50-year-old organisation , which for that reason should focus on zero budgeting .
We must ask the following question : if we were starting today ( and not 50 years ago ) , what would we invest our budgetary resources in ?
Would we invest them in creating the Economic and Social Committee or the Committee of the Regions ?
Would we invest nearly half in a protectionist agricultural policy , in PR and marketing for products that could not otherwise be sold ?
Would we invest in subsidies for tobacco production , for producing tobacco that cannot be sold in the normal way , at the same time as we are by and large banning smoking in the EU ?
Would we invest in Structural Funds which take almost all the remainder of the entire budget , thereby deciding that countries can receive money centrally from the EU budget provided it goes to a certain kind of regional policy ?
The answer is - as I am convinced everyone sitting here in the building ( which is not many ) would say - no , we would not do that .
The question is then : how can we approach the issue ?
Well , we cannot do it if we are not prepared to look at the fundamental budgetary issues from scratch and then to work from there .
We are therefore in completely the wrong place .
If we conduct a normal economic analysis and consider what should be done with budget funds at EU level that are spent through Brussels , it is allocating money that the Member States would not otherwise be able to invest , for example in basic research .
We all know from economic theory that basic research is completely underfunded on the market .
There are always freeloaders there .
It is assumed that someone else will pay the costs of basic research and when it is all completed , it is available to us all .
There are many such areas and an incredibly small amount of money goes there .
We talk about it , but we do nothing .
In most cases money goes to what was decided 30-50 years ago .
That is scandalous .
We also have an EU that is buying buildings around Europe in the belief that it is cheaper .
That is an irresponsible way to act , speculating with taxpayers ' money .
It should not continue .
We must initiate a discussion on what the EU should do with the money we receive .
What we are doing right perhaps takes 10-15 % of all the funds .
The rest goes to preposterous things , and to different kinds of PR work , such as the money for adaptation to globalisation .
Individual states that compete with one another to find good institutional solutions are what created Europe and its success . Let us keep that .
Thank you very much .
( DE ) Mr President , anyone who was in the Committee on Budgets will know how difficult it always is in the autumn to release very much money at all .
It is usually tucked away under the reserve information services budget headings .
There is , of course , an attempt to be active and therefore to do something .
Here I would address you directly , Mr President .
The LUX film award has been set up .
The conditions were that the films would be viewed by 18 October of this year and only those Members who had seen all three films could and should vote under this budget item initiative .
I have just looked at the list .
There are not even a dozen Members who will be making the decision tomorrow on which Tower of Babel they will give to whom .
I should like to ask you , Mr President , to be honest enough not to deceive us tomorrow , but to tell us how many Members have in fact legitimately taken part in this vote .
Please ensure that the Minutes are not tampered with outside at the last minute , because the deadline for watching the films , the viewing deadline , was 18 October .
This relatively small problem on the scale of budgets , Mr President , can be carried over to so many other areas .
We are constantly throwing money around here without thinking about it because we have too much money and therefore even good ideas such as the film award are being knocked down .
However , please be honest at least tomorrow , Mr President !
These remarks are not worthy of a reply .
I would like to start by saying that it is a great pleasure to speak to you today , before the important vote , just after first reading .
I wish to thank the chairman , Mr Böge , the main rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , as well as the coordinators of all the political groups for their most successful , coordinated and positive work to achieve consensus in the Committee on Budgets at first reading .
All the lines proposed by the Commission were reinstated - many thanks for that .
For the establishment of practically all PDB lines , I would like to express my thanks to Parliament .
I repeat this in English , in case of an inexact interpretation , because that is the most important part of my speech .
At the same time , I would also like to say that , no matter how satisfied we are and our cooperation is , we still have some comments to make and say that still , in most cases , Parliament made reserves .
This is something we tackled last year , and the Commission was capable of tackling last year , and we will try to do our best to ensure that all conditions are met by the Commission , providing all the information necessary for you to be able to release the reserves before second reading .
I would like especially to mention the pilot projects , where , this year , Parliament took the initiative and practically used an enlarged number of new pilot projects and preparatory actions , which you propose .
As usual , we will look carefully at each case and will present our opinion at the beginning of November through the so-called ' executability letter ' , which will come in time , well before conciliation and the second reading .
On executive agencies , which are the very large , enlightening item on our budgetary procedure this year , I would like also to stress the constructive framework set by the July conciliation between us and the overall issue of agencies .
I would like also to thank Parliament , in particular Ms Haug , for her cooperation , especially in finalising the revision of working arrangements for executive agencies which we agreed recently .
The Commission will do its best to ensure , as an honest broker between the two budgetary authorities , and will try to have the best and balanced result between all of us for finding the budget , especially knowing and bearing in mind that we still have large problems to solve together , such as Galileo and the EIT , which is on the table after our proposal pending , mainly , the decision of the Council .
We are satisfied at how Parliament tackled this question in the proposal and at first reading .
So I hope that altogether - all three of us - we will be able to conclude the budgetary procedure successfully and on time .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , the financial ceiling for heading 4 is EUR 7.002 billion according to the multi-annual financial framework .
The Council increased the Commission 's 2008 preliminary draft budget of EUR 6.672 billion to EUR 6.89 billion , mainly by adding additional amounts for Palestine and Kosovo .
Parliament pointed out at an early stage that these funds could not be adequate because challenges that could already be foreseen had not been taken into account .
Now we hear from the Council that much higher amounts are required , particularly in the area of security policy .
Unfortunately , we are still not aware of any concrete proposals .
We must , however , come to an agreement with the Council as regards CFSP .
Let us therefore negotiate openly and honestly on the actual needs for 2008 .
If we have approved some EUR 250 million a year for the CFSP from 2007 to 2013 , the shortfall in funding will already be apparent .
Our costs for security policy are running almost according to the time frame .
Another important subject is Palestine .
In 2007 we are spending significantly more than estimated , up to EUR 400 million .
We also need more money next year than the Commission and the Council have so far estimated .
We cannot expect Parliament to introduce lower amounts into the budget , however , and to subsequently plunder other policies in the course of the year because there has been no serious planning .
Nor is there yet any clarity regarding the precise allocation of the tasks relating to Kosovo and the budgetary needs for 2008 .
I know we will first have to wait for the exact mandate here .
In conclusion , I should like to point to the political dialogue we shortly need to establish .
The European Parliament has been fighting for this in negotiations on the multi-annual financial framework and to have it anchored in the Interinstitutional Agreement .
This would be the right forum to tackle major developments in a constructive manner , in good time and on the basis of mutual trust .
This would be the right context for preparing a review of the new financial instruments .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Development is making an effort to set priorities with its expenditure estimated in the budget .
We know that development aid , therefore our aid for the poorest people on the planet , is not something that happens by a snap decision and the results appear from nowhere , but there are processes here and we must work continually on these processes .
We have emphasised that we want to combat poverty .
This means we have to provide people with an education and ensure that they are healthy so that they are able to develop within their own environment , their own country .
We have invested a great deal of money in the past to combat malaria , tuberculosis and Aids and we want to help these countries genuinely develop through preventive measures such as , for example , the abolition of small arms , land mines and ABC weapons by setting up a conflict prevention network and cross-border cooperation between the developing countries .
It should not be the case here , however - and these are my two pleas to the Council and the Commission - that the Council - simply because a new topic appears on the agenda - says quickly : now we are starting to reorganise everything .
We must help Kosovo and we must help Palestine , and we fully agree on this .
We have to do this but we should not do it by extracting money from the poorest of the poor and by believing that we could detect something like continuity in this switchyard or that people outside might have the feeling that we are working on helping the poorest of the poor there in a really concentrated manner .
New money needs to be forthcoming here and I know we are talking about our taxpayers ' money , but they have to be told this explicitly .
If we do this , we shall also be successful .
The second item is directed at the Commission .
You know exactly what our priorities are for combating poverty .
I have just referred to them : provision of health care and basic education so that people are able to earn something themselves at home .
We have put a great deal of money into the reserve and we shall not release this money until you have made it clear that you have accepted and adopted Parliament 's priorities .
It is not micromanagement that we want to introduce , but we have made a political evaluation , which you have agreed .
We shall insist on it and implement it so that , as in other cases of foreign policy it , too , becomes reality and we shall therefore avail of our budget rights and opportunities to exert the appropriate pressure on you .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä for a splendid , yet thankless , job .


I believe it is important to underline not only the role of Parliament as the Institution with oversight over the budget , but also the role of each individual committee in regard to aspects of the budget directly under their sphere of competencies .
I think it is very healthy that individual DGs report to the various committees on their expected expenses for a given year .
There has to be a level of control and there has to be transparency .
Although the Committee on International Trade does not have a codecision in trade matters - yet - I think it is a very good practice that has developed in which we have a frank and open discussion with DG Trade on budgetary matters and why certain expenses are needed .
In terms of budgetary lines , I want to emphasise the need to maintain both aid for trade as well as the parliamentary dimension of WTO as important aspects of a trade budget .
We need to be able to promote European goods in third countries .
We need to have experts who help our companies to enter foreign markets but , at the same time , we need to help developing countries export to the EU .
Without trade there is no long-term sustainable development .
The WTO has been criticised recently for its lack of transparency .
The parliamentary dimension of world trade talks is an important initiative we should continue to support because it improves dialogue , gives greater legitimacy and allows for greater oversight .
On a final note , I urge the Commission to make sure that Parliament is informed in due course of any projects of microfinancial assistance so that a proper debate can be held in the relevant committees , and that we as an institution are well aware of beneficiary countries spending EU money .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on Budgetary Control has focused its opinion for the 2008 Budget on two fundamental points :
The first is compliance with paragraph 44 of the new Interinstitutional Agreement relating to the statement of assurance and the annual certification that has to be sent by every Member State .
In this amendment we are taking up the conclusions and recommendations of the 2004 and 2005 discharge , which a minority of Member States have already applied , but we believe more should do so .
We know that the European Commission cannot evaluate the extent to which Member States have complied with this commitment until 15 February .
However , and perhaps in order to encourage the European Commission to continue with this evaluation without wasting any time , we have introduced a reserve in the Commission 's staff costs .
We are sure that the Commission has as much interest as Parliament does in ensuring that the Member States fully apply paragraph 44 in the area of shared management .
I am therefore certain that we will reach an agreement on the reserve .
The second point is transparency .
We believe that the more detailed budgetary expenditure is , the simpler it will be for the competent budgetary authority to monitor its implementation .
We have therefore asked for the creation of new budgetary lines in areas of spending that are very sensitive for Parliament , such as agencies , rural development and other categories such as external action , with a view to , I repeat , a very clear commitment from Parliament and from the Committee on Budgetary Control , which was to contribute to maximum transparency , which is what public opinion demands of us .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteurs , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has put forward an opinion , which was adopted unanimously - there were no votes against - in which , firstly , we celebrate the advances in appropriations aimed at improving competitiveness for economic growth and employment , and also , especially , those aimed at cohesion for growth and employment within the European Union .
With regard to the matters that the Committee is responsible for , economic and monetary affairs , the field of enterprise , competition , taxation and customs union , the fight against tax fraud and general fraud in European statistics and , in particular , the chapter on statistics , we do of course welcome the budgetary advances , the budgetary approach , but of course we have also , found inadequacies .
We would have liked more money , more money used for economic growth , in other words more money for the well-being of citizens , to provide clearer support for monetary union programmes , to provide clearer support for small and medium-sized enterprises as a source of job creation .
Of course , we all need to be guided by the principles of austerity - this should come first and no one says so more than myself .
However , this and the current shortcomings in our Union budgets are poles apart .
We believe that the European Union should really have to make more incisive budgets in terms of stimulating economic growth that will create employment , and for this purpose allocating resources that belong to all the EU countries is absolutely necessary .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs I particularly welcome the fact that the Commission is now willing to spend 44.2 % , corresponding to EUR 57 billion of the budget , on growth and employment .
The increase in the corresponding budget headings by EUR 2.3 billion for 2008 effectively support the Lisbon Strategy .
I should particularly like to highlight the three pilot projects in the social sector , even though the Committee on Budgets has not approved the funds for this in one instance and has substantially reduced them in a second instance .
Even the project on the employment situation in health care , which has been reduced somewhat by the Committee on Budgets , is particularly close to my heart , because there have been considerable problems here since the EU enlargements in 2004 and 2007 .
The pilot project should therefore be carried out as we have devised it .
This applies particularly in regard to possible regulations for social services .
The same also applies to another project we have proposed , namely the social integration of migrants .
Please therefore support the amendments we have re-inserted .
I should also like to promote once again the family project to be carried out by the foundation in Dublin , which we would like to support to the tune of EUR 400 000 , but which the Committee on Budgets has entirely rejected .
Family-friendly jobs , the improvement in the housing situation for families and continuing family support are also prime objectives for us in Europe .
The treatment of these subjects should therefore be incorporated into the work schedule of the foundation in Dublin and the necessary funding made available , of course .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has restored the budget figures reduced in its sector by the Council to the amounts stated in the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
This means a 10.3 % budget increase for the environmental sector compared with the 2007 budget year .
We believe this is also entirely appropriate for the most important instruments in the environmental sector .
The EMEA , EEA , EFSA and ECDC - these are the abbreviations for our agencies , with whose work we are entirely satisfied - have also recovered their money .
Life + is agreed , work is beginning and the new health action plan is also replacing the old one from January 2008 .
So far , so good - all of it !
We shall certainly be able to make an evaluation at the end of the year or in early 2009 .
The HELP programme is giving us cause for concern , however .
We know how harmful tobacco consumption is .
However , we also want the European public to hear and understand this message .
2008 is the last budget year in which we shall be receiving money for this anti-smoking campaign from the tobacco fund .
We are asking the Commission to think very quickly about where the money for this campaign can come from in subsequent years .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me first of all , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , thank the rapporteur and our fellow Members on the Committee on Budgets for their continually constructive and effective cooperation .
Two closely linked topics in particular are central for us in the Committee on Industry .
On the one hand these concern - as has already been addressed today -Galileo and on the other hand , the European Institute of Innovation and Technology project .
Both initiatives involve ground-breaking projects of vital importance in terms of policy on innovation and industry that deserve our full support .
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology will make an important contribution to the transfer of technology from science to industry and to enterprises .
There is still a backlog of demand here in Europe .
Funding , however , raises questions .
The Committee on Industry has been arguing very clearly in favour of funding not being at the expense of other forward-looking programmes .
We should not therefore be taking money from the Seventh Research Framework Programme , from a programme for life-long learning or from the Trans-European Networks programme to finance the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
No , we in the Committee on Industry are pleading for funds to be redeployed from the administrative budget for the benefit of the EIT .
Thankfully the Committee on Budgets has also accordingly undertaken to do this .
Furthermore , the Committee on Industry is pleading for clear funding even beyond its own budget line .
Considerably more problematic is Galileo .
Perhaps you would allow me simply to point out the following from the viewpoint of industrial policy : I believe there is agreement that we need Galileo and that it also has to be financed .
The latest resolution on Galileo has resulted in Parliament arguing for Community funding , as has also been proposed by the Commission .
Having said that , it is crucial , in my view , that the project ultimately continues .
The project does not have to be relaunched but can be based on the considerable efforts of the industrial enterprises involved .
This should also be taken into account during the upcoming negotiations .
Everything else regarding Galileo I am handing over to my colleague Mr Böge , who will also be responsible for continuing negotiations on the Committee on Budgets together with his colleagues here .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( ES ) Mr President , firstly I would also like to start by thanking the members of the Committee on Budgets for the support that they have given to the amendments that were put forward by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , that were also adopted practically unanimously by the committee .
Firstly , with regard to budget Title 12 , ' Internal Market ' , I would just like to say that what the committee aimed to do through our amendments was to recover the amounts in the PDB that had been envisaged by the Commission , which the Council document had subsequently reduced .
I would like to mention or remind you of the importance that everything related to the internal market has in the European Union .
I think that is obvious .
It is one of the main bases for all the subsequent development that has been built around it .
In some years , such as last year and next year , 2008 , in which important legislation is to be adopted , for example the Services Directive , and also there are plans to continue moving towards legislation to perfect the internal market , we understand that it is necessary to recover the amounts envisaged in the PDB .
The same argument could apply to Title 14 , ' Customs Union ' , which also refers to perfecting the Union 's external borders , which , in turn , will enable us to ensure that our single market functions correctly .
Finally , with regard to Title 17 , relating to consumer protection , which concerns the committee for which I have been draftsman , I would like to say that , with the support of the Committee on Budgets , we have recovered the amounts in the PDB for the SOLVIT Programme .
There are different levels of development of consumer policies and consumer protection policies in the various EU countries .
On many occasions there are discrepancies that need to be resolved through non-legal , out-of-court instruments .
SOLVIT has proved to be a good instrument for this .
Finally , and I will conclude , Mr President , I would like to especially thank the Committee on Budgets for its support for a pilot project that has been allocated EUR 1 million , that will enable a study to be carried out in the next year monitoring and comparing the application of consumer policy measures in the various Member States .
Mr President , in its opinion the Committee on Regional Development gave particular attention to the budgetary lines relating to Chapter XIII , or the heading ' Regional Policy ' .
We appealed to keep , or if necessary reinstate , all the budgetary lines from the preliminary draft budget .
The Committee on Budgets met our demands , and even , in line 130616 relating to the European Regional Development Fund , asked for an increase in payments of EUR 900 million .
The Committee on Budgets also shared our concern about the use of the unallocated part of the money in the cohesion area for additional funding of other projects , such as the European Institute of Technology , on the strength of a decision by the Council that would be at odds with the principle of cohesion and would also deplete the European Parliament 's prerogatives .
To sum up , this is not our dream budget , it is not a budget that could delight us , but the Committee on Regional Development supports the draft budget proposed by the Committee on Budgets .
Many thanks .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( NL ) Mr President , the following ritual is performed every year with regard to the agricultural budget : the Commission adopts the draft budget , then the Council makes cuts to many lines without much justification , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , backed by the Committee on Budgets , restores those lines , and then we start discussions on the basis of the Commission 's letter of amendment to adopt the precise budget for the following year .
Why it is necessary for the Council to constantly make those cuts is a mystery to me , as we have been holding discussions based on that Commission letter of amendment since as far back as the Treaty of Amsterdam , as it provides us with the most recent figures available .
I think that we had better continue that way .
The Committee on Agriculture has increased a number of lines : those for school fruit , school milk , and so on , as we all want awareness of good nutrition to start at an early age .
We appreciate the pilot projects and the preparatory action originally adopted by the Committee on Budgets .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Fisheries , within its sphere of competence , submitted a number of proposals for amendments to the Committee on Budgets for consideration , most of which were well received and concern , in particular , the strengthening of European maritime policy in preparatory actions for the sustainable development of the ocean of opportunity represented by Europe 's oceans and seas , more resources for fisheries control so as to ensure the sustainability of the seas and oceans and for collecting information vital for the development of a sustainable fisheries policy , for the proper operation and efficiency of the Community Fisheries Control Agency and , moreover , regarding the outer most regions , to guarantee the effectiveness of the current programmes vital for minimising the constraints that continually and specifically affect those regions .
The reports by Mr Virrankoski and myself are a clear signal for strengthening the fisheries policy , even with all the constraints linked to the Financial Perspective ; I therefore urge my fellow Members to give them firm support and the Council to take account of the proposals we have submitted as well as Parliament 's proposals .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am speaking here for the Committee on Culture , which is responsible not only for culture , but also for education , youth , media and sport .
Our budget is very limited when compared to what it ought to be .
I believe that when we take a good look at how successful the ERASMUS programme has been , whereby university students in Europe can study in different countries , make friends in other parts of Europe , and discuss it afterwards among their friends and contacts , it is clear that it makes an essential contribution to mutual understanding in Europe .
I believe that we should do more for communication , especially now that the Heads of State or Government have agreed on the Reform Treaty .
The idea of ' going local ' , working with people in their own environment to gain their support for a European future , is crucial .
I am delighted that two pilot projects , at least , were possible : EuroGlobe , a mobile theatre like those from Shakespeare 's era , set up to tour European capital cities so as to really involve citizens , and a culture project on the theme of artist mobility , to enable Europe 's young artists to come together , work together and shape Europe 's future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am standing in for Mrs Dührkop who cannot be here .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs had defined three main priorities for the 2008 budget .
The first of these priorities concerned the strengthening of the operational resources available to the Frontex agency , which , as you know , is charged with coordinating cooperation on the EU 's external borders .
This objective has been met : if Parliament takes our lead , Frontex will receive 30 million in additional operating appropriations , that is , more than double the 2007 allocation .
The second priority concerned the need for transparency in the management of the computerised systems for controlling entry to European territory .
Appropriations were therefore put in reserve for the Schengen SIS I and SIS II systems and for the visa information system , known as the VIS for short .
These appropriations will not be released until we have adequate legal bases where necessary , and whatever the case , information about the invitations to tender and contracts .
Finally , our Committee 's third priority concerns the European Return Fund .
All the appropriations for this were placed in reserve and will only be released once the Council and Parliament have adopted the Directive on common standards and procedures for returning illegally staying third-country nationals .
The Council should know this : no Directive , no dough .
It is as simple as that .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( LV ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very pleased that finally , following the Lisbon Summit , we can move on to the signing of the Reform Treaty and its ratification and implementation .
We all understand that this new Treaty is necessary for Europe 's development and consolidation .
For this reason , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I was surprised that budget heading 3b , which relates to European citizenship , was the only one where significantly reduced expenditure had been planned compared with the 2007 budget .
At a time when the European Union 's institutional structure is changing , resources are needed for communication with EU residents .
EU citizens must be informed about changes to be made , and their cooperation and support must be secured .
I am therefore grateful to the members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs from my political group , and especially the rapporteurs and the members of the Committee on Budgets , for their support for my proposals on various budget headings to increase expenditure on this programme .
I hope that Parliament will also support the budget amendments and that these resources will be used appropriately to strengthen the European Union . Thank you .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - ( DE ) Mr President , it is important to treat the budget in a gender-neutral manner , as we should and must do , from the women 's policy point of view .
The aspect of gender is of great importance here and ' gender budgeting ' must not be merely empty words , but must be seen to be put into practice .
It is very important that we top up the DAPHNE programme .
Unfortunately , our amendment did not get through and we will now raise it in the Plenary once again .
We Social Democrats support the amendment and the increase of funds for DAPHNE , because it is a relatively small , but very important programme to combat domestic violence .
Then it is also important to provide appropriate financing for the European Institute for Gender Equality , to ensure that it is launched successfully .
It is also important that expenditure for the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue is distributed equally between the sexes .
There are a great many women , especially migrants , who should be given a vital role in this intercultural dialogue .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Petitions . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , for their excellent work .


I believe that the budget should be the fundamental political act of each public institution , but also of each private entity , because it illustrates the policy decisions on which public money will be spent .
There are three fundamental elements : first , rigour ; second , the courage to make effective and efficient policy choices ; third , control of expenditure .
Evidently , as Mr Virrankoski said , this all requires a firm and resolute policy which also embraces the revision of procedures , which I fully support .
Now , as to the question of the Committee on Petitions , we felt we should suggest to the Committee on Budgets that the proposed increase of 4.69 % in the Ombudsman 's budget was fair and appropriate , partly because the Ombudsman is now a key political figure in the democracy and transparency of the European Union and in sound administration , which he must guard vigilantly .
( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner , the most important item in the budget for 2008 is cohesion policy .
In practice there are underdeveloped regions in every Member State , and so we all have an interest in this issue .
Moreover , cohesion is also in the interests of those who are involved in financing this process , and not just in the interests of the beneficiaries .
This is why we cannot accept any suggestion of making significant cuts , equivalent to around half a billion euros , to payments relating to cohesion policy .
In my view , Parliament is convinced that the new Member States will be capable of adjusting and spending all the funds available to them .
We all need to push for this in our own countries as well .
This is not the only item about which we are , and will continue to be , in disagreement with the Council .
We can also state with certainty that we have managed European citizens ' money well , in other words responsibly , for the 2008 budget is much lower than the ceilings set out in the financial framework .
That is why it is disappointing that daggers are still drawn in the debate on the Galileo Programme budget or on the European Institute of Technology .
Both of these would be advantageous for the European Union 's development , so why do we have to put obstacles in the way of making them a reality ?
I thank the European Commission and the rapporteur for their work , and ask Parliament to support the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets and thereby to lend solid support to the negotiations preceding the second reading .
Lastly , Mr President , permit me to salute the Members of Parliament present today on this , my country 's national holiday .
I am of course referring to the 1956 Hungarian Revolution . Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has done this year what it always does : it has allowed its civil servants in the Ministries of Finance to put together a budget that takes into account the Council 's main aim which is ' keep the figures down ' and , most importantly , ' keep payments down ' .
It bears no relation to the political plans that we in the European Union want to implement - no relation at all !
The Council in its many formations is still in the habit of preaching on Sundays and being content to let others , that is , Parliament , do the real work for the rest of the week .
It does not matter whether the issue is external policy matters , or aid for Kosovo or Palestine or about implementing policies on competitiveness for growth and employment that are extremely important for Europe , vital to its survival , in fact .
Parliament looked ahead and pointed out , even during negotiations on the financial perspective 18 months ago , that there would be problems with financing exactly these policies within the foreseeable future .
However , our message fell on deaf ears and now the Council has to make it up as it goes along .
Sooner than we expected , we are facing a situation where we are having to provide public funds to rescue the Galileo project because the dream of entrepreneurial initiative has collapsed .
The European Parliament was able to agree fairly quickly that it would finance the beginning of the Galileo project with European money , by using the ' Community method ' .
We see anything else as quackery , and want no part of it .
We are prepared to provide Galileo with EUR 2.4 billion from 2008 to 2013 , in addition to the EUR 1 billion that were already planned .
However , since the required funds are not available in Heading 1a , and are not going to fall from the sky , we are prepared to take it from other budget categories , from Heading 2 2007 and 2008 , making EUR 2.2 billion , and EUR 220 million from Heading 5 .
Certainly that is a lot of money from Heading 2 , but it is possible without farmers being deprived of funds .
Prices for agricultural products are high on the world market , so our subsidies can be reduced .
The transaction for which we created the basis in the Budget Committee in the first reading , is called a ' minor revision ' .
Pah !
The Council avoids even the most minor of revisions like the plague but that is the Council 's problem .
Anyway , we are prepared to create the preconditions for Galileo , a flagship of European technological innovation .
That fact that , as part of this minor revision , we are prepared to make funds available for the European Institute of Technology is , for us , worth only passing mention , due to the size , well , actually the smallness , of the amount initially required : EUR 2.9 million from 2008 to 2013 .
We expect the Council to get moving and to come to Parliament and move in our direction .
Mr President , allow me one further remark .
We really expected the Finance Minister or at least a State Secretary from the Portuguese Council Presidency to attend this debate at the first reading , so that we could welcome his presence .
Nothing against you , Mr Mourato , but even the Portuguese Vice-President of our own Parliament is no substitute in this instance .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as spokesperson for the ALDE Group , I would first like to express my appreciation of the work done by our fellow Member , the rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , and in particular I would like to tell him that we wholly support the strategy he has developed on Galileo with the agreement of the Committee on Budgets .
Europe needs Galileo .
We want funding for Galileo to be Community funding and we want the appropriations to be guaranteed without having a negative impact on other priorities .
I would also like to thank our rapporteur for having kept in the list of pilot projects a few we were particularly committed to , in particular the rapid alert mechanism for child abductions or disappearances .
I would like to say a word about the report by Mr Itälä who , unfortunately , is not in the chamber .
I appreciate the initiatives to increase the resources available to regional media for publicising Community initiatives among citizens .
I believe that the regional and local media can have a much greater impact than certain centralised , more bureaucratic initiatives .
However , I must say that there is an initiative in Mr Itälä 's report that I do not like at all .
This is the increase by EUR 1 000 per month in the secretarial expenses for each MEP .
I do not like this initiative , which is a product of an agreement between two political groups , by chance the two largest , and which happens to come along the year before the European elections .
I consider it a disguised subsidy for the re-election of a number of our fellow Members and I will be voting against this provision .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have taken the floor in the debate on the budget for 2008 in order to raise the following issues .
Firstly , although at nearly EUR 129 billion , the expenditure in this budget is the highest in the history of the Union , the ratio of this expenditure to the gross national income of the 27 Member States is the lowest ever , and , following adjustments by the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets , is barely 0.99 % of the gross national income in commitment appropriations , which I would like to emphasise .
Secondly , within the Financial Perspective period 2007-2013 , the commitment appropriations ceiling for 2008 is set at 1.08 % of the Member States ' gross national income , so we are looking here at a significant discrepancy between what we wanted to fund just two years ago and what the European Union wants to fund now .
You cannot have more Europe for a lot less money .
This view has been repeated over and over again in this House and we need to be reminded of it again today .
Thirdly , we must support the decisions of the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgets that significantly increase the funding for the Galileo Programme , the European Institute of Technology and certain external activities of the European Union .
Fourthly , we must press for the European Commission to accept the programmes put forward by Member States for regional development and the development of rural areas as quickly as possible .
More than EUR 20 billion will be allocated to the new Member States specifically in 2008 .
It would therefore be a good thing if these funds could be utilised as effectively as possible .
Finally , fifthly , it is worth noting the instigation of the fund for adaptation to globalisation , which will enable companies experiencing the negative consequences of this process to take advantage of transitional support and to safeguard EU jobs .
( FR ) Mr President , I am going to focus my comments on the report by our colleague , Mr Itälä , who has done a good job .
We know it is always very difficult to decide the budget for our institution .
I have only one real regret : there is something very special about the 2008 budget .
It is the last budget in which we could collect a lot of money together for investment , particularly in Parliament 's property policy .
We have 32 places of work , if you count all our offices in different capitals .
Apart from Brussels and Strasbourg , we own only six of the places in which we work in the various countries .
We know there is an acquisition policy , which the Court of Auditors is regularly asking us to pursue but we cannot implement it because Mr Itälä - and I understand his concern about sending out a signal by saying we are not spending all the money because we want to remain below the 20 % ceiling - is preventing Parliament from injecting money into it and putting together a property portfolio .
However , it was 2008 or never , because in 2009 we will be paying for the Member 's Statute , as you know , and we will no longer be able to do it .
Apart from that climb-down , I have to acknowledge that Mr Itälä has done a very good job , and in particular it is one of the greenest budgets I have seen as it contains many provisions , particularly provisions to reduce carbon emissions , offset our carbon impact , a desire to have a fleet of vehicles that includes hybrid cars , the desire to cut the number of meetings by holding videoconferences , and even by reducing the amount of travel by officials , who do not necessarily follow us to the places where they are needed .
To sum up , therefore , we should have had more money for investment and actions in 2008 , the pre-election year , but generally speaking it is still a very good report because of the impact on policies I hold dear .
That is why we will vote for this report , Mr President .
( PT ) In the two minutes I have to speak I would like once again to point out that budgetary history is repeating itself .
The European Commission presents the proposed Community budget , this time for 2008 , the Council proposes significant cuts to the Commission proposal , and Parliament comes forward with a proposal for reducing the cuts in the Commission 's and Council 's drafts .
Everything seems normal , were it not that all these proposals are below the 2008 budget in the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013 .
As happened in the previous financial framework for 2000-2006 , the budget ceiling provided for in the current Financial Perspective is not being adhered to , since the Community budget in 2007 was EUR 1.6 billion less in commitment appropriations and more than EUR 8 billion less in payment appropriations , without taking account of actual implementation .
It is clear that the amounts entered in the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013 are already insufficient in themselves , in our opinion , to promote real economic and social cohesion in an enlarged European Union of 27 countries .
Basically , all these proposals for the 2008 Community budget run counter to the requirements of the rich countries which impose a ceiling on the budget of about 1 % of Community GNI , thereby reducing its share of this budget and minimising its redistributive role .
Parliament 's proposal covers aspects that improve the draft presented by the Council , such as increasing the appropriations for the cohesion policy , as we also proposed , though we should stress that its effective implementation is to a large extent undermined later to meet the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy 's neoliberal agenda , which we firmly reject .
However , even Parliament 's proposal represents a cut of more than EUR 5 billion in payment appropriations , in relation to what was agreed for 2008 in the multiannual financial framework .
Since this is a phase of the negotiation process , we hope that , in contrast to what has happened in the past , Parliament will at least seek to ensure that the minimum amounts laid down in the Financial Perspective for 2008 are adhered to as closely as possible .

Mr President , for budget debates , there is a well-known law we call the law of the three ' Ls ' , because budget debates involve reeling off Litanies , like in a religious Liturgy , which ends up causing economic Lethargy . We are finding this with the 2008 budget .
The litanies first .
Mr Virrankoski reels off these litanies like Mr Elles did in 2006 , and like our fellow Member Mr Garriga Polledo did in 2005 .
First of all , the litany of cutting off appropriations : in the draft budget , the Council of Ministers cuts off the appropriations in the preliminary draft budget .
Mr Mulder has explained to us that this is quite normal for agriculture , for example .
The European Parliament , however , is proposing to restore the appropriations .
The litany is also one of a budget consistently below the ceilings of the multiannual financial framework .
The multiannual financial framework is already very short of the necessary appropriations and the budget even more so .
It is a cascade of Malthusianism .
It is also a litany of political priorities : year after year , fighting poverty , education , training , agricultural multifunctionality and the seventh framework programme on research are mentioned , and that is where the liturgy comes in .
The liturgy is primarily in the budgetary nomenclature and the ideology supporting that nomenclature .
The nomenclature is the presentation of the budget by activity , the preparation of the budget by activity .
In practice , the expenditure is chopped up into titles , into political fields , which correspond to the directorates-general .
The budget is like a huge salami , a type of grocer 's shop inventory , the problem being , as the rapporteur has seen , that dividing the budget up by activity creates confusion with the multiannual financial framework , which is split into broader categories . One has five categories : competitiveness , preservation of natural resources , freedom , the EU as a global partner , administration , and the other has about thirty political activities , and the correspondence between these categories is difficult to establish .
All this is done in the name of a budgetary ideology , the ideology of performance , competitiveness , effectiveness , efficiency and results , and this creates a jumble of nebulous tools , results indicators , performance indicators , activities sheets .
This budgetary technology is presented as new , as being in the vanguard of budgetary intelligence , but it is actually something quite old , dating back to 1947 .
It was the American Hoover Committee that first talked about the concepts of performance , cost / benefit , efficiency , targets and results .
It was this that gave the US the Planning , Programming and Budgeting System in the 1960s under the Johnson Presidency , and that under President Carter gave the BBZ , or budget base zero - the budgetary performance ideology that subsequently spread to New Zealand , the United Kingdom , France in 2001 with its organic law on finance laws , and even Mexico in 2006 .
One might understand from this why the European budget is lacking in transparency and really in efficiency too .
The European Parliament does not contain 100 people capable of understanding the European budget by activity , with the consequence that this entails : the economic lethargy of the European Union .
Because if there is no Galileo , if there is no Lyon-Turin link , if there is no Genoa-Barcelona link , if the capital cities are not connected by high-speed trains , if the research budget is not what it should be , if the budget for a Europe of 27 Member States is the same as the Spanish budget , if the European budget is one twentieth of the budget of the United States , it is precisely because of this Malthusian ideology .
Perhaps it is time we realised that alongside the ordinary budget , we need an extraordinary budget to make loans financed by a major European loan , which would permit investment .
( SK ) If we were to rate the confidence in centrally financed activities of the EU according to budgetary expenditure expressed as a share of EU GNI , the trajectory of the confidence curve would resemble that of a falling leaf .
This is truly alarming .
Payment appropriations as a share of EU GNI have fallen regularly for several years to around 1 % .
In the 2008 draft budget they dropped to 0.95 % .
Similar trends can be seen not only with regard to the volume of budget resources but also payment appropriations in relation to the payments ceiling of the multiannual financial framework .
In particular the proposed EUR 10 billion in unallocated payment appropriations appears to be a substantial deviation from the aims of the long-term financial framework .
I , too , am astonished that the Council is proposing over EUR 1 billion of cuts to payments for the programmes aimed at improving European competitiveness and cohesion .
I therefore share the view that the payment appropriations are insufficient in the light of the policy challenges faced by the EU .
That is why I will support the proposal to increase payments appropriations to 0.99 % .of EU GNI .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today I would like to address two important reserves in the Commission Budget : one for buildings policy and one for staff .
Regarding the latter , it can be said that the screening report has shown us that the Commission employs almost 11 000 staff in administrative support and coordination - administering the administration .
If you add the translators and housekeepers to that , it then becomes the area with the greatest growth in staff numbers , because that adds a further 5 700 people .
Given that we mention ' better regulation ' from time to time , we must immediately start requiring ' better organisation ' .
To do that , we need more information , and that is what the reserve is for .
Part of the job that Parliament gave the Commission to do was benchmarking , comparing staff positions with those in international organisations .
The Commission is not allowing us to see this comparison , stating that it has agreed to keep the identities of those organisations anonymous .
That is a bit rich !
We can only make progress here if Parliament receives the information it has asked for - proper information , not fragments .
The screening gives us a one-off , first-time look at the staff structure of the Commission , for which we are grateful , but there are no conclusions , and the Commission has not produced an action plan .
I must ask firmly that this action plan be presented .
Nor are there any conclusions about buildings policy in Brussels .
The communication from the Commission in July on building needs does not take into account the results of the staff screening , although the same Commissioner is responsible for both .
You are not that Commissioner , which is disappointing and cannot continue .
The amounts placed in reserve by Parliament compel the Commission to link these two documents .
The Commission must finally get to work on this matter and do its job properly because , in my view , the results of the staff screening that we have been given so far cannot be presented to our voters .
( SK ) To begin with I would like to thank both rapporteurs .
My thanks to Mr Itälä for over eight months of cooperation on the issue of the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2008 .
Over the last four years the institutions ' budget has increased by almost 18 % , chiefly as a result of enlargement .
In the future this budget will not grow at such a rate .
If we want to make the institutions more efficient , we need to improve the cooperation between them .
I am glad that the fears of risks associated with such cooperation have not come true .
On the one hand , we have been trying to ensure that all the tasks that the citizens expect the institutions to fulfil will be fulfilled .
On the other hand , we have been trying to ensure effective use of the funds .
When allocating the European Parliament 's budget , the most important thing for us is to concentrate , both now and in the future , on our main role and priority : improving the legislative process .
Issues that are not related to this have to be reduced in the budget to an absolute minimum .
We are well on the way to achieving that .
Ladies and gentlemen , back in March we said that you need to have better information on all the resources and materials at your disposal , so that you can work in a responsible and efficient manner .
We are therefore calling for the creation of a knowledge management system that will enable the Members to work in an effective manner , using all documents .
Ladies and gentlemen , you want to prove to the voters that you manage their funds responsibly .
However , sometimes we do not have documents available in even the most common languages .
There are extraordinary committee meetings for which new resources are needed .
We need to improve flexibility in this area .
Spending on buildings accounts for a large portion of the institutions ' budget : we should therefore keep a close eye on this in the future .
In the past , there were instances where European institutions bought or leased property for prices above the market value .
In the future we want closer attention to be paid to all aspects of purchasing , leasing and renovation .
Our aim is to lower costs and ensure flexibility .
We want to avoid cartels and monopolies .
Our next priority is to provide better information to the citizens of the European Union .
We have thus decided to strengthen this area by helping regional and local media .
Ladies and gentlemen , we want to continue to make the institutions operate more efficiently .
The reports we receive about their activities must be more informative .
These reports should clearly indicate whether or not the targets have been reached .
I welcome the method used by the institutions to prepare the budget with the help of inflation coefficients as well as on the basis of what is really needed .
In conclusion , I want to thank the rapporteur because we have managed , by way of a number of difficult debates , to reach a good compromise that will lead to better use of European taxpayers ' money .
- ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one and a half minutes to say what you think of the 2008 draft budget is a formidable task , but I would first like to take the time to thank our rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , with whom we have had to navigate our way with great difficulty through the decisions that the Committee on Budgets is proposing today .
Of course , the2007-2013 multiannual financial framework squeezes us into an austerity that unfortunately does not allow us to pursue , either as steadily or above all as quickly , the objectives we have set ourselves for Europe , the policies of which are , to my mind , the only way of saving the regions of Europe because they can give our fellow citizens the comfortable lifestyles they aspire to in a global environment that has metamorphosed and is constantly shifting and evolving .
I therefore invite Parliament to support our committee 's initiatives , especially with the prospect of a mid-term renegotiation of the multiannual framework and the definition of a new mechanism for own resources .
On the subject of this budget , because I only have a little time I would just like to mention one point .
As permanent rapporteur for the Structural Funds in the Committee on Budgets , I have decided to ask the members of the European Commission what the reasons were for putting 30 % of the administrative costs of these funds in reserve .
The study we presented recently with Mr Virrankoski on the implementation of the Structural Funds highlights the considerable time it has taken the Commission to approve the national frameworks and operational programmes , so there are now record outstanding commitments of three years ; by taking this firm stance on the reserve , we wanted to raise the alarm .
The regional policies , like the support for research and innovation , are policies of prime importance for the future of our economy , and therefore for jobs and the quality of life of Europeans .
We want to do things quickly , but we want to do things well , which explains the high level of appropriations we are asking the Council to support .
( GA ) Mr President , there is one aspect of the budget that should be mentioned , and that is the money to be set aside for the common agricultural policy .
The CAP , as it is called , has undergone numerous reforms in the last 15 years : the Mac Sharry reforms , Agenda 2000 , and the decoupling of payments from production .
I should like to clarify one point : the governments of the Member States might not agree to any changes to the payments to be made under the CAP to farmers in Europe as a whole between 2007 and 2013 .
Indeed , in my country , Ireland , firm financial arrangements have been laid down for farmers under the agricultural policy to be pursued between 2007 and 2013 .
We know that agricultural policy is to be the subject of a health check , but not a general review .
And the check will not cover the financial arrangements which EU leaders have made for farmers in Ireland and Europe up to 2013 .
I hope that this will be understood and that nothing will be left out ; and that there will be no attempts at distortion , for it is vital for farmers throughout Europe that everything should be in order .
( DA ) Mr President , our group is naturally voting in favour of the amendment proposal to allocate even more money to Palestine .
However , we must highlight the fact that both the Council and the Commission should ensure that we do not end up in a situation in which we are throwing money into a bottomless pit .
This is the case with much of the aid that is currently being given and contradicts the EU 's principles for aid , where the beneficiary must be made able to develop a sustainable economy .
However , this is impossible because Israel is stifling Palestinian society and its economy , and not just in Gaza .
The delegation from the Committee on Development witnessed this when it visited the West Bank and Gaza in September .
EU money flows endlessly without Israel being held accountable at all .
We have been given an account of a dialogue from Washington , in which one of the White House 's Middle East consultants was asked about the EU 's role .
He responded : ' EU ?
We give orders , Europe pays ! '
This is true , too !
We keep on paying out , and Israel is simply being allowed to destroy everything that we have built up .
The Commission and the Council must now make demands on Israel .
The blockade of Gaza must be stopped in order to allow goods and people to move in and out .
Gaza is now effectively one large open-air prison .
The barriers on the West Bank must also be removed .
It is not only our delegation that is saying this ; the message from the World Bank and from our own ECHO was equally clear .
If there is no hope of improvement or any light at the end of the tunnel , we are abusing EU citizens ' tax payments , and this must stop immediately !
( EL ) Mr President , the EU 's budget is the main way to achieve political priorities .
Its budgetary policy seems to have three aims : business competitiveness , anti-terrorism and intervention in third countries .
Expenditure is used to achieve these three aims , but the interests and concerns of the masses are entirely different .
They relate to their future places of work , income , pensions , and state school and university education .
Let us ask ourselves about the political priorities set by the budget : do they really improve the lives of citizens ?
Is the EU as a global player meeting its commitments fairly ?
How does the allocation of some EUR 741 million to promote freedom , security and justice improve the lives of European citizens ?
The Commission 's recent consultation paper on the reform of the budget says that today and especially in the future the budget ought to intensifying competition for raw materials and markets , shifting the balance of economic power and liberalising huge new markets which create new opportunities for Europeans .
However , this is exactly what is leading the people of Europe astray .
For a start , instead of the budgets of Member States being aimed at social justice , they are aggravating the struggle to control the markets regardless of the means .
Secondly , this stirs up public opinion in third countries against Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , we are still at the beginning of the new financial perspective , so we are being cautious in programming expenditure for 2008 .
At the same , this is the fourth annual budget of this parliamentary term , and we have therefore accumulated sufficient experience of the budgetary procedure and the specific rules of the game between Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
That is most probably why a record number of amendments were smoothly voted through in the Committee on Budgets under the efficient leadership of Mr Böge in a spirit of consensus , which will certainly facilitate block voting on Thursday and will certainly equip us with greater negotiating strength in shaping the draft budget for 2008 .
The priorities for 2008 have been named again and again , and the funding of the Galileo Programme has again and again been specified as a problem .
I am therefore pleased to make the point that for the first time the Baltic Sea region has been given consideration in this budget , not by way of a declaration , but in a financial , i.e. a real sense .
Perhaps this is because both the Commissioner , the two rapporteurs and the Chair of the Committee on Budgets are inhabitants of that region .
It is good that the European Union is taking on global commitments , but the larger the European Union becomes , the more its responsibility increases for our own continent , including the Baltic Sea region , i.e. the internal sea of the European Union as it is now , and everyone knows what a poor state it is in .
In view of this , it is good that we have found , in the form of pilot projects and preparatory actions , a financial instrument to increase funding for regional development , safety of navigation , simplification of border-crossing procedures , and above all , protection of the environment .
I hope that these priorities will stand up for themselves in the stern mirror of the European Commission , along with the whole of our budget strategy .

( MT ) Mr President , I will start by saying that I agree with what Mr Itälä has said on the issue of budgetary procedure and that no one is prepared to be a ' rubber stamp ' .
I therefore suggest that we discuss this subject as quickly as possible in order to address the difficulties and the differences that appear to exist in an effective manner .
On a different level , we welcome the EUR 30 million increase in Frontex 's budget .
Realistically we expect an improvement in the Agency 's structure , better coordination and more determined operations .
Parliament gave a clear and concrete signal that it is now up to Frontex and the Member States to eliminate the inefficiency , the unkept promises and the delay we have suffered over the past year .
Another point that I would like to address relates to reports and studies produced within or commissioned by the various institutions , including the Commission .
There is a need for a common database of reports and studies in order to avoid duplication of work , reduce waste and at the same time make information more accessible .
In addition , there should be an annual report that lists these studies and reports , who won the contract , how much they cost and , if possible , what use was made of them .
We should also examine the impact and added value of the reports produced by the Economic and Social Council and the Committee of the Regions , particularly in the light of reports that are too technical or reports that have already been produced by the Commission or by Parliament .
On the subject of the purchase of premises , I would like to remind you that in 2006 it was agreed that we would once again reexamine the policy regarding the purchase and leasing of buildings used by the institutions , including the information offices .
I am under the impression that over the years , the institutions , for various reasons , have bought and leased buildings at a price that appears higher than the market price .
Without questioning the merits of the policy on the purchase of buildings , it still makes sense to examine , in an institutional manner , how we can improve the conditions under which we purchase and lease premises and to bring offices closer to the market prices and thus avoid the situation of cartels or monopolies .
Lastly , I would like to congratulate the Finnish double act on their useful work and the manner in which negotiations were conducted .
( HU ) Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Virrankoski , who has done an excellent job .
However , I would like to make the point that if the European Union wants to be a global player , then it is ridiculous that it wants to spend less money on foreign policy than on administrative expenditure .
Secondly , it is also unacceptable that expenditure under the enlargement heading , considered a priority , should also be lower in nominal terms relative to 2007 , and , thirdly , it is unacceptable that expenditure on external affairs should increase to a lesser extent - by about 1.5 % - than general expenditure , which is set to increase by 2 % .
This means that the European Union has not ensured that there will be sufficient resources available to carry out the tasks it has set out ; nor has it ensured that there will be sufficient funds to implement foreign policy priorities .
Adequate funds have not been allocated for the mission to Kosovo , nor for providing assistance to the Palestinian people ; I fear the budget will have to be amended again several times next year because no provision has been made for this .
The imbalance between the eastern and southern components of the European neighbourhood policy has been a recurrent problem for many years .
The countries to the south have received three times as much money in per capita terms as those to the east , and this is unacceptable .
Lastly , I think it is important to resolve the issue of cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council regarding the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) heading .
As yet there has been no ex ante agreement or policy dialogue , and until this happens , I agree with placing EUR 40 million in reserve for the CFSP . Thank you very much .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , one of the things on which we have to decide today is the allocation of the first tranche of financial support for the European Institute of Technology .
This is a particularly important and keenly-anticipated decision for Wrocław , which is hoping for this institution to be located there .
It is very bad that we have not managed to set up this institution before the end of negotiations on the budget perspective ; it is greatly hindering its start-up .
Today we have an opportunity to make up for lost time and send some EUR 3 million to get the institution up and running .
Its full funding during 2010-2011 can only be assured through a review of the budget perspective .
I can assure you that this money will be a good investment .
This is evidenced by the readiness and enthusiasm of the Lower Silesian local authorities , businessmen and the world of science to get involved in this project .
I therefore ask you to accept these amendments .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to the rapporteurs Mr Itälä and Mr Virrankoski for their excellent work .

I am glad that the Committee on Budgets approved the two pilot projects connected with the protection of the Baltic Sea .
I hope that the plenary session will also give its support to them .
It is time we paid closer attention to the Baltic .
Since the 2004 round of enlargement it has been an internal sea of the EU , but at the same time it is one of the world 's sickest and most polluted seas , something that shames the EU .
One of these pilot projects has to do with reducing the amount of hazardous waste that ends up in the Baltic Sea and correcting the oxygen deficit in the deep basins of the sea .
The other is connected with cutting the sulphur dioxide emissions from shipping though emissions trading .
If this experiment gives good results , sulphur dioxide emissions trading may become a viable way to cut sulphur dioxide emissions in all sea areas of the EU , which would clean up the air we all breathe in the future all over Europe .
So I also hope that the plenary session will support these initiatives .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , as others have done .
However , in my remarks , instead of the three ' L 's used by Mr Martinez , which if I remember correctly were ' litany ' , ' liturgy ' and ' lethargy ' , I would rather use three ' I 's , which are ' implementation ' , ' initiation ' and ' imagination ' .
Firstly , I should like to thank the rapporteurs , particularly Mr Virrankoski , for including a couple of paragraphs about the monitoring of the budget .
It is extremely important that we think about the question of value for money .
Even if that particular term is not included in the resolution , it is , no doubt , in the hearts of everybody that we need to be able to justify , with our specialised committees , the monies we are actually spending , not just in the current period , but also in the fact of having the national management declarations , which it seems many Member States are still reluctant to put together .
Secondly , I would like to thank both the rapporteurs and the Commissioner , in this regard , for having , in my own budget for the year 2007 , implemented those pilot projects and preparatory projects which were included .
There are quite a few of them , and it is nice to have a certain continuity as we go through into 2008 , particularly picking up on the pilot information networks , but also on the projects with the EU , China and India .
That brings me to my last point , which is the question of imagination .
Einstein said that imagination is more important than knowledge .
We have seen in this debate that many colleagues - Mr Mantovani , Ms Guy-Quint and others - and myself always deplore the fact that we have too little money in category four , the external actions .
We know perfectly well there is too little , so I would put in a particular plea at this stage , as we look towards the budget review , that maybe we should actually use a little imagination to see how the European Union will be called upon in the future to meet the global challenges of the future and to play its part in global assistance and the functioning of the global economy , and then make sure we have the means to be able to implement what we wish to take on as our policies .
- ( ES ) Mr President , with a budget that represents 0.99 % of the Union 's GDP we cannot have a solid political position .
With regard to category 1a , competitiveness for growth and employment , it should be pointed out that this is the first time that the figures on these policies represent the majority of the preliminary draft budget .
However , the Council 's figures cut down these categories relating to the Lisbon Strategy , which should be at the core of the Union 's policies .
I would like to mention the financing of Galileo and the European Institute of Technology , which are priority projects for our competitiveness and credibility .
The financial perspective 2007-2013 are insufficient to finance projects of such strategic importance .
Another point relates to the Frontex Agency , which plays an essential role , both from a humanitarian point of view and from a political point of view .
The European Council in June reiterated the need to strengthen Frontex in order to improve the Union 's capacity to manage its external borders .
This is also one of the priorities that have been expressed on several occasions by Parliament .
Proof of this is the proposed increase of EUR 30 million in commitment appropriations for the Agency 's operational costs , which is an increase of 127 % on the preliminary draft budget .
The allocation to category 4 is clearly insufficient for achieving our objectives and fulfilling our promises as a global player and , in particular , as has already been said here , in the operations in Kosovo and Palestine .
Finally , I would like to say that the confirmation of the Union 's participation in EXPO Zaragoza 2008 - Water and Sustainable Development - is the right decision and is a good opportunity to bring European policies closer to the citizens of Europe , which we need to do .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I too would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur Kyösti Virrankoski for his excellent preparation of the budget .
He has listened to the different parties concerned , and has also taken the proposals of the Committee on Regional Development into proper consideration .
The rapporteur Mr Itälä has also done a very good job .
It is important that the appropriations for regional development remain at an adequate level .
At the same time , we have to ensure that regional policy practices and administration are simplified and clarified both in the Union and in the Member States , so that all the appropriations set aside for regional development can be spent more effectively and wisely in the Member States to reduce regional differences and to implement the Lisbon Strategy .
The bureaucracy that is the bugbear of the Union also disrupts the implementation of regional policy .
The first year of the new programming period is almost over , and most of the programmes are still unapproved .
This is a serious problem , as the rapporteur said .
Because the Commission and the Member States have been dawdling , projects have been slow to begin and the first year of the programming period will be a problematic gap year .
The Commission should approve the rest of the programmes without delay , so that the appropriations reserved in the budget can be spent effectively and fruitfully , and so that the new programmes can get under way properly .

( MT ) Thank you , Mr President , and thank you , too , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä .
With this budget , Parliament will double the Frontex Agency 's budget to almost EUR 70 million .
This is a measure that speaks for itself , because the priority that Parliament is giving to Frontex is now clear to all .
The increase of EUR 30 million has been allocated to Frontex 's operational budget in order to increase its missions in those areas that are worst hit by the influx of migrants .
At the same time , Mr President , we have put 30 % of Frontex 's administrative budget in reserve because we want the Agency to be more effective in its work .
There are three conditions for removing this reserve : firstly , we want the Director of Frontex to establish regular contact with us to strengthen Parliament 's scrutiny of the Agency .
Secondly , we want detailed information on Frontex 's work programme for the coming year , and because Commissioner Frattini , Vice-President of the European Commission , himself announced that from next year Frontex 's mission in the Mediterranean would become permanent , we now expect the Agency to be allocated far more than the EUR 10 million that it originally projected up to now for missions on the maritime borders .
Thirdly , we want an updated and realistic list of the resources , ships , aeroplanes , helicopters that the Member States are prepared to put at the disposal of Frontex missions .
We do not want ficticious lists , like we had this year , where the Member States supposedly agreed to provide Frontex with about 21 aeroplanes , 27 helicopters and 117 boats but in practice , when the missions came to be carried out , the Member States unashamedly ignored their own promises .
Therefore , we expect Frontex to work to a proper schedule that can be relied upon before we remove the reserve . Thank you .
( SV ) Mr President , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , many are now wondering why Parliament is seeking a revision of the long-term budget .
Are we really not able to cope with new needs such as Galileo , the European Institute of Technology , the EIT , the EU 's work in Kosovo and Palestine , and at the same time make budget cuts ?
The problem is that budget ceilings apply to the whole budget , but of course they also apply to each individual budget category .
In order to avoid , for example , Galileo entailing cuts to other research programmes , we are requesting what we call minor revision .
But note that this is within the framework of the overall ceilings .
We would prefer to cut surpluses in the agriculture budget , that is what is important .
As regards Palestine and the costs of the EU 's work in Kosovo we want to use the ' flexibility instrument ' .
Otherwise we have to take money from Africa or Latin America , and that would be unreasonable .
The EU 's rigid budget model needs to be changed .
But I want to be clear , I do not want to step outside the overall framework , only to achieve greater flexibility within the framework in order to manage new needs .
How otherwise will we in future , for example , address what is needed in climate and energy policy ?
In addition to this , I want to mention just two things .
First , the debate on the Treaty shows the importance of increased resources and a long-term perspective in the EU efforts in respect of communication , dialogue and democratic development .
I then tried to make some adjustments to the allocation of quotas in this area by the Committee on Budgets .
I hope that we are now all agreed on more aggressive investment .
Secondly , I want to mention the pilot project that I myself have initiated .
It relates to support for the reconstruction of cultural and religious institutions and monuments in conflict-affected areas .
The proposal concerns , first of all , the Balkans , but in the long term it should also be possible to use the experience gained from that in other areas where destroyed museums , and razed churches and mosques , can constitute a cause of conflict which the EU can help to remove .
Such areas could be , for example , Palestine , Afghanistan , Iraq , and perhaps even Tibet .
In this area I appeal for the Members ' understanding and support . Thank you .

( FI ) Mr President , first of all I wish to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä .
I know both men and I also know that they are in favour of openness and transparency and are keen to structure the European Union 's economy on a sustainable basis , as is only appropriate .
It is good to keep a tight rein on expenditure and acknowledge the demands of common sense .
I would like briefly to focus attention on a few issues , the first of which is research and innovation .
Although I know that this is largely in the hands of the Member States , all the same , the European Union needs to remember its own commitments , the Lisbon Strategy , for example , and it has to keep to them , so that we can channel budget money into research and innovation , creating new added value for Europe .
I am delighted with this emphasis on the Baltic Sea .
I believe it has largely emerged on account of the rapporteurs .
It is good to realise what a state the Baltic is in and these two pilot projects are a good start .
It is true that we need considerably more input , but this is a good place to begin .
Thirdly , when drafting the budget it is important to remember the principles of sustainable development and the Union 's values .
This must be the way to act , for example , when we send money to third countries , and we are involved in various projects such as the Palestinian Autonomous Area .
We need to ensure that resources are used properly and that they do not result in work which runs counter to democracy , human rights and freedom of speech , that is , the Union 's values .
The way in which money is spent and the Union 's values must always go hand in hand .
( RO ) At the beginning of this year , we planned to negotiate together with the Council a pragmatic and efficient budget of results , which would achieve the policies now necessary in the European Union .
By our amendments in the Committee on Budgets , we have made severe cut-backs in the programmes consuming the tax payers ' money without any real value added .
The cut-backs in agriculture , amounting to 553,000,000 euros , namely 77 % of all the cut-backs operated , reveal another clear agenda of the Council to gradually eliminate this policy that the entire structure of the new Member States ' economy depends on .
I am glad that , in the Committee on Budgets , we have managed to reestablish the level of the funds designated to agriculture .
I also hope that the operational programmes and the rural development programme will be approved as soon as possible by the European Commission .
Besides these aspects , I would like to speak about the importance of the budget for the European Union 's youth policy .
The budget we have proposed operates a 9 % increase in finances for lifelong learning programmes , reaching a total amount of 900,000,000 euros .
These programmes have contributed to advancing the European idea more than anything else .
90 % of young people identify the European Union with the possibility to travel , to study and to work anywhere in Europe .
For these young people , we have to do more .
One of the problems they deal with is the small number of European scholarships , especially as regards the Erasmus programme .
In the current budget , we have increased payments by 100,000,000 euros due to the European Union 's enlargement to Romania and Bulgaria .
Nevertheless , we have to make sure that a bigger share of this money reaches every student .
Erasmus should not be an additional income for young students but , on the contrary , the main support for those with low financial possibilities .
Last , but not least , I would like to remind the Commission of the commitments undertaken in the trialogue of July , namely to ensure an adequate number of jobs for the new Member States .
At present , very few Romanians or Bulgarians work in management positions and , on the contrary , many of them work under temporary contracts .
The additional funds we have provided to the European Union 's Selection Office should be spent efficiently for the employment of permanent personnel for the new Member States as soon as possible .
( BG ) It is a challenge for a representative of Bulgaria , one of the newest EU Member States , to take part in the adoption of the 2008 budget as a full member .
This has become possible thanks to the enlargement policy pursued by the European Union and supported also through its budgetary policy .
I support the report and congratulate the rapporteurs and coordinators on the agreement they have reached with regard to the budget and its changes .
The draft 2008 budget , in its Sustainable Growth part , makes it possible even for the newest EU Member States to achieve the goals facing them in connection with their membership .
The operational programmes within the framework of the Structural Funds ensure high quality and qualifications of human resources , competitiveness , improvement of the infrastructure , strengthening of the administrative capacity in transport , the environment , etc .
Regrettably , the available resources are less than what is needed .
I wish to express my support also for the strategic increase of payments to the Structural Funds , the Social and Cohesion Funds , because this will enable them to expand the operational programmes and their capabilities .
I support also the 30-percent reserve for the administrative expenditures line because I believe this is a way to ensure efficiency of expenditures and control over spending .
The draft 2008 budget pays attention also to the new regions that have joined the EU .
In the Black Sea Region , these are Bulgaria and Romania which are also borders of the European Union .
The policy of the EU and the national governments is aimed at transforming the region into an area of security , stability and goodneighbourliness .
The region needs improvement of the infrastructure , more investment , and adequate measures to protect the environment because of its high industrialisation and its transformation into a transfer zone for raw materials in the energy sector .
The European Union with its policy and financing should guarantee both the environmental security and the stability and security of energy supplies to Europe ..
The Black Sea Monitoring and the Framework Programme for the Black Sea Development is a pilot project which I am confident that the European Parliament will support ; it is a right step towards good development of the Black Sea region and towards integration of the citizens of the Black Sea region into the EU membership policy .
( LT ) I would like to speak about the impact of the EU budget on the wellbeing of the ordinary citizens of Europe , some of whom are following our debates today .
Very often we hear that the European Union must develop into the world 's most competitive economy , and the budget can facilitate that .
However , it should be restructured in order to be more efficient and should encourage scientific research and innovation .
Regrettably , in reality it appears that the European Commission does not even have a definition of what constitutes scientific research .
Various projects have different expenditures set to be financed according to the research and innovation programme .
We constantly speak about Europe and its influence in the world .
The 27-strong newly enlarged European Union is capable of making changes on a world scale .
The budget allows substantial funding for aid for third countries .
However , according to the investigations carried out by the Court of Auditors , the funds are very often used inefficiently .
The reason for this is because most of the countries to which we give our aid are governed by non-democratic regimes .
Human rights are being abused and aid projects help a handful of people to get richer rather than improve the wellbeing of ordinary people .
I would therefore like to urge you , ladies and gentlemen , to ensure that we adhere to the condition defined in our documents , in particular that aid programmes should be allocated in line with the promotion of democracy and human rights .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , thank you to the whole budget team for their good work .
Please allow me a few remarks from the point of view of the Committee on Regional Development .
In its estimates , the Commission evaluated the need for finance and , in harmony with the threshold values of the Interinstitutional Agreement and the terms of the financial perspective , took into account the likely applications for the current period .
Thus , logically , the commitments within the framework of the Structural Funds for 2008 increase by 0.9 % , and payments by 3.2 % , while monies for the Cohesion Fund increase by 14.4 % for commitments and 36 % for payments .
Since the Commission is , in fact , the only institution that has unrestricted access to the required information in connection with overall financial requirement , our Committee was guided by the Commission 's proposal and also unanimously and immediately corrected unjustified amendments undertaken by the Council in its draft budget .
Above and beyond our amendments , we also simplified the administration and made the use of the funds more efficient , particularly against a background of the Lisbon and Göteborg goals .
We focused on the unique status of small and medium-sized enterprises and traditional small business activities such as research and development .
Not least , we considered it important to make special mention of the JEREMIE and JESSICA initiatives , to mention but two of the many key points in regional policy .
We also support the Commission in facing the future demographic challenges in Europe , particularly that in some regions and even in entire Member States , population ageing has become a major problem due to declining birth rates .
Family values must be promoted , for example by helping young women to balance family and career responsibilities .
This is forward-looking policy , which must also be reflected in the key areas of regional policy .
( NL ) Mr President , a Europe anchored in solidarity : that is what we want .
The 2008 budget contains some new elements that further demonstrate this .
A more modern budget is also needed , however : one that is in keeping with the knowledge-based economy - and anchored in solidarity .
At the initiative of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , more financial assistance is to be provided to Palestine and Kosovo .
This is essential , however complex .
There are other issues , too , where Europe must show solidarity .
Support is needed for the Global Health Fund and for my initiative to reinforce sexual and reproductive health and rights in poor countries , examples being the reduction of maternal mortality and the right to an abortion .
This supports the emancipation of women , thus aiding the development of poor countries .
Solidarity is also relevant when it comes to the reorganisation of the EU budget .
The best way of doing this , of course , is to reduce agricultural subsidies , which is eminently feasible now that prices are high .
Europe must invest in new technology , and Galileo has shown that there is room for another budget .
We can live with lower agricultural subsidies , whilst Galileo stands for increased employment and innovation .
( SV ) Thank you Mr President .
The adoption of the budget each year is one of the most important duties we MEPs have .
It is one of the few opportunities we have to send a very clear , collective message about what kind of EU we in Parliament want to see .
Generally , I think that it is good that an increasing number of my fellow Members here in the Chamber seem to see the importance of holding back EU funds , but there is still much to be done .
I think that it is important for us to set the right priorities in the budget , but the work on monitoring the money and its use is as important as budgeting for the right purposes .
If we are doing it today , I think that unfortunately in many areas we are seeing that some of our money almost does more harm than good .
In addition , the institutions must develop the EU 's accounting system so that it is easier to understand and monitor the money , so that we can see both beforehand and afterwards how it is actually spent .
It is a question of transparency .
Personally , I would hope that the 2008 EU budget would signal more clearly an EU that prioritises , an EU that focuses on its core task - to create free movement of goods , services , persons and capital .
But unfortunately this year 's draft budget leaves much to be desired in this respect .
Let me just take a few brief examples : grants for silkworm breeding , bee-keeping , cotton farming , energy crops , figs , hemp , nuts , olive groves , rice cultivation , and tobacco .
Export subsidies for cereals , sugar and products from the wine sector .
Altogether , these budget headings amount to more than EUR 1 858 436 000 .
Aside from the fact that the budget headings , in my view , are an incredible waste of European taxpayers ' money , they are doing more harm than good .
They affect people outside the Union .
Nevertheless , one of the most serious examples is , I think , the EU 's export assistance for agriculture , where the EU subsidises its own agriculture sector and thereby dumps goods and prices on the markets of poor countries .
This invalidates the poor countries ' natural competitive advantages and is a serious obstacle on their path to prosperity .
We have to do something about this , not in 2013 but next year . Thank you .
Chairman of the Committee on Budgets . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgets recommends for the first reading in the Plenary a 2008 budget of EUR 129.6 billion for commitments and EUR 124.2 billion for payments , with strict observance of all our agreements and commitments , both from the multi-annual programmes and the financial perspective and , I might add , well below the ceilings that we agreed in this multi-year plan , in a spirit of budgetary discipline and , at the same time , linked with an offer to the Council to resolve current issues such as Galileo and the financing of foreign and security policy sustainably .

I would like to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs , Mr Itälä and Mr Virrankoski , who , together with the coordinators and staff , did an excellent job preparing for the first reading .
Firstly , the Parliament budget .
Between the vote by the Committee on Budgets and the vote in the Plenary , a process of conciliation has been under way in consultation with the Bureau of this House , with close involvement by the administration .
As part of this process , we were able to resolve several contradictory positions judiciously and satisfactorily .
However , I would like to add at this point that a Bureau and an administration must be willing to face questions and criticism from the Committee on Budgets , as that is part of our task .
Part of the conflict that we discuss every year was able to be resolved by creating a deadline of two to three weeks between presentation of the administrative proposal on the Parliament budget and the decision by the Bureau , to enable the Groups to be listened to more closely at the beginning of the process rather than at the end of the procedure .
Commissioner , in your letter dated 17 October , you again laid out the implementation of the budget as at the end of September .
You showed where it was working well and where it was running into difficulty , where some programmes had possibly been implemented too late , and where the Commission itself had practised a little too much micromanagement regarding other questions for the Member States .
However , overall , the report showed implementation has improved since the May report .
If the Commission now wishes to remain credible , it can no longer claim late implementation or other difficulties for 2008 to justify being in arrears with payments or commitments in the implementation of the 2008 budget .
Today we can say that , with the agreement between the institutions on the agencies - starting with the German Presidency and concluded by the Portuguese Presidency - and thanks to the exceptional work done by our permanent rapporteur Jutta Haug , the development of the agencies has been firmly re-established so that , in future , no agencies will be set up without adequate cost-benefit analyses and without clarifying whether they add any value .
Therefore this must be continued in the code of conduct that is being agreed for the executive agencies .
At this point , Commissioner , I must also say that this year , we dealt very circumspectly with the Commission 's administration budget , but that does not have to be the case every year .
However , the continued assessment of staff positions , screening , development - prudently and without exaggeration , but carried out very transparently - those stay on the agenda for us .
Mr President , we have taken a very clear position on Galileo .
When we talked about the Reform Treaty this morning and gave it solid support , then in future that will be called the Community method .
If Member States believe they can rely on a hodgepodge of financing or on financing outside the Community budget then , in the light of this development in Europe , that is simply absurd and does not make sense .
In my second point I would like to speak about the financing of the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
Without Parliament , the CFSP would already be bankrupt , for we would have to front up with approximately EUR 90 million , according to the Decision of the Heads of State or Government in December 2005 .
When I now hear that we may have to go well beyond what the Council and the Commission put forward to us , with Palestine and Kosovo to be added as well , then we are prepared to find a way through .
Obviously we will also have to talk about the flexibility instrument , on the basis of the vote .
This also applies to further acknowledgement of Parliament 's interests , as expressly - and correctly - called for by the Committee on Development .
The Presidency must realise that , with the exception of Galileo and the Common Foreign and Security Policy , everything can be decided by Parliament on its own .
Therefore my urgent recommendation : the Council needs to get a sufficient mandate so that we can put both Galileo and the Foreign and Security Policy on a firm footing - hopefully not only for 2008 .
If this is not achieved , then we are all going to have to have further sittings during the 2008 budget .
The door is open for all negotiations , but we expect a clear signal from the Council that it is taking action on these two key questions .
Either way , from the point of view of this Parliament , there will be a 2008 budget .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 25 October 2007 .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - We must demonstrate to the European taxpayer that the EU 's budget is value for money and represents sound financial management .
Therefore , the EP 's continued monthly commute to Strasbourg totally contradicts this , especially with our focus on climate change .
Whilst I welcome the comments in the Itälä report on greener use of transport , these hardly tackle the scale of the problem .
We urgently need to act as pioneers and set a real example .
On the Virrankoski report , I am disappointed by the level of funding for poverty reduction programmes to the poorest regions , including Asia .
If the EU is to have credibility as a global power it needs to put its money where its mouth is .
Whilst I welcome the support for Palestine and Afghanistan , in the case of the latter , the EU strategy needs greater collaboration with neighbouring countries India and Pakistan to achieve long-term success .
Furthermore I regret the proposed reduction to CFSP funding , especially in Kosovo .
This should not be delayed or underfunded .
Finally , I support the emphasis on the Lisbon Agenda creating jobs and increasing skills .
These initiatives will really bring added value from the EU to the people I represent in the West Midlands .
( The sitting was temporarily suspended )
Membership of Parliament : see Minutes
Commission Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0318 / 07 ) .
We wanted today , and I think some colleagues are aware of this , to try a little experiment in order to make Question Time a little more friendly and interactive .
I would therefore invite all Members of this House to come forward to the front row of seating so that we can be a little more friendly amongst ourselves and the Commission .
Please , come forward to the front seats rather than sitting right at the back .
I can see that some of you are still shy .
Come on , it should be fun to have an experiment !
The following questions are addressed to the Commission .
First part
Subject : Child abduction
In the light of the number of cases of child abduction and disappearances , what measures is the Commission proposing to coordinate Member States ' means of preventing and punishing these types of acts throughout the European Union ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The Commission fully agrees on the importance of combating the disappearance and abduction of minors .
Enhancing children 's rights , as you all know very well , is one of my personal priorities .
The first action undertaken by the European Commission in relation to this was to support , in 2001 , the creation of a European network of organisations , the European Federation on Missing and Sexually Exploited Children , which is now called Missing Children Europe .
To date , we have 21 organisations in 15 Member States .
Then , with the financial backing of our Community programme , the Daphne Programme , several centres were created or revamped from 2001 to 2005 , with the aid of Child Focus .
Several Member States have , over the last 10 years , set up emergency call lines in order to speed up searches and support families of missing children .
Cases of missing children and abduction can quickly become , and still become , cross-border phenomena .
We therefore propose to have a single telephone number for urgent calls about missing children .
To that end , the Decision of 15 February 2007 on reserving the national numbering range beginning with ' 116 ' for harmonised numbers for harmonised services of social value will be implemented .
This is an important decision by each Member State , particularly in relation to the 116000 number for hotlines to report missing children .
You know that putting in place the services corresponding to a 116 number remains the responsibility of Member States .
There , unfortunately , I have to say that three Member States have not yet responded .
Legal measures have been taken by 17 Member States .
There have been calls for candidates for the management of the hotline numbers in 12 Member States , and only four Member States have so far chosen service providers : Belgium , Denmark , Greece and Portugal .
So I am not at all satisfied at the state of play in implementation of the decision taken in February 2007 .
In addition to these emergency phone numbers , a mechanism of assistance in the search for missing children is necessary .
Several systems already exist and can serve as an inspiration for a Europe-wide action .
You know about the American system , ' Amber Alert ' , the French ' Alerte enlèvement ' and the Greek ' Amber Alert Hellas ' system , which are already in place .
We support Member States in putting similar mechanisms in place nationally .
Provided that all Member States adopt such mechanisms and that interconnection schemes are put in place , resolving cross-border cases would be possible and easier .
To that end , we have drafted guidelines describing our idea for a Europe-wide child alert mechanism .
The issue was discussed for the first time at the informal Justice and Home Affairs Council on 1 October 2007 .
Finally , we support the creation of an international database of child abuse images , which will be a new tool to help identify victims and criminals .
The feasibility study and implementation phase are funded by the AGIS programme and , since September 2005 , this database used by Interpol is funded mainly by G8 governments and private companies .
So far this database has made it possible to locate and arrest several criminals in Europe and outside Europe , most recently a very well-known paedophile in Thailand , and save victims .
- ( ES ) Madam President , thank you very much for enabling us to be face to face with the Commissioner , whom I have already asked many questions on similar matters .
The issue of missing children is a distressing one .
For example , in my islands alone , the Canaries , three children have disappeared in recent years without a trace , meaning that they have not even appeared in paedophile networks .
They disappear completely , which leads us to wonder whether these children are used for certain purposes such as , for example , trade in organs , and whether mafia organisations with possible international connections are operating within the European Union .
This makes me think that this is a matter that requires an initiative that is somewhat more ambitious than those that the Commission has undertaken so far .
I know that the Commissioner has always been ambitious , but I also invite him to be ambitious in this area , as it is a distressing matter for parents and for society in general , because children are the most precious thing that we have .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Mr President , Mr Medina , I fully concur with your wishes and I can tell you how dissatisfied I am to see that even when we adopt initiatives , the Member States do not implement them .
The idea of a single telephone number in Europe for urgent calls should have been specifically implemented by each Member State by the end of September .
This is now the end of October , and only four Member States have a functioning system ; the other 17 have adopted initiatives but are still lagging behind .
The other proposal that we want to make is for closer cooperation to monitor what is commonly referred to as ' sex tourism ' .
Unfortunately many European citizens apparently travel as tourists to other parts of the world to commit horrible acts of paedophilia , and in this area I agree that international collaboration must be stepped up .
I agree with you - and sadly we have proof - that missing children are often used for organ trafficking .
Unfortunately this applies not only to my own region , but to other regions very close to the European Union , such as the Balkans , Eastern Europe and the Black Sea .
Unfortunately , organ trafficking is a reality , not to mention the discovery of organ trafficking of adults and children from the Far East and South-east Asia .
Obviously , even though this is an area which until now national governments have not been willing to hand over to the EU , it may soon be handled more effectively by the European Union , partly as a result of the adoption of the agreement on the new institutional treaty .
( EL ) Madam President , may I ask the Commissioner if it is certain that in all Member States births of children are being declared ?
Is the number of children crossing the borders of the EU being recorded , so that their possible disappearance or the use of their organs can be made known ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Yes , you are right .
We have discovered cases of children not yet registered at border crossings , and that is why I attach great importance to identification .
Identification means helping the countries of origin , either within the EU - though I do not think that is the case - or especially in neighbouring and partner countries , where there is sometimes a lack of control regarding registers , and where children who are not yet registered , or not registered at all , are a matter of particular concern to me .
That is precisely why we have decided to aid strategic projects to help and strengthen the civil registry capabilities of partner and neighbour countries , partly through European funding programmes .

( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , in your examples , you specifically mentioned that four Member States had set up emergency call lines .
There have been other issues - I remember the situation with the tsunami at that time - in which those who came into this area , for example to indulge their inclination for paedophilia , were protected by data protection and their relatives and the authorities were unaware who was really affected here .
Is it not time to stop pussyfooting around and start naming these Member States ?
' Naming and shaming ' would be a suitable method of prompting these Member States to do what they should , so that they finally demonstrate better behaviour .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I have already said that I am not at all satisfied with the level of implementation and , so far , only four Member States have implemented this decision .
This decision now has to be implemented by all the Member States .
The fact that only four Member States so far are implementing a decision unanimously taken in February 2007 shows that we have to do much more .
Concerning the right balance between protecting the confidentiality of data , or the protection of privacy of data , and the fight against paedophilia , when we talk about paedophiles and crimes and the abuse of children , from my personal point of view I am on the side of the victims - the children - and I am not on the side of the criminals .
So , provided that all the guarantees are acknowledged , we should first of all support the victims and parents , not the suspected criminals .
Member of the Commission . - Actually , I had some problems pronouncing it myself .
To begin with , I had hoped it would be eradicated without my having to learn how to pronounce it , but unfortunately it is becoming persistent so we now have to discuss the issue .
First of all , I had the opportunity yesterday , during the one minute speeches , to hear the Honourable Member 's intervention on this issue , and I share his concerns .
One could say that , relatively speaking , we have a low number of infections - for example , about 250 in Italy as compared to more than 150 000 on the island of Réunion a few years ago .
However , the worrying thing is the trend .
What is actually raising our concerns is the fact that we now have tropical diseases spreading in Europe as a combination of climate change , which of course helps the proliferation and survival of the vector , and at the same time increased mobility , which allows the introduction of the virus via the movement of people coming from the tropics .
It was important for us to take immediate measures .
From the beginning the Italian authorities reacted correctly , rapidly and effectively , so one can now say that the situation is at a much lower level , even though we still have on-going cases .
The first thing the Commission did was to take various measures , using existing instruments or adjusting these to deal with the situation .
First of all we made sure that we offered technical support through the European Centre for Disease Control , once again proving the wise choice of the European Union in establishing such a centre .
We now had to deal with this new threat and new form of challenge .
We adapted our legislation and included vector-borne diseases in the list of diseases to be addressed as a priority .
At the same time we asked Member States - and this is a legal obligation on them - to notify the Commission and other Member States through the early-warning response system .
It is very important to be able to detect cases as soon as possible in order to prevent the spread of the disease .
The European Centre for Disease Control ( ECDC ) , in addition to the case definitions , also produced standard operating procedures and is updating them regularly .
Very importantly , we upgraded and strengthened laboratory capacity in order to detect and identify the chikungunya virus .
We did this through the European Network for Diagnostics of ' Imported ' Viral Diseases , which is funded under the public health programme .
Also , through the same programme , we are funding joint activities with Member States to further strengthen preparedness for public health emergencies .
We had the opportunity to discuss in plenary a communication and action plan on generic preparedness , which was adopted in 2005 .
The system is in place and we can use it of course , and it has been used , but we will of course adapt it and adjust it to be able to deal with this form of health threat as well .
Information for the public is very important , and is something we also do through the ECDC , both for the areas affected and also for travellers .
Technical guidance documents on the rapid detection of cases of chikungunya fever are in place , as the cornerstone for an effective epidemiological surveillance .
Also , the ECDC has produced a robust package of technical guidance documents : information for health care workers ; case definitions for chikungunya fever ; and flow charts for identification of cases .
These are available and are currently being used by the competent authorities to facilitate decision-making processes at national level .
We are also dealing immediately with the issue of blood safety , which is an important factor as well , with the cooperation of the national competent authorities .
However , if the situation persists , my services are ready to adopt a new donor-deferral rule for this disease as well .
The new public programme and other instruments will also fund research in addressing many issues related to vector-borne diseases , as we also need to look at the issue of the insects themselves , and of course at global change through projects like Eden , which concerns emerging diseases in a changing European environment .
All this demonstrates how climate change has an immediate effect on health .
In parallel , I should mention that we also have problems in animal health which have developed because of climate change .
The European Commission is planning to adopt a communication next year dealing with that aspect of climate change too .
( SK ) Commissioner , thank you for your competent reply and congratulations to the Italian authorities for their appropriate action .
Looking at the whole matter , I find it somewhat strange that no vaccine against the chikungunya virus is available yet , even though , according to some data , up to 1 million people were infected with the virus in Africa .
I understand this to some extent when it comes to bird flu because in that case a virus that can be transmitted has not been isolated yet and therefore we cannot develop a vaccine .
However , in this case we seem to have a virus that can be identified by serologic and other methods , and a serum or vaccine against it could now be developed .
If the virus happened to spread , such a serum or vaccine would be an effective treatment against the chikungunya virus and perhaps also against an even worse infection : dengue fever .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission is fully aware of the scale of the humanitarian needs inside Iraq and its neighbouring countries .
The Commission 's response to this crisis is twofold .
Firstly , in order to support the refugees from Iraq and neighbouring countries , the Commission has immediately responded with the financial decision on EUR 6.2 million in humanitarian aid , adopted in May 2007 , to address the most urgent needs of the refugees .
That assistance will be further increased to EUR 7 million by the end of 2007 .
The Commission has engaged with the governments of Syria and Jordan , which bear most of the burden of the refugee crisis , to develop assistance programmes .
Those governments have clearly indicated that they were not in favour of external humanitarian assistance programmes , implemented via international organisations and NGOs .
They expect the international community to support their national systems , mainly in the fields of education and health , as these systems also benefit Iraqi refugees .
Consequently , the Commission has identified quick impact projects for a total of EUR 37.7 million , for which the Commission is in the process of consulting Member States .
All these actions form the Commission 's immediate response to the refugees ' most pressing needs .
The Commission realises that they only partially alleviate the enormous suffering and the pressure on the institutions and social fabric of neighbouring countries , and that is why it is currently further developing its response strategy in order to match it with appropriate funding .
Secondly , as far as the situation inside Iraq is concerned , the Commission is supporting the International Committee of the Red Cross with , so far , EUR 4 million , and is currently identifying additional solid and acceptable partners operational in Iraq with a view to increasing its level of assistance .
It has to be acknowledged that while there are significant humanitarian needs , there are also significant impediments to the delivery of humanitarian aid .
These are severe security concerns and problems of access that prevent the Commission and any other donor from allocating funds which are truly commensurate with the level of needs .
There is in fact a dearth of humanitarian partners able to operate and implement programmes inside Iraq that properly address the needs of the most vulnerable people .
Finally , the Commission would like to recall that it is the main financial contributor to the international reconstruction fund facility for Iraq , with a contribution of EUR 123 million .
That is , by the way , 46 % of the total contributions to date .
Since 2003 , the Commission has committed over EUR 800 million in Iraq .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , thank you very much for your clarifications , but may I remind you that Iraqi refugees in Egypt are already estimated to number 200 000 ; the European Commission is not offering anything for Egypt .
The University of Amman has just conducted a study which estimates that Jordan has more than a million refugees - an absolutely catastrophic macroeconomic impact ; the European Commission is not taking any steps to address this .
Even Israel is setting up a quite remarkable medical assistance programme for Iraqi children .
As for Syria , I am not a party to the talks that the Commission has been holding with Syria , but I have often spoken with the Syrian authorities : the fact is that they already have perhaps 2 million more inhabitants .
Today , Madam President , allow me just to remind you of this , today , right now , in Rabiah , on the border between Syria and Iraq , a huge humanitarian disaster is developing : thousands of Iraqis , who heard a rumour that the borders were about to open , have gathered there and cannot enter .
The situation is absolutely tragic and we can no longer ignore what is going on .
I think we all share your concern , but our rules allow half a minute for supplementary questions .
Member of the Commission . - I have already mentioned that the governments , especially the Syrian Government , which the honourable Member referred to , have clearly indicated that they were not in favour of external humanitarian assistance programmes implemented via the international organisations and NGOs .
So the amount of assistance provided reflects the reluctance of the Syrian and Jordanian authorities to let international non-state actors , such as the UN and NGOs , intervene in their respective countries .
Our assistance can only be directed through organisations that are accepted by the local authorities and have sufficient operational capacity .
This imposes a natural limit on what we can do .
We are , however , working on capacity-building programmes and engaging in direct dialogue with the Jordanian and Syrian authorities to strengthen our implementing capacity in these countries .
It should be noted , if I may say so , that the Iraqi Government itself seems very reluctant to assist its neighbours .
The Iraqi Government has repeatedly declared it will allocate USD 25 million to assist Iraqi refugees .
However , although commitments were made at the Sharm el-Sheikh Conference last May and relations were strengthened between Iraqi , Syrian and Jordanian officials , it seems as though Iraq is not cooperating sufficiently .
We therefore have to ask the Iraqi Government to assume at least its financial responsibility for its own citizens .
The lack of coordination among UN agencies in managing humanitarian crises is of high concern .
We note strong competition - and it is awful to say so - between the UN humanitarian agencies , instead of close cooperation .
We hope that the appointment of a new humanitarian coordinator will improve the ability of our UN partners to address the crisis .
( LT ) Recently Turkey , a candidate for EU membership , launched military action against Iraqi Kurds in Iraq .
What is your view on this ?
What impact could this action have on the situation in Iraq ?
Would any aid be required and what is the Commission 's opinion on Turkey 's action ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - It has been drawn to the attention of the honourable Member that the detailed answers provided below relate only to the Commission , which is of course by far the major employer amongst European institutions .
One of the purposes of Directive 1999 / 70 / EC concerning the framework agreement on fixed-term work is to establish a framework to prevent the abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term employment contracts or relationships .
To prevent abuse , clause 5 ( 1 ) obliges Member States , where there are no actual legal measures to prevent abuse , to introduce one or more of the following measures to prevent abuse arising from the use of successive fixed-term contracts :
objective reasons justifying the renewal of such contracts and relationships ;
the maximum total duration of fixed-term contracts or relationships ;
the number of renewals of such contracts or relationships .
The rules governing the employment of staff in the European Institutions are laid down in the Staff Regulations , which were discussed with staff representatives before being adopted by the Council .
The European Institutions are thus bound by law to respect the provisions of these Staff Regulations .
The Staff Regulations allow the European Institutions to recruit three main types of staff : permanent officials , temporary agents and contract agents .
Temporary agents and permanent officials occupy a post in the establishment plan .
There is no limit to the level of responsibility which permanent officials and temporary agents can exercise .
The situation for contract agents is different .
They do not occupy a post in the establishment plan and they must work under the supervision of a permanent official or a temporary agent .
There are two distinct categories of contract agents .
One category of contract agent was created to perform tasks which are non-core and which do not necessarily need to be performed by an official .
Such contract agents can be offered permanent contracts so their tasks can be considered as permanent in nature .
The spirit of Directive 1999 / 70 / EC is followed for such staff as they are generally offered a first contract for a fixed term , an extension for a fixed term and a third contract for an indefinite period .
In some cases a permanent contract can be offered directly upon recruitment .
There are currently around 2 300 such contract agents working for the Commission around the world , mainly in delegations , representations and administrative offices .
A second category of contract agents exists to cover temporary or specialist needs not covered by existing posts , and to substitute staff temporarily absent , among others on maternity or parental leave .
By limiting to three years the maximum total duration of successive , fixed-term employment contracts in any one institution , the staff regulations give de facto effect to clause 5 ( 1 ) ( b ) .
Such contract agents represent approximately 15 % of the total staff .
It is clear that permanent officials are the mainstay of the Commission staff .
Contract agents provide valuable support on a temporary basis to the work of Commission officials .
There are currently around 3 200 such contract agents working for the Commission in its different sites .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the Commissioner for his reply .
May I also ask him whether in the case of contract agents , or auxiliary staff as they were once known , the previous years of employment will count as years of service ?
If this is so , do their previous years of service count for more in a competition for a job than the qualifications of other applicants who have succeeded in the competition but as yet remain unappointed ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Of course , the contract agents ' relationship with the employer is based on the contract which , at the same time , must be in accordance with laws and the labour market in these places , so there is no seniority system as we have in the case of permanent officials .
Therefore , this is a contract which is based on the conditions on the labour market and we have successfully recruited a lot of good contract agents .
( DE ) Commissioner , I am sure you understand that the way the staffing of the European Union develops in future is a great challenge for us .
Therefore it is very important to Parliament that we are told not only the number of employees and recruitment offices - for I believe you have described these employees as full-time equivalents - but also the exact amounts that are planned for each of the categories and how they are distributed between the countries .
Could you provide us with those statistics ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Pension rights and the pension system are , of course , one of the most complicated things in all Europe .
First of all , it should be mentioned that the 2007 budget provides for 23 198 posts for the Commission .
This question contains two sub-questions : on the action taken by the Commission in terms of recruitment in order to limit the implications of the growing number of EU officials on the budget and on the impact of the growing number of EU officials on pension costs .
For the first sub-question , it must be recalled that the reform of the Staff Regulations was put in place in 2004 , inter alia , in order to curtail budgetary costs linked to the increase in institution staff .
The new career and promotion structure and the new staff category of contractual agents were introduced with a view to having a positive impact on the budget .
On the other hand , the honourable Member might be aware that , during the 2007 budgetary procedure , the European Parliament asked the Commission to carry out a substantive screening exercise providing a mid-term evaluation of its staff needs and a detailed report on the Commission 's staffing for support and coordination functions .
The European Parliament also wanted to be informed about the Commission 's intentions concerning staff redeployment to address the priorities of the new Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management and , more particularly , those policies supported by Parliament during the negotiations .
As a result of the screening of the Commission 's human resources carried out at the request of the European Parliament , the Commission confirms the need identified in 2002 and 2005 for additional staff exclusively in relation to enlargement-related tasks : 890 new staff for 2008 , broken down as 640 new staff for EU-10 enlargement and 250 posts for EU-2 enlargement .
For 2009 , there is a confirmed need for a last wave of 250 posts for EU-2 enlargement .
The Commission endorses the decision to maintain stable staffing once all enlargement-related personnel are integrated , with no requests for new posts for the period 2009-2013 .
The Commission commits to meet new staffing needs in key policy areas exclusively through redeployment within and between departments .
The Commission is committed to delivering the highest standards of value for money to the citizens it serves , delivering high quality service through increased efficiency .
The Commission has already shown its commitment to these goals in practice .
Over the period 2000-2007 , figures show that the increase of establishment plan posts within the Commission is lower than in the other institutions .
For the second sub-question , it should be noted that the recruitment for the period 2004-2008 due to enlargement will only have an effect on the pension costs in 30 years , meaning that , in the near future , enlargement will have no impact on pension costs .
Nevertheless , the Commission is extremely attentive to the growth of pension costs in the coming years .
In the budget pension costs were expected to increase by 10 % in 2008 .
This is due to exceptional circumstances .
The higher-than-average increase in 2008 is a normal rebound after the lower-than-average increases for both 2006 and 2007 .
There will be the first round of departures of contract agents , whose contribution will have to be transferred to another scheme , and 3 % annual expected increase of salaries and pensions .
Even with this exception , we estimate that the growth rate of pensions for the 2007-2013 period is compatible with an 8.5 % average increase in expenditure taken into account for the 2007-2013 financial framework .
Concerning the long-term financial effects of the current wave of recruitments , the impact was analysed when preparing the reform of the Staff Regulations .
Measures have been taken to reduce the pension costs and the Staff Regulations require that the pension contribution rate paid by the employees , currently 10.25 % , is updated yearly so that it corresponds to one-third of the total contribution required to guarantee the long-term equilibrium of the Community pension schemes .
( NL ) Madam President , I am a municipal councillor in a Belgian municipality with 13 000 inhabitants .
The supervisory authority does not approve the budget of this small municipality unless a staffing requirement schedule is supplied , complete with detailed budget .
A 16 % increase in the number of officials for some years , as in the EU , would never be authorised ; nor would an increase in pension costs of more than 10 % in one year .
The Commissioner has pointed to enlargement , but despite that enlargement the number of MEPs has been reduced .
My question is : does the Commissioner not think that it is high time to also consider a freeze on the number of staff , in spite of possible further enlargement ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - Yes , but as I said there will be a staff freeze after the enlargement , so this comparison with a municipality is not a similar situation .
We have a big political project - the enlargement of the European Union - and we have taken on new officials .
This has been the same model as during all previous enlargements .
We have been quite successful in recruiting people from new Member States , and this will be frozen .
After that , the overall number will be frozen .
Commissioner , they say in Brussels that if you pass all those tests and exams and you are admitted to the European Commission as an official , then you will in any case have a quiet life until your pension .
So I would like to ask about the quality of those who are working in the European Institutions .
Perhaps the Commission has some plans to make the lives of those who are not very industrious more difficult , to have some attestations and to make a clear difference between those who are doing their best and those who have too quiet and easy a life .
Vice-President of the Commission . - I can with pleasure provide you with all the details of our career development system , which is one of the most complicated systems in the world , I must say , and which is a matter for constant debate .
There is a yearly evaluation of every single official .
There is a promotion system which takes account of this evaluation and offers a certain number of points , which , consequently , form the basis for promotion .
This system is quite detailed and developed .
You are right also in asking about the quality of the staff .
Concerning the average open competition or ' concours ' , there are approximately 42 serious applicants - not to mention other applicants - to each published post .
This is the case during the year , so we have always had a large influx of very good and experienced people , and the recruitment tests are very difficult .
I must say that it is not such an easy life inside the Commission and not so calm and quiet until pensionable age .
However , you are also right to state that most officials will really work a very long time in the Commission , and this can also be considered an advantage for the Commission .
( DE ) You have mentioned the staff screening exercise several times today .
One of the results of the staff screening was that the task of 32 % of the Commission 's staff is to administer the administration , that is , to provide administrative support and coordination .
That is 11 000 people !
Question : when are you going to draw some conclusions from these numbers ?
When are you going to produce an action plan for reducing staff numbers ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - I am sorry that I cannot answer in Finnish immediately , but we can have further discussions in Finnish .
I am a little afraid of not using the right terminology , which must be so exact in the European Union .
Like the Council , the Commission has concluded an agreement with its staff trade unions , putting a certain amount of human resources at their disposal .
In the case of the Commission , on the basis of the resources agreement of 2001 and annual resources protocols , 12 so-called secondment posts are granted to the trade unions on a permanent basis out of a total of more than 23 000 posts at the Commission .
Such secondments to trade unions , on the basis of their representativity , have been allowed since 1989 .
Furthermore , a very limited number of posts are granted on a flexible basis , in particular in order to account for changing majorities after elections .
The staff thus put at the disposal of the trade unions continue to be paid a salary from the EU budget as Commission staff .
In addition , the trade unions receive a budget which allows them to recruit up to nine contractual agents from Function Group II ( secretaries ) .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , as far as I recall you were a trade union leader in your country and trade union activity must surely be of interest to you on account of your background .
I did not receive a precise answer to my question of how many of these trade union employees presently work for the Commission in total in all the trade unions represented ?
I have an additional question relating to this matter .
There is a rumour going around that the Commission would pay its employees a salary during a strike .
Have the unions succeeded in negotiating a solution where if they go on strike they will get paid while it is on ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FI ) I can , in fact , answer the question from my own knowledge of the situation .
There are 12 seconded experts in the Commission 's trade union .
In addition , there are 19 positions on the staff committees , which are of course separate bodies .
They may employ a total of nine secretaries .
What you said about strikes is partly true .
It is true that the Commission has agreed a negotiated solution that during a strike officials may be paid some of their salary , but normally not all of it .
For me it is something of a delicate matter that people who are on strike get paid half their salary .
( DE ) Commissioner , I would be interested to know how much these functionaries are costing .
What does it cost per year ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - The budget for the trade unions is approximately EUR 500 000 per year , which is given from the Community budget .
Can I again remind those Members who have joined us in the interim , we are trying an experiment today and I would ask you to come to the front of the Chamber .
Please do not feel shy , come and fill the front seats rather than sitting right at the back , so that it makes it a closer encounter .
Subject : Total proceeds from fines imposed on businesses under competition rules
Can the Commission indicate the sum total of the fines it has imposed on businesses under European competition rules since the beginning of its current term in office and whether any measures have been taken or whether there have been any consultations within the Commission with a view to reserving this money - less the relevant amounts budgeted - for additional EU activities rather than transferring the extra revenue to the Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - Since the beginning of its current term and up to the end of September 2007 , the Commission has adopted 21 decisions imposing fines on companies that have infringed the anti-trust rules .
The total fines imposed during that period amount to just over EUR 5.2 billion , 95 % of which has been imposed on cartel participants .
However , it should be borne in mind that such fines become part of the European budget only once they are final : that is , if no appeal has been lodged by the undertaking on which a fine has been imposed or when all possible appeals have been rejected by the European courts .
As companies frequently challenge the validity of the Commission decisions imposing fines , a large part of the amount mentioned above is not final , so to speak .
The possible use of the proceeds of fines for additional activities , as suggested by the honourable Member , is prevented by legal constraints .
Such use would run counter to the budgetary principle of universality as set out in Articles 17 to 20 of the current Financial Regulation .
According to that principle , total revenue covers total expenditure without any specific link between a given item of revenue and a given item of expenditure .
The basic objective of anti-trust fines as laid out in the preamble to the 2006 guidelines on the method of setting fines is to ensure deterrence , in other words to discourage companies from behaving illegally .
In time it is to be hoped that the levels of abuse , and hence the number and volume of fines imposed , will decrease as complying levels increase and we are still doing our job properly .
( NL ) Thank you for that very interesting information , Commissioner .
I should like to know whether I have understood properly : in view of the Financial Regulation , the majority of that money actually returns to the Member States eventually - is that right ?
Secondly , you tell me that - only when it is final - the money also belongs to the EU budget .
Can you tell us how much , approximately , of that large sum of EUR 5 billion can actually be termed ' final ' ?
Member of the Commission . - ( NL ) The answer to the first part of the question is a resounding ' yes ' : it returns to the Member States .
It means that a Member State 's contribution to the European budget is assessed as being lower .
Your next question was when is what part final , and that is very hard to say .
It depends in any given year on the circumstances , whether the party concerned was sensible and refrained from appealing , or decided on a rather longer path and tried to get a bit knocked off .
( DE ) Commissioner , you mentioned the amounts imposed as fines .
These fines are intended to change the behaviour of the companies upon which they are imposed .
What are your observations in this respect ?
In view of the occasion , I remember that when you commenced your role as Commissioner you gave us in the Committee on Regional Development the opportunity to discuss the de minimis rule with you .
You responded very quickly then , for which we are very grateful .
Are companies responding as quickly as you did then ?
Member of the Commission . - We hope that is a fact , but I am not 100 % sure , and certainly not sure enough to be open and honest with you .
We should take into account that it is not only the level of the fine , but also reputation , that is hopefully making a difference in the attitude of companies .
I find it interesting that now quite a number of CEOs of organisations who contact me mention that they are aware that this is real politics from the Commission , and that those who are not behaving and are abusing the rules and regulations are being confronted with a huge fine .
As you are aware , with our new fine level , that is indeed not sweet money anymore .
Having said that , they are taking the initiative within their own organisations to confront their own people , and saying that it should absolutely not be done any more in their companies .
They are confronting them , if they are not taking the right measures , and saying that if something is rotten then they should mention it to the top , and that the fact is that later on they would be fired without any form of package .
They also mention that damage to reputation , in combination with the fines , is a very important part of their attitude and their struggle to clean up the companies .
A couple of them recently mentioned that they loved to be on the front page of the Financial Times but not because of our fines .
That is indeed quite a good step forward .
( LT ) This summer Germany announced its plans to increase food prices .
At the same time Lithuanian producers have made it clear that they intend to increase food prices in the autumn , without giving any objective reasons .
Are you able to envisage cartel agreements involving international food producers ?
Food prices are increasing simultaneously in all countries without there being any increase in raw material prices .
Member of the Commission . - The Commission approved the merger of Gaz de France ( GDF ) and the Suez Group in November 2006 , subject to commitments by the parties , which allowed the Commission to conclude that the merger would not significantly impede competition .
The commitments entered into by the merging parties include , most notably , the divesture of Suez shares in Distrigas , the Belgian gas incumbent , which has , as you are aware , also entered the French market , the divesture of GDF shares in the alternative Belgian gas and electricity provider SPE and the abandonment of any control , by law or de facto , Suez has over the Belgian gas transmission network operator Fluxys .
While GDF Suez is allowed to remain a shareholder of Fluxys , specific arrangements will guarantee that the latter is managed in an independent way , and this outcome is entirely consistent with the policy objectives pursued by the Commission regarding the liberalisation of the energy markets in Europe , in particular the package of proposals of September 2007 .
The Commission decision on the merger provides that the parties must proceed with the divesture of their ownership , including a partial divesture of participation in Fluxys , and with the other commitments , including those relating to Fluxys governance , within a certain divesture period .
The parties have to fully comply with the commitments in order to legally implement the merger .
In the mean time , the parties have to respect certain obligations , which the Commission will oversee with the assistance of the monitoring trustees .
( NL ) Madam President , fortunately I can speak in Dutch .
The Commissioner is aware of Parliament 's interest in national champions : the ' level playing field ' .
I have two brief supplementary questions .
Is it the case that cross-subsidisation between the production company and the network company is now a thing of the past ?
Secondly , did I hear you say that the current proposals also fully accord with the new package you and Commissioner Piebalgs have presented ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission will analyse the planned subsidy to Volvo Cars in Ghent directly on the basis of the EC Treaty , since the matter exceeds the EUR 1 million ceiling laid down in the specific block exemption regulation on training aid .
Article 87 of the Treaty provides that aid to facilitate the development of certain economic activities , and which does not unduly distort competition , may be considered compatible with the common market .
Training aid can be permitted when it creates incentives for activities which will increase the pool of skilled workers in the European Union and which would not otherwise be undertaken .
That is the case where the training goes beyond what is normally done in the sector concerned ; for instance , because more workers are trained or because the training is more extensive .
That was the situation , for instance , in the recent Fiat case .
On the other hand , aid cannot be authorised for training that is an accessory for the good operation of the firm concerned and that would therefore be carried out even without aid .
For instance , when a car assembly plant wants to produce a new model , workers have to be trained on the new techniques and new working methods to be adopted .
Subsidising this type of training simply relieves the company from a cost it would normally bear .
Accordingly , the Commission has in the recent past partially prohibited aid in favour of several assembly plants and you are certainly aware of General Motors in Belgium and Ford Genk .
The proposed eight measures for Volvo Cars Ghent relate to the introduction of a new production platform .
The Commission cannot , at this stage , exclude that the training concerned would take place in any case and therefore would not contribute to increasing the pool of skilled workers in the EU .
Therefore , the Commission has decided to open a formal investigation that is without prejudice to the final decision in the case .
We need more time to find out what it is all about .
The Belgian authorities , the beneficiary , as well as third parties , will have the opportunity to comment and to submit information before a final decision is taken .
( NL ) Thank you for your answer , Commissioner .
Also , incidentally , congratulations on your victory against Microsoft .
Moving on to what I wanted to say , as I understand it , then , the matter is still being dealt with .
Am I right in thinking that the new interpretation of the rules on State aid for training will also contain sufficient scope for social relevance in training courses ensuring that , if training gives workers more opportunities in the global labour market , this training aid will not be regarded as a major interference in competition ?
Member of the Commission . - Climate change is one of the greatest challenges of our time ; it hardly needs restating here .
It is not a trade issue first and foremost , but there are areas where trade can help .
That is why the Commission wants the Doha Round to deliver liberalisation of environmental goods and services and also sees scope for the new generation of free trade agreements to help facilitate sustainable trade .
The Commission is aiming to negotiate an ambitious and comprehensive post-2012 climate framework .
If we succeed in including all major players , we will have gone some way , the furthest we could , to obtaining a level playing field for EU industry .
That also means that the carbon leakage - the displacement of pollution from one place to another - that might otherwise flow from a failure to reach agreement will be avoided .
Our aim is to include all major polluters in a proportionate way and not to frighten away partners from the negotiating table in Bali , and later on , by preparing trade measures for imports at this stage .
We should rather address the free rider issue when , and only if , it actually arises .
A well-designed trade policy can help the world deal with climate change by generating the wealth needed to pay for the mitigation and adaptation measures required .
Investment in trade , in both low-carbon goods and services , can carry skills and climate-friendly technology throughout the global economy , helping to address climate change at global level and in the most cost-efficient manner .
Throwing that away would be doing a disservice to climate change policy .
It should not be forgotten that our approach to climate change policy has helped put European industry at the forefront when it comes to environmental low-carbon technology .
The EU has a considerable first-mover advantage as a result .
The Stern report made clear that combating climate change makes economic sense , in addition to the numerous societal benefits , because the costs involved are lower than the costs of inaction .
Trade policy can support climate change objectives by minimising those costs and generating part of the finance required and by fostering regulatory frameworks that support investment and trade in low-carbon goods , services and technology .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner Mandelson certainly seems to respect the time limit for questions .
He hardly confines himself to formalistic replies .
Today , Commissioner , we adopted the new framework for placing plant protection products on the market .
The entry into force of this framework will have consequences on the primary production of agricultural products and by extension on the European food industry .
Can you confirm to us that imported products are subject to effective checks to see whether they comply with the strict specifications imposed on domestic production ?
Member of the Commission . - We are indeed looking at all these aspects .
But I would just reinforce the point I originally made : we want to secure the best , most far-reaching , most inclusive agreement for the post-2012 period that we possibly can .
That requires a great deal of persuasion of our trading partners , the emerging economies , who we need to persuade to buy into and sign up to the post-2012 agreement that we all agree is greatly needed and which needs to have the maximum geographical coverage .
The question we have to ask ourselves is with what tactics we can , or are most likely to , persuade emerging economies to sign up to the agreement that we want to promote .
In our view , it would not only be premature , but it would be counterproductive , to start using a stick or threats or create a scenario in which those who might be inclined to hold back would be somehow punished by some trade measure or other because they fell into the category of free riders .
If the time comes to reflect on such measures , then we would only approach that after considerable reflection and consultation , and , of course , any measure that we were even to contemplate would - and I have to stress this - need to be assessed for its WTO compatibility .
There is no question of the European Union promoting or adopting a measure that is not clearly and firmly WTO-compliant .
( DE ) Commissioner , I would like to ask another question .
My colleague Mr Papastamkos is absolutely right when he says that we must think about preventing European companies being disadvantaged if other countries do not participate in whatever follows the Kyoto system .
There are three possibilities : firstly , the European Union could be the only one to commit to continuing .
That would , of course , put companies under financial strain and disadvantage us .
The second potential scenario is that if other countries do not participate , we will not participate either , although we would then be unable to meet the climate goals we have set ourselves .
The third possibility , if the others do not join this ' Kyoto plus ' or post-Kyoto system , would be for us to pass appropriate sanctions .
What exactly might these sanctions look like ?
Can you imagine specific sanctions ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission appreciates the interest shown by Parliament in a review of the trade defence instruments ( TDIs ) and reiterates the importance it attaches to the views of Parliament in the context of the current review .
It looks forward to the report by the Committee on International Trade , which it hopes will be completed soon .
On its side , the Commission is finalising its response to the consultation process .
Indeed , the Commission held a preliminary discussion , an orientation debate , before its meeting today on this subject .
Proposals to the Council could be made in the next weeks .
The Commission intends to keep Parliament closely involved and informed on this .
The Commission has , of course , carefully examined all reactions to the Green Paper , of which there are many hundreds .
The intention now is to inform Member States and Parliament of the main reactions and suggestions received , and these will also be published .
They will be discussed by the Commission again before proposals are tabled to the Council , hopefully in the last half of November .
Most stakeholders consulted and submitting their views share the Commission 's opinion that TDIs remain essential in a globalising world economy where multilaterally-agreed competition rules are lacking .
Also , the majority of stakeholders do not see the need for a major overhaul of the TDI system .
Neither does the Commission .
However , there is also a wish for the rules to be made clearer , as well as for increased transparency and for there to be more efficient application of the instruments .
The claim that the Commission has changed its approach towards the assessment of Community interest in some recent cases is simply not true .
Each case has been examined on the basis of its own technical merits .
Some cases have raised atypical issues , but they have been resolved in line with Community legislation and within the small discretion allowed by that legislation , after thorough discussion with Member States .
Lastly , it is correct that no new anti-dumping investigations were initiated in the first half of 2007 .
However , it should be pointed out that anti-dumping investigations are industry-driven and are not initiated by us .
In other words , they are initiated on the basis of complaints from Community industry .
In the first six months of 2007 , no complaints meeting the requirements of the law were lodged .
It is not unusual that the number of initiations varies from one year to another , depending on factors such as the business cycle , over-capacity in third countries and diversion of trade as a result of trade defence measures in other world markets .
The number of initiations has also fluctuated in past years .
In 2003 , for example , the Commission initiated in total only eight new investigations , the first of which was initiated at the end of May in that year .
Also , the first semester of 2007 followed a period of exceptionally high activity at the end of 2006 .
Finally , I would draw your attention to the fact that in September 2007 two new anti-dumping investigations were initiated against imports from China : one for citric acid and another for monosodium glutamate .
( DE ) Commissioner , thank you very much for your comments .
Transparency plays an important role in this process .
When are we going to receive the evaluation of the Green Paper survey ?
Either there is no evaluation yet , in which case you would have released your paper without an evaluation , or there is an evaluation - I assume that there is - in which case it is high time that it was presented to the public and to Parliament .
Secondly , I am interested to know whether you believe it is really tenable to determine essential matters without amending the basic regulation on the basis of new principles .
Thirdly , why is it that you want to treat ' market ' and ' non-market ' economies equally ?
Fourthly , still talking about Community production , where do you see the percentage threshold for production outside the EU ?
Member of the Commission . - The Commission has undertaken a preliminary assessment of the responses to the Green Paper , and that provided the basis for our orientation discussion on the subject today .
That paves the way for an even more rigorous assessment , which will accompany the Commission 's consideration and agreement on the proposals that it wishes to submit to Member States on the basis of the review .
I can assure the honourable Member that information about the responses is - already , I believe - posted on the website of DG TRADE , but we shall also publish what is , I hope , an easily accessible version or presentation of the responses we have had to the Green Paper in order to allow good time for reflection on those responses to take place ahead of the submission by the Commission of our proposals .
The honourable Member seems to have alighted already on certain aspects of the Commission 's proposals which have not yet been submitted to or agreed to by the Commission , so I suggest , with respect , that he is slightly jumping ahead of himself in some of the assumptions that he appears to be making .
( LT ) The question I would like to ask is , obviously , based on my meetings and discussions with the industrialists of the country I represent - Lithuania .
In fact , I can reiterate what my colleague has said : there is a lot of concern about the liberalisation of the trade policy , and also a lot of criticism .
My question is : if the position remains the same , what will be the Commission 's reaction ?
What measures can the Commission be expected to take ?
Would you be inclined to listen to what business representatives have to say , or would you consider other arguments to be more important ?
Member of the Commission . - I am not quite sure what the honourable Member means by the ' liberalisation of our trade policy ' .
By definition , trade can only take place when markets are opened and trade flows are , in effect , being liberalised .
Trade does not take place behind closed borders or where economies are being converted into fortresses , so of course the Commission seeks to promote the liberalisation of trade .
The Global Europe trade policy review and strategy that was presented and agreed by the Commission and the Member States a year ago sets out very clearly the interests of the European Union , which are to maintain open markets at home , to promote and use multilateral and bilateral negotiations , to open markets abroad and to use effective trade defence measures to tackle unfair trade or unfair competition .
Those are the three legs of our strategy ; each is equally important .
The review of the third leg of that tripod is taking place after quite dramatic changes have taken place in the world economy , and indeed in the European economy , since the last review of our trade defence measures took place , which was over 10 years ago .
We have a responsibility to make sure that our measures are operating as well as they could be and that they command consensus and support and solidarity amongst our Member States .
When that weakens , the trade defence measures become less easy or possible to use .
It is in an effort to rebuild and restore that consensus , support and solidarity amongst our Member States that we are undertaking this review .
Commissioner , in order to get to one further question , I am going to take the next two supplementary questions together and ask you to deal with them both together .

( EL ) Madam President , in addition to the questions put by my colleague Mr Caspary , let me add my own question about when we will have access to the assessment of the questionnaire on the Green Paper .
Commissioner , European anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures represent less than 0.45 % of the value of total imports into the EU .
How , then , is the Commission 's haste for unilateral revision of trade defence policy justified ?
In which direction is the Commission leaning ?
Is it towards politicising the procedure or preventing people from seeking redress against unfair practices ?
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to ask a question related to the answers you have been giving .
Parliament does not acknowledge the need to review the trade defence instruments ; the public consultation reached the same conclusion .
The Commissioner has not explained to Parliament the point of his proposal and , especially , to what extent his proposals and convictions have changed on the basis of the opinion of the public hearing and the opinion of Parliament .
This is the heart of the issue , because we do not understand the point of persisting with a review of instruments that everyone thinks are useful and are working well .
This , then , is what we need to understand .

Member of the Commission . - I do not quite know what the change of direction is that the honourable Member is referring to ; there is no change of direction and , as I have made clear , neither the stakeholders responding to the review nor the Commission takes the view that a fundamental overhaul or fundamental reform is needed .
So , I am not quite sure what she means by a change of direction .
If there was no need for a review , then I think that the Green Paper that we issued would have received far fewer than the 500 responses that came in .
It would seem to indicate that a Green Paper that has over 500 responses indicates interest in a review which has taken place .
In answer to the first question , I can 't submit an assessment to this Parliament until it has been undertaken .
The Commission has not yet made its assessment ; it has not yet decided on its response .
It had a plenary discussion today and will make its views known when it submits its proposals to the Member States and , at the same time , they will be made known to Parliament , and that will be some time in the second half of November which is not very far away .
As for politicisation - politicisation of these issues is almost inevitable .
When you have European industry now representing different views and competing interests and , frankly , making very different rival submissions as to whether they want trade defence measures adopted , that is bound to be reflected in the positions of our Member States .
If the Member States chose instead simply to take at face value the objective and rigorous analysis of the Commission 's services and to adopt the conclusions and the measures we propose ; if they were prepared simply to do that , then the politicisation wouldn 't arise .
However , the Member States are subject to the same lobbying and different competing interests , amongst producers , retailers , distributors , importers and consumers , as we are .
When people have different views , those views have to be debated very broadly in a political way , through a political process , and that is what happens .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( See Annex ) .
I am sorry for those who have waited .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.35 and resumed at 21.00 )

The rise in foodstuff prices , consumer protection ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
an oral question - B6-0321 / 2007 ) concerning the rise in foodstuff prices and consumer protection by Joseph Daul , Lutz Goepel and Neil Parish , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group to the Commission ,
an oral question - B6-0377 / 2007 ) concerning the rise in foodstuff prices and consumer protection by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos , on behalf of the PSE Group to the Commission , and
an oral question - B6-0378 / 2007 ) concerning the rise in foodstuff prices and consumer protection by Sergio Berlato , Janusz Wojciechowski , Gintaras Didžiokas and Liam Aylward , on behalf of the UEN Group to the Commission .
author . - Mr President , it is with great pleasure that I stand up and talk tonight because we are in a situation now where food security has become a real issue .
For 25 years we have been in a situation where there has been plenty of food in Europe .
In fact , we have been taking many decisions in agriculture , in the common agricultural policy , to restrict production in order to maintain prices and reduce the use of export subsidies and to export products on to the world markets .
Now we are facing a situation that is completely different : cereal prices have risen threefold this year ; the livestock sector is having a huge problem , having seen its feed costs going up by perhaps 50 % or 60 % , and we are extremely concerned about this .
Mr Daul , Mr Goepel and I have tabled this oral question - and we are delighted that Commissioner Fischer Boel is here tonight - because we feel we now have to look at every opportunity for getting extra feed into the European Union .
We will have to face up to the reality that there are some feeds that are derived from GM maize and GM soya which cannot come into the European Union at the moment because they are not licensed .
I think we have to make sure that we look at this and that we have a system by which we can license these products .
Provided they are safe , they should come in to be fed to our poultry , and to our pigs in particular , as well as to our cattle , both beef and dairy , because we need to keep a very competitive industry .
We also have to look at the situation regarding supermarkets , because - do not forget - not only are we concerned at the price that the farmer receives for his or her products , but we are also interested in what the consumer has to pay .
There is no doubt that we are seeing , for instance , that only 10 % of a loaf of bread is actually made from the raw material of wheat and yet there are huge increases in the price of the loaf because the supermarkets say they are having to pay so much more for wheat .
So we need to put pressure on the supermarkets to make sure that consumers are paying the right price .
It is great that it puts European agriculture in a very strong position to face up to the brave new world , because we will need food production , we will need farmers and we need the countryside , and all these things work very well .
But , as I say , we now have to get the balance right between the cereal and livestock sectors , and that is why we have tabled this question .
We shall be delighted to hear what Commissioner Fischer Boel has to say about it .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is a pleasure to see you again here in Parliament .
As you know , we were surprised a few months ago by a change in the situation in the market for some agricultural products , which not long ago we believed to be unthinkable ; an enormous pressure on supply , with the consequences that we have been seeing .
This in turn caused a major disturbance in the livestock production sector , foreseeable consequences in the rise of consumer prices and not forgetting the FAO 's warning about the consequences for foodstuffs in many areas of the world that could result from this situation .
Let us not forget that while in Europe we spend 10-20 % of household incomes on food , there are societies where this item accounts for 90 % of income or more , and it is easy to imagine what a price rise would mean to these vast populations that are already so deprived .
Therefore we need to act , and act immediately ; and I am very pleased that the Commission has acted swiftly - and well - by taking some palliative measures , reducing the set-aside for 2008 to zero .
It is a shame we did not go further .
There are other measures that could perhaps be adopted without additional cost to the Community budget , such as advance authorisation of payments to certain livestock farmers of the aid they are entitled to , who are of course doubly affected not only by rising prices , but also by having to deal with livestock diseases , such as ' bluetongue ' , and so I think we could go a little further just now .
However , most of all we must go further in assessing and studying the situation so that we can quickly identify the measures that , in the short term , can be adopted in the immediate future .
We naturally place our trust in the sensitivity of the Commissioner and the Commission in following up this concern of ours .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , throughout Europe we are seeing across-the-board increases in the price of foodstuffs .
Market surveys carried out show how European consumers are radically changing their eating habits , being forced to change the quality and type of products that they buy as a result of the exorbitant prices .
These increases can be blamed on the one hand on the excessive number of intermediate phases that products must go through from the producer to the consumer , and on the other on the disproportionate increases applied by major supermarket chains .
One thing is certain however : the blame for these increases cannot and must not be placed on our farmers , who are the main victims of this worrying situation .
Mr President and Commissioner , we believe that today more than ever , the European agricultural model must be protected in order to shield national agricultural markets from international price fluctuations and give substance to the defence of models of production and use of the territory which are so characteristic of European agriculture .
We welcome the Council 's recent decision to ratify the proposal for zero set-aside for 2008 .
However , this does not do enough to reassure us about the worrying situation in terms of cereal stocks and the rising price of cereals on the world market .
We also need to work with the various CMOs and make good use of these mechanisms for rebalancing the market , which would help ease food prices , at least in the internal market .
We asked the Commission , in a recent question , to propose an immediate increase in milk quotas of at least 2-3 % to help stabilise the price of this staple product .
In a difficult economic climate such as this one , the European Union and the Member States have a responsibility to help consumers maintain their food purchasing power while at the same time protecting our farmers ' right to an income .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I recall what I think is an old Japanese curse : ' May you live in interesting times ' , and I think this is exactly what we are doing now .
We have seen , over the last six to eight months , prices for raw materials within the agricultural sector rocketing , as mentioned already by the speakers , but I have to say that this is happening from an historically low level .
I think this is an important reminder to all of us .
These increases in prices will be reflected on consumer prices but to a lower extent .
If I may use the example of bread , a basic commodity - and I will use a German example - if you take the price of bread in a supermarket or in a store in Germany , only 4 % of the price relates to the price of the cost of the wheat .
For the dairy sector , as has been mentioned already , a number of different measures have already been foreseen .
Milk quotas were increased on 1 April 2006 and 1 April 2007 by 0.5 % in 11 Member States .
On 1 April 2006 , eight new Member States received this restructuring reserve varying from between 2 % and 5 % of their national quota level .
On 1 April 2008 - next year - another 0.5 % will be added to the increase in the quota allocated to 11 Member States .
In addition , all market support aids have been massively reduced and , at the moment , there are no export refunds and no disposal aid at all - zero for both of them .
The market outlook report in the dairy sector will be adopted by the Commission later this year and it will provide us with the basis for a further discussion on whether we need to increase again the quota .
Moreover , I have already had the chance here to signal clearly the expiry of the milk quota system by 31 March 2015 , and indicated as well that we needed , for the period from now until 2015 , a soft landing for the abolition of the quota system .
Among the possibilities mentioned is to increase the quota system over the period and we will have the possibility to discuss this during the health check next year .
In the cereals sector there are various different reasons for the increase in prices .
I shall just say , just to be sure that there are no misunderstandings , it is not biofuels that are causing the steep increase in prices .
We use , today , less than 2 % of cereal production for ethanol in Europe , but the reasons are different : adverse weather conditions in Australia , drought in southern Europe , floods in the northern part of Europe , increasing demand from India and China , and restricted exports out of Russia and Ukraine .
Then , of course , there is the snowball effect from the very strong focus on ethanol in the United States and , therefore , a certain influence on the increase of prices in corn .
The Commission has , as mentioned already , reacted : set-aside is put to zero for the coming production year , for the sowing to take place this autumn and next spring .
Then whether to continue a zero set-aside will be a discussion to be held during the health check .
We expect that the zero set-aside could contribute to somewhere between 10 and 12-15 million tonnes , depending on the climatic conditions .
Moreover , I will submit to the College of Commissioners a proposal to the Council to suspend cereal import duties only for the current market year .
I think that those initiatives will help us to ease the pressure on the livestock farming and the consumer prices .
There are different problems for the pigmeat sector .
The pipelines are filled with meat , so there is an imbalance on the input and output in the sector and therefore the management committee decided last Thursday to introduce a private storage that I hope will help the problems in the pigmeat sector .
There are other possibilities , but I think we should try to find the right balance because , if it is only a question of prolonging the pain , then we gain absolutely nothing .
So , I think that we have reacted and I have had the possibility to thank Parliament for its quick reaction so that we could send clear signals as soon as possible to the farming sector on the zero set-aside .
I would like to come back to the GMO question in my final remarks , as I can see that my time has expired .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I would have been happy to share my time with the Commissioner , because I am interested to hear her views on GMOs , but I will be here for the entire debate .
I think it is true , because it is not the first time we have said it in this Chamber , that the unpalatable truth is that the era of relatively cheap food is over and that what has happened was not predicted either within the Commission or , indeed , globally .
The Commissioner has gone through some of the reasons why we now have this imbalance in supply and demand and I agree with her : weather , climate change , the demand from the developing countries and , yes , biofuels are impacting globally - the Commissioner has acknowledged that .
However , it is important to remember - and there were others in this House prior to my time - what your predecessor Mr Fischler said when reforming the CAP in 2003 .
He promised farmers better market prices .
Perhaps we are seeing the impact of those reforms now , and we are beginning to question those impacts because of the impact on consumer prices .
We have had positive developments on milk and cereals , but we do not have the same on the livestock sector in terms of the beef and lamb producers , chicken and pigmeat that the Commissioner has discussed .
We are asking the questions now about the volatility and whether we are happy with that volatility in demand and supply .
A major food company said to me recently that the supermarket buyers have no knowledge or interest in the economics of food production , but they are beginning to take note , and that is positive .
However , we need to monitor the power of the supermarkets and to look at whether they are passing on the price increases they are charging to the producers of food .
That is something I would urge the Commission - perhaps the Commissioner for Competition - to take a close look at .
They have refused to do it in the past .
Concerning GMOs , this is a big issue .
There is a problem in relation to the differences of approval methods between the European Union and the US and we need to look at that .
So I wait for the Commissioner 's comments on GMOs before making my points in particular .
Lastly , we cannot ignore the impact on the developing world of insecurity , particularly with the grain market , where countries that cannot afford to pay more for food are seeing a massive increase in their food bill .
We must acknowledge it in this House and we need to take it into account in our policies going forward .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during World Food Day on Tuesday 16 October , the FAO wanted to raise public awareness of malnutrition , which currently affects 854 million people throughout the world .
On this occasion , the rising price of agricultural raw materials was highlighted , particularly its impact on consumers in the developing countries - my fellow Members have spoken about this at length - but also on the populations of poor countries , which import cereals .
While in the developed countries , we spend 10 to 20 % of our household budget on food , in the least developed countries , this figure is 60 to 80 % of the budget , and a 20 % increase in the price of cereals is drastic .
This situation is made worse by the fact that some countries depend heavily on imports , and are affected by currency fluctuations , climate variations and increases in transport costs .
Commissioner , you have responded partially , but I hope there will be other measures .
What measures do you intend to take in the short and medium term , for the CAP health check , to put right this difficult situation for consumers in the North , and this even more difficult situation for those in the South , and to contribute to a global food equilibrium ?

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is important that there is now a focus on the very interesting situation that we are currently witnessing in connection with the very marked price increases for a number of agricultural raw materials .
At the same time , we know that in the areas where they have not yet taken effect , namely the pig sector , these price increases will lead to a very expensive winter in terms of food prices .
We are aware of the underlying causes : poor autumn yields , empty corn stores , etc . - I will not go into any more detail about this .
I feel that the situation we are currently experiencing should provide an opportunity for more discussion .
First and foremost , we should not be alarmed at the current price rises .
For far too long a litre of milk has cost less than a litre of cola and less than a litre of water .
It is completely unreasonable of us not to accept that food should cost what it actually ought to cost , because there is a long production time and many working hours behind the products , particularly in the milk sector .
It is also clear that there is now an opportunity to increase the production of foodstuffs in Europe .
The market is in fact demanding this of us .
The Commission has shown good initiative by removing set-aside and of course we still have the opportunity to increase production very quickly , especially in the milk sector .
We should continue the reform of the common agricultural policy from 2003 by reducing support , and we should seriously discuss further transfers of agricultural support to rural development policy .
We now have the opportunity to kick-start dynamic agricultural production in the EU , and this means that we can give farmers more freedom than they have at present to exploit the current strong demand .
Naturally , as is the tradition , we will also take care of farmers in mountainous areas and less fertile regions - that is all that is needed !
However , we must not be afraid of price rises , but instead understand and make offensive use of the situation in which we find ourselves .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , this discussion has gone crazy .
We have been talking about falling prices , lowest possible prices and all-time lows for years .
All the speakers who are now bemoaning the fact that prices are rising - finally heading upwards for once - and are calling for measures to hold back the price rises .
We should be happy that the market is functioning , with your help .
With the help of your predecessors , but also of demands made by the European Parliament , the billions of euros that were going into intervention and price stabilisation - the price pressure that ruined market prices on the world market and have caused the countries of the third world to get into difficulty - have been done away with .
Finally this circumstance has been eliminated and we are getting closer to the market , entering a situation that is being exacerbated by the use of corn to produce fuels .
There are many other reasons why such great demand exists on the market at present .
The market reacts , the price goes up and now we , here in the European Parliament , as representatives of the farmers , are asking for prices to be brought down again .
I have never been involved in anything so ridiculous in all my 20 to 25 years in Parliament !
That is why I applauded Mr Busk .
We should be delighted with this situation .
Of course we have to be watchful on behalf of those who cannot afford to buy food at normal prices .
We have to hold unjust wage rates and misguided social policies in any country accountable , but we cannot take measures to put food in the mouths of the poor at the expense of farmers who , in recent years , have left farming in their hundreds of thousands .
This is not the right way to be talking !
I am glad that we can even discuss the situation here today and that we have a market in which prices are finally increasing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is important to initiate this discussion , although , partly because of what the Commissioner has told us , we are not seeing the full scale of the problem yet .
I would like to remind the Commissioner that a few months ago , we asked for a moratorium on the discussion of amendments to the CMO in fruit and vegetables in order to pause and reflect on what was happening - and what is happening now in wine - based on a few points , which I would now like to raise .
Firstly : we are talking about harvests that have failed due to climatic events , but there is no mention of the fact that we will be dealing with this problem for years , because climate change is happening in Europe and around the world .
Fact one !
Secondly : compared to 1950 , when there were 2.5 billion of us and everyone on the planet had 0.5 hectares each , by 2020 the world 's population will have grown to 7.5 billion ( according to UN data ) with around 0.2 hectares per inhabitant available for cultivation .
I understand where Mr Baringdorf is coming from when he says that this is a fundamental problem , but I do not think that the increases we are seeing at this time are to the advantage of producers .
If we look at the difference between the cost of the product and what consumers are charged , we can see that consumers and producers are paying for a very long supply chain .
However , this is partly due to policies created here in the European Parliament , so I think the Commissioner should look carefully at the actions we are going to be setting out .
Of course , it has been important to return fallow land to production , although today what we need most of all is in-depth discussion .
When the European Community was created , action was taken to meet the food requirements of the European people .
Today , we should adopt the same policy .
We can no longer allow land to be set aside under a decoupling policy , because this leads to a loss of production and renders our questions unproductive .
Therefore , we must prepare for an in-depth discussion on whether the policies of the past few years have delivered a response to consumers and producers , or whether conversely they have created problems for both .
Mr President , I want to focus on the position in the intensive sector .
I will not take time to recount the dire straits in which many producers in that sector find themselves , rather I want to focus on what I believe the Commissioner should be doing to help .
I have four or five points to make .
First of all , I think the Commissioner should recognise that soft measures , like market promotion , are not going to be enough .
Secondly , she should face up , more than has happened to date , to the long-term impact on grain availability and prices of the rampant switch in the United States to biofuel production .
Their targets , which are very aggressive , are in truth drying up the imports that we need in that regard .
Thirdly , with intervention grain stocks at an alarming low and the ratio with usage being totally out of kilter , there urgently needs to be action to address that balance .
Fourthly , I suggest that the Commissioner needs to be more proactive in fighting for speedier approval of GM substitutes .
With respect , Commissioner , you need , on behalf of agriculture , to match the vigour of Commissioners Kyprianou and Dimas as they resist GM approvals .
Fifthly and finally , you need to put a floor in the market for our intensive sector , with export refunds extended immediately to meat and hams .
On that point I am not sure that helping private storage will solve very much in the longer term .

Mr President , let me be first of all assure Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf that I am happy to see prices going up for our farmers at last , so long as it is farmers who benefit , and not supermarket chains .
Up until now the small number of supermarket chains that dominate the retail sector in Europe have been profiteering at the expense of our farmers and producers .
In my constituency in Scotland , dairy producers have for far too long been getting GBP 0.17 per litre for milk , which is below the cost of production , while it was selling on supermarket shelves at over GBP 0.50 per litre .
That has driven many dairy farmers in my constituency out of business altogether .
We have now seen the price farmers receive for wheat go up by only 10 % , while the shelf price in supermarkets of wheat-based products has gone up by 40 % .
Once again , supermarkets are using fluctuations in price to pocket bigger profits for themselves .
That is a disgrace , and I agree entirely with Mr Parish that we should ask the Commission to start an investigation into the pricing policy of supermarket chains in order to ensure that consumers and producers get a fair deal .

( ES ) Mr President , it is clear that the rise in prices that consumers are experiencing directly in their shopping baskets is due to multiple factors , but in my speech I am only going to discuss what Mr Stevenson said .
I think that the role of intermediaries and large food retail chains is concerning .
In many cases they respond to speculative movements , so the increases in the prices of final products are greater , as has been said , in percentage terms , than the increases in the prices of raw materials .
The situation is also very concerning for producers who , in the face of the huge purchasing power of the large retail sector , are obliged to reduce their selling prices , without being able to pass on the increases in raw material or fuel prices .
I therefore think , and I support the previous speaker , that it is important for the Commission - and I would like to take this opportunity to thank the Commissioner for being here - to act and take measures : that there should be investigations and the necessary means put in place to bring an end to these practices , which are unfair , and in many cases abusive .
I think that the resolution is very timely , and that we are in time to be able to adopt measures .
( PL ) Mr President , many of those who have spoken before me have been pleased that there has been a rise in the price of foodstuffs , but we must ask ourselves whether this price is getting through to the farmer .
I have very serious concerns about this .
Many small farms are currently being closed down in line with the policy of the Commission and the European Union .
We must , however , also ask ourselves what kind of foodstuffs farmers are receiving .
They are getting beef from Brazil , sugar from South America , dodgy chickens from Asia , and thus cheap foods are pouring into our market , which is ' lowering ' prices for us , but in fact restricting production in Europe .
The question arises : are we going to have to keep on bowing down to the industrial lobby ?
Why , at the end of the day , can we not start supporting European farmers once again , at a time when a niche has appeared for us to increase this production and raise quotas for milk and starches , for example , for which there is a constant demand in Poland and other Eastern European countries .
( EL ) Mr President , the problem of bread , milk , potatoes and other foods undergoing a price hike , which in some Member States is ten times the current rate of inflation , is very acute , particularly for those on low incomes , the main proportion of whose budget goes on food .
This problem did not come out of the blue .
We know that the food sector is controlled by a few undertakings which make significant profits at the expense of producers and consumers : consumer prices are many times higher than those paid to the producers because of the large number of middlemen and the market monopoly .
For this reason there is now an increased global demand for food and animal feed ; cereals and oil seed rape are being used in the production of biofuels , not for environmental reasons but as part of the profit-making plans of the oil multinationals .
There has been a collapse in prices and EU intervention to help cereal production has diminished , and there has also been a mandatory set-aside because of the CAP .
All these factors , together , of course , with dreadful weather conditions , have drastically reduced the EU 's stocks and production .
Nonetheless , trade and industry have exploited this at the expense of farmers and consumers .
This is why food and animal feed prices have risen .
These rises have worsened the position of workers , increased the number of undernourished people and bankrupted small and medium-sized livestock farmers .
Greek livestock farmers are in despair ; they are taking action to demand substantial aid to help them survive .
The decision by the Council of Ministers on 26 September to remove the compulsory set-aside , suspend duties on imported cereals and take other measures , to which you have referred , Commissioner , will go some way towards easing the problem , but it does not solve it .
The decision suggests half-measures , which are by their very nature insufficient .
Substantial measures are required to boost and the stock of animal feed , control prices , and clamp down on cartels and speculation .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am very grateful that we can have this debate today with the Commissioner .
As commodities prices increase , people are paying more attention to agriculture again .
The situation is due , on the one hand - as already mentioned by the Commissioner and some of the previous speakers - to demand from third countries and on the other , to crop failures in traditional agricultural exporting countries such as Australia and New Zealand .
Therefore it is essential that we mobilise all the resources that we have in Europe .
I have now determined , for example during my visit to Romania , that at least a third of the total cultivatable land is lying idle , as it always has .
We have considerable resources within our Member States .
A first step would surely be to stop letting land lie fallow .
As already stated , as a farmer , I believe wholeheartedly that the first priority should be to produce healthy food , the second priority to produce fodder and the third priority to produce energy materials .
Ultimately , however , I believe that the slight price increase for our farmers does not in any way bring the price adjustment that would make up for the losses of recent decades .
As many of those who have already spoken have pointed out , we are getting perhaps 10 % more in primary materials prices , but retailers are marking that up by 40-50 % in some instances .
I am thinking of butter , for example , and this does not seem fair to me .
One way for us farmers to respond would be to organise ourselves better into producer cooperatives with production contracts , in order to meet the food retailer monopolies head on .
( HU ) The present debate clearly demonstrates yet again how widely opinions vary in this House .
I agree with Mr Stevenson , namely that this price rise means only a very small increase in income for farmers , compared with the trade sector , supermarket chains , and market speculators , who take the lion 's share .
Another problem is that cereal producers will benefit hugely from this , while livestock producers will lose a great deal .
We have an untenable situation here : certain sectors are either favoured or neglected under the common agricultural policy , and this price rise is set to make the neglected sectors even worse off , while those that are prosperous will get even richer .
I agree with Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf that the increase in prices is a good thing , but who is going to be affected by this price increase ?
These contradictions are continually increasing , and unfortunately the distortions of the common agricultural policy deepen and exacerbate these distortions .
We need to fundamentally rethink common agricultural policy , because piecemeal interventions are merely cosmetic .
There can be no normal common agricultural policy as long as livestock production , wine , vegetables and fruit , pig-meat and poultry are neglected sectors . Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , as I said last month during the debate we had in Parliament on the suspension of compulsory set-aside , which was also a night sitting , the increase in agricultural prices should provoke an in-depth discussion on the direction that the common agricultural policy is taking .
We will soon have the Communication from the European Commission on the CAP ' health check ' on the table , but I fear that in that communication the Community executive will not be bold enough to acknowledge that the liberalisation of the markets also has a price , and that European farmers and consumers are now starting to pay that price .
Many Members of this House have always favoured a dismantling of the market management measures and have contributed to projecting the negative image that European consumers have built up regarding the CAP .
As I said at the last plenary sitting , I would like to know how we are now going to explain to citizens that we scarcely have the instruments to control these rises in agricultural prices in the European Union .
It would also be interesting to ask the European Commission to estimate what the cost is going to be for European citizens of this increase in food prices and to compare this cost with the cost for each citizen of the common agricultural policy .
I would also really like to know whether or not citizens will ultimately benefit in the coming years from the liberalisation of the markets and the drastic cuts in direct aid that European farmers are suffering from .
I am going to give you a statistic which I think is very significant : before the creation of the CAP , in 1961 , the prices of raw materials for producing animal feed were twice as high as the prices paid by farmers 20 years later .
The common agricultural policy guaranteed a supply of raw materials at an affordable price and at the same time European consumers also benefited from a fair price for an essential commodity .
In a country such as mine , Spain , we are seeing rises in prices of foods as basic as milk .
I think that the economics and finance ministers of the European governments should now also be more concerned about the repercussions that this increase will have on inflation in their countries .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , all of us who are here tonight are aware of all the causes of the rise in the prices of cereals and raw materials .
Although you gave us some good reflections on what those causes are , there are , however , other issues that you tiptoed around .
As you are going to present your proposals on the CAP ' health check ' to us in November , I would prefer to tell you now what I think , and say that I hope that in this ' health check ' you will analyse whether the CAP is in line with the new requirements of the global market , because one of the principal causes of the restriction of European production has , I am convinced , been the lack of foresight by Community experts .
We need to review the current policy of extremely reduced stocks .
The Community intervention stores should , as has been said here , be the safety net for guaranteeing supply at times like these , but there are no supplies and the Community stores are empty .
I am very concerned , Commissioner , about the consequences that the rise in animal feed prices is having on European livestock farming , as it is having a very negative effect , especially on small and medium-sized farms .
Mr President , this is a very timely debate .
We all know that cereal prices have increased dramatically , and we know the reasons why .
Commissioner , it is a fact that we depend on , and still need , grain imports and substitutes from outside the European Union , mostly from the United States .
In this respect , I am concerned that it is taking so long to decide on the new strains of grain that are up for approval .
I am well aware that this is not necessarily the Commission 's fault .
It is the fault of the national governments , because they could not agree .
You are going to have to take the decision , and I hope you take it as soon as possible .
I would urge speedier approval of the new strains of grain that are in the pipeline .
As price inputs rise , the cost is inevitably passed on to the consumer .
That is not something that anyone looks forward to , but it is where we must face up to the power of the supermarkets .
I have known Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf for nearly 19 years now - ever since I have been in this Parliament .
I have to say that sometimes he gets it right and sometimes he gets it wrong ; he is wrong on this occasion .
I am not against prices going up , as long as the price comes through to the producer as well as to the processor and the consumer .
We must address not only this issue , but also the use of GM grain .
We are importing into the European Union food for our consumers to purchase in our stores when we have no idea how it was produced .
There is no traceability of these imports .
They could have been produced using any manner of means .
That is something that we must confront .
A large amount of the meat coming from Brazil , to name but one country we have discussed , is almost certainly produced using GM-grain .
How can we tell the difference ?
- ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the authors of this resolution and give them my support .
The soaring price of cereals and therefore of foodstuffs generally reflects Europe 's current dependence on the volatility of world agricultural markets .
Accepting this situation would mean accepting that consumers are becoming a variable for adjustment during the correction phases of these markets .
Accepting this situation also means denying the influence of the large supermarkets , which for 40 years have contributed to the downward trend in prices for farmers , while food prices for consumers have stayed the same or have increased .
This excessive margin capture could have , and should have , been used by the large supermarkets to absorb the rising cost of agricultural raw materials in the crisis we are currently experiencing .
Clearly this is not happening .
The large supermarkets are continuing to abuse their dominant position and the Commission must now discuss this question as a matter of urgency so as to prevent European consumers from being held hostage to an unfair and dangerous system .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will try to respond to some of the questions raised .
First of all , I agree with those who say that it is nice and very satisfactory to see that the market is now working , that the reforms we have been making are working .
That was the whole idea behind all the work done to reform our agricultural sector , so now the farmers can actually respond to the market , and that - from the farmer point of view - is what we really want to do .
It is also important to realise that this increase in prices is not a European phenomenon , it is a global phenomenon - and that is the reason why it is very difficult for us to take certain measures .
I would just like to respond to the idea of introducing export refunds .
I think it could send the wrong signal to the sector to continue production and thereby prolong the pain to the point where we see an increase in prices - here I am talking specifically about the pigmeat sector .
But there will be pressure on prices as long as we have overproduction compared to demand .
We see that prices are going down on carcases ; we know that it is part of the cycle and we know as well that in autumn there is always pressure on pigmeat prices .
Let me just mention biofuels , which , under the mandatory targets that the Commission presented on 10 January 2007 , will represent 10 % of our fuel transport sector by 2020 .
We never intended that this would be exclusively European production : we will need imports .
However , it is very important that we start on the first generation and thereby encourage our research institutions to try to find the golden solution for the second generation that will not be produced exclusively or mainly on cereals but on straw , woodchips and residues from slaughterhouses .
We therefore have potential , and we estimate that , by 2020 , between 20 % and 30 % will be coming from the second generation , and we might be able to do better if we push the research investments .
Concerning GMOs , I can fully assure you that the Commission is aware of the problem posed by asynchronous authorisation .
You can see the consequences in the Directorate General for Agriculture 's recently published report - which you can find on the internet - where there are three different scenarios .
The Commission is currently reflecting on the best way to address this situation without any compromise on our high level of risk assessment , with regard to both the environment and human health .
Important improvements have already been made in reducing the procedure or the time line - the time necessary - for authorising GMOs .
I would like to mention , just as an example , the recent commitment by the European Food Safety Authority to perform the completeness check within six weeks , compared with a much longer period previously .
I also expect that stronger support from the Member States will help the Commission in further shortening the time line of the authorising process .
Steps in this direction have been taken to increase Member States ' support in the authorising process .
I am strongly committed to workable implementation of our rules to ensure that trade in animal feed is not disrupted , with clearly negative consequences for our farmers .
But I am also committed to ensuring the highest level of safety when it comes to placing new GM products on the market , and of course our trading partners know the specific rules that we have within the European Union .
Just two days ago I came back from Argentina and Brazil .
They told me clearly that they will be able to deliver non-GM products , soybean and maize mainly , and the types of GM products that have been authorised in Europe .
But they said that we have to be aware that this is more costly .
If we are prepared to pay the price they will deliver but we have to remember that they have other customers out there , and here they mentioned China as a big customer .
So I am quite sure that we will come back to this issue .
I feel certain that we will before too long .
I have received six draft resolutions submitted under Rule 108 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 25 October 2007 .
Tobacco smoke : policy options at EU level ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Green Paper ' Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke : policy options at EU level ' .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am glad that the European Union is again discussing tobacco consumption .
In my country alone , 350 people die every day as a result of tobacco consumption so it is only right that we deal with this topic at European level .
I am very glad that the committee decided to launch a European initiative to continue to promote a ban on smoking in restaurants , cafes and pubs , and public buildings .
I think this is the right approach .
Whether there needs to be European legislation or national legislation that would then perhaps be established within the European framework is a matter for debate .
Those who still believe that we do not need it should bear in mind that , in relation to the Air Quality Framework Directive that we passed here a few weeks ago , we argued about whether we would accept 20 or 25 ppm of fine particulate in the air .
Commissioner , the figure in the average pub is 540 grams and after midnight at the ' Aviateur ' , a popular pub in this area , it is 1 730 grams , so you see how great the differences are and how necessary this is .
Another very important point , which has concerned me for many years , is additives .
Even now , 600 additives may be included in cigarettes , and 70-80 of these are on the ' red list ' .
These are highly toxic , carcinogenic substances which may damage our young people 's fertility and trap them in addiction .
These substances require very critical , intense scrutiny , the cost of which must , of course , be borne by the manufacturers .
The thought of Commissioner Kyprianou having to spend his last penny on tests made necessary by that industry is deplorable .
The question of costs must therefore be settled , by placing it firmly with the Commission .
I believe that this will reveal many of the main pathogenic ingredients of cigarettes .
Nevertheless , cigarettes are still dangerous .
For me , a further important point is the question of whether , in the long term , we can get industry to pay some of the expenditure brought about by tobacco .
As far as I can see , we have introduced producer liability in many areas : if you drive your car into a ditch and this was due to some defect in the car , the manufacturer of the car must pay .

Commissioner , I would like to see you make every effort to initiate this redistribution of costs onto the manufacturers of tobacco products because , when you think about it , my country spends EUR 50 billion getting people back on their feet .
Why should somebody who has never held a cigarette in their hand have to be involved in that ?
That is very unfair , and I would be glad to see those on this side of the Chamber who have a social conscience working hard on this issue .
The costs should be transferred to where they belong - those responsible for them , the producers .
Of course , they will pass the cost on afterwards .
I understand that ; that is the way of things in a social market economy .
Every year , thousands of people in Europe die because of smoking .
We must therefore put proper , strict rules in place .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to begin by congratulating and thanking the rapporteur , Mr Florenz .
I think he , and other colleagues here , remember from the very first day of my hearing in the European Parliament , which he chaired by the way , that I have made a very firm commitment : I would like to see Europe free of tobacco .
I think that , slowly and gradually , we are getting there .
I would like to thank Mr Florenz for the work and his dedication and the commitment he has to this cause .
Also , on a personal note , Mr President , if you will allow me , I would like to wish Mr Florenz a happy birthday .
I understand that yesterday was his birthday .
I will not mention the age as I do not want to create an interinstitutional problem , but I would like to wish him many happy returns .
I would like to say that we see a trend and significant improvement in the area of smoke-free environments in the European Union , as compared to a situation three years ago where we only had Ireland and , I think , Italy which had just introduced these bans .
Now we have a much larger number of states that have adopted these more comprehensive bans , even some with a few exceptions : I shall come to that in a minute .
But I believe that we need a joint effort to achieve this - the Commission , Member States and , most importantly , the European Parliament .
I shall say that Parliament 's contribution to the Tobacco Directive was of vital importance and I would like to interpret today 's report as support for smoke-free environment policies .
I am also very happy that the report takes a very positive constructive approach to the Commission 's Green Paper , in particular on supporting the Commission 's view that only a full smoking ban can adequately protect the health of citizens and workers .
We have to be frank about that .
First of all , a comprehensive smoking ban protects from passive smoking , it is a disincentive for people , especially young people , to begin smoking , it is an incentive for many people to quit .
It creates , and this is an important factor , a level playing field among the various operators , especially in the entertainment industry , because the exceptions , in order to be effective , have to provide for separate rooms , sealed , negative pressure , separate ventilation systems - all this creates a certain cost that not all operators can meet .
It does create a better level playing field and , also , it is easier to enforce when there are no exceptions .
We have evidence from the European Union , but also from other jurisdictions which have introduced these bans before us , that there has been no negative effect on the hospitality sector .
Actually , in many cases the revenues went up .
Now , for me , what is important is a result .
That is what we are trying to achieve .
The procedure through which we achieve it is not very important for me , whether it is European legislation , national legislation or regional legislation in some cases , what we need to do is achieve the target .
I am ready , and I would be willing to accept a step-by-step approach , provided that at the end the target , and not far away , should be an introduction of a comprehensive ban .
Where are we today ?
I would like to mention that .
We already have total bans in Ireland and the United Kingdom - the whole of the United Kingdom .
We have Sweden , Italy , Malta , Lithuania , Estonia and Finland which have already introduced quite thorough smoking bans even with exceptions on the special sealed-off rooms as I said earlier , with separate ventilation systems .
France followed this two-step approach , so as of next year will have a similar situation .
Then we have the same restrictions , but with more exceptions , when it comes to hospitality venues for countries like Belgium , Spain and the Netherlands .
We have also proceeded in countries like Germany and Austria , where initiatives are under way already to strengthen existing smoke-free regulations .
We have had a Green Paper as you know .
We had a consultation , a debate in the Council and now with the contribution from the European Parliament I am planning to take all these and then decide what will be the next step at European level and what action should be taken .
We also have commitments under the international obligation of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control - all these will be brought together to decide what the next steps should be .
I will go to another point which is included in the report , the Tobacco Products Directive , and I think that is a very important issue .
We will produce a second report on the implementation of this Directive later this year and it will analyse the state of implementation of the directive and identify areas that warrant future amendments .
It will discuss and will be inspired by the report .
Several issues which feature in today 's report will be included in ours , for example those on the regulation of tobacco ingredients , labelling requirements for tobacco products and products and manufacturers ' liability .
I would like to mention two points .
One is the issue of the pictorial warnings .
As you know , we have created a databank with different photographs and pictures that can be used as pictorial warnings , but I have to admit that it is very disappointing that very few Member States have actually taken advantage of that .
I really regret that .
To give you an example , I am just going through my notes , we have now only Belgium which has introduced them .
Romania will do it from next year and then we have the United Kingdom also later next year .
I have commitments from the Finnish and Latvian governments that they plan to introduce these in the near future and that was after many calls and urging Member States to introduce them .
We have many countries outside the European Union , like Switzerland and New Zealand , which signed licence agreements with us so that they can use our pictures and our suggestions so , for me , the situation in the European Union is very disappointing and therefore we are very seriously contemplating actually amending the relevant directive and creating a mandatory obligation to use the pictorial warnings .
I also find very interesting the Parliament proposal to have these on both sides of the package .
This is something that we will study .
Finally , the application of the implementation of the tobacco advertising ban is now everywhere .
We had problems with certain Member States .
We managed to sort them out , some through legal actions , others through persuasion , but now that applies equally everywhere .
One specific aspect I would like to mention is the initiative we took recently to convince non-EU countries to stop allowing the sponsorship of Formula One events by the tobacco industry .
As you know , we do not have the legal extraterritorial jurisdiction ; on the other hand , as these events are broadcast back to Europe they are viewed by the European citizens , they affect young people in Europe , they undermine European legislation and European policies in this area , so I have contacted both those from the private sector involved in this and the respective countries which still allow - there are only three - tobacco sponsorship and host Formula One events .
Hopefully soon we may have some positive results but I will pursue this issue .
Once again , I would like to thank the rapporteur , but also the Members of Parliament who are very committed in this effort .
For me , and I have said that from the very first day , it is very frustrating that , in the European Union , with the highest levels of education and standards of living , people still die of preventable diseases .
More than 600 000 people die of tobacco-related diseases .
I believe that this is a lifestyle where we can encourage change .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , exactly 20 years ago , as a legal adviser in the office of the Belgian Secretary of State for Health , I had the opportunity to draw up regulations that led to the first national Decree banning smoking in public places in the then European Community .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have the feeling that , with the resolution on which we are voting tomorrow , we are now playing a kind of pioneering role here , too , in this field .
The initiative in the Green Paper and the excellent report by Mr Florenz have without doubt shown us the way .
Anyone reading the resolution can come to only one conclusion : the European Parliament is opting henceforth for a zero-tolerance policy on smoking .
An immediate ban on harmful additives is demanded , as is the effective application of product liability in respect of tobacco manufacturers - these are examples of sections that speak for themselves .
An unrestricted smoking ban in public places , transport , enclosed workplaces - including catering and drinking establishments - is also called for here .
In this regard , however , my group believes that account must be taken of the decisions taken recently in a number of Member States calling for a high level of investment - which has not yet been written off - in a number of sectors .
Account has to be taken of these , but our ultimate objective in the longer term - to be pursued consciously and without hesitation - must be an unrestricted smoking ban , covering these places too .
The wind is fully in our sails on this issue .
If Eurobarometer and other surveys are to be believed , we have the full support of the people .
To anyone who still doubts the need for intervention , I should like to point out that , since we arrived here in Strasbourg on Monday afternoon , statistically some 480 Europeans will have died from the effects of passive smoking .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have to take action against this .
My group , too , intends to invest the maximum effort in this , and also to support all the supporting anti-smoking campaigns .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the International Agency for Research on Cancer recently examined all available evidence on second-hand smoke and cancer .
This was an independent panel of international scientists from 12 countries convened by the World Health Organisation .
They concluded that second-hand smoke is carcinogenic and that exposure to other people 's smoke increases the risk of lung cancer in non-smokers by 25-30 % - quite a staggering figure .
There is no doubt that people in the workplace and in enclosed public places have the right to be protected from other people 's smoke .
Remember that the majority of the population are non-smokers .
The best way to deal with this problem is by a comprehensive smoke-free regulation at Member State level , encompassing a ban in all enclosed public places and in workplaces .
I do not , therefore , agree with Amendment 3 by Mr Florenz asking for limited exceptions .
Any exceptions must be kept to a minimum .
Nor do I agree with his Amendment 2 , which deletes a proposal for amending the Framework Directive on workplace safety and health , requiring all employers to ensure a smoke-free workplace .
Employers have a responsibility to protect workers ' health .
Further , I would resist any suggestion that exemptions should be granted to pubs or bars not serving food .
Not only is this harmful to employees , but it would also lead to health inequalities .
For example , in the UK , non-food pubs accounted for half of all pubs in deprived areas , compared with a quarter in more affluent areas .
I also think that awareness-raising measures about the dangers of smoking are crucial .
Bigger and bolder picture warnings are part of this awareness-raising and , therefore , I cannot support Amendment 6 , which deletes paragraph 16 , which refers to these pictures .
I think we would all agree that we must act to help prevent young people from smoking .
The younger people are when they start smoking , the more difficult it is to stop in later life .
Therefore , I would urge support for paragraph 4 of the report , which is aimed at cutting the number of young smokers by 50 % by 2025 and rejection of Amendment 1 by Mr Florenz calling for the deletion of this paragraph .
Smoking causes enormous health problems within the population , both of smokers and non-smokers , and I know that some colleagues feel that the use of snus is a better alternative .
However , I cannot support measures that may lead to the wider use of snus , because its use has its own health-related problems , including oral cancer .
There is no value in trading one health hazard for another .
Finally , if we are serious about improving the health of our citizens , then we must encourage all Member States to introduce the necessary measures to make a smoke-free Europe a reality .
Can I just suggest that we could make a great start by enforcing the ban here in our own Parliament buildings ?

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the timing of the Commission Green Paper and the report by Mr Florenz is excellent .
It is really high time the European Union returned to the issue of tobacco , as silence has surrounded the subject for too long .
The Florenz report rightly focuses on smoking among young people and the harmful effects of passive smoking in workplaces , public buildings and catering and drinking establishments .
On the subject of young people , research has shown that 90 % of smokers start smoking as children , as under 18s .
I am very pleased with the ambitious objectives of the Florenz report to significantly reduce smoking among this age group .
After all , young people are susceptible to peer pressure and , in addition , the harmful effects on health are greater in this group .
It is my hope , therefore , that the Member States - who think , of course , that they themselves can do everything best and that we must on no account become too involved - will respond to this House 's appeal to commit themselves to halving the harmful effects of smoking among young people by 2025 , so that they actually take action by agreeing with each other to do so .
With regard to passive smoking and the general smoking ban , a sound liberal principle is that one 's personal freedom ends where another 's begins - and what clearer illustration of this principle can there be than unwilling passive smoking ?
Passive smoking inflicts great harm on public health and entails costs for the European economy .
Each year more than 79 000 adults die in the EU Member States as a result of passive smoking , and there is proof that passive smoking in the workplace accounted for 7 000 deaths in the European Union in 2002 , whilst exposure to second-hand tobacco smoke at home was responsible for a further 72 000 deaths .
Of course , ample experience of this kind of smoking ban has been gained already in countries such as Ireland , Scotland and Italy , and this experience is actually all positive .
The comments from these countries - including from people who had been very sceptical about this kind of measure - are ultimately positive .
Thus , it is tempting to issue a smoking ban at European level , too .
Recently , in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , this House decided against imposing a European smoking ban at this time , instead opting to leave such measures to Member States .
I think this is the right decision , as such a controversial decision should be taken as closely as possible to the citizen for the time being - that is , at Member State or regional level .
Therefore , the call on the part of those Member States who already have a smoking ban for the voluntary signing of a European charter in order to bring greater clarity for consumers strikes me as the most that can be achieved at present .
What is extremely good - and in this respect I commend the Commissioner on his Green Paper - is the promotion of this discussion that has indisputably taken place .
The issue is on the agenda in all Member States .
Mr President , I should like to make some concluding remarks about the Directive on tobacco products .
The Florenz report also looks towards the revision of this Directive .
I support everything the report says about picture warnings on cigarette packets .
It is tragic that so few Member States have made use of these , and personally I would be in favour of legislating in this regard .
Moreover , it should be possible to use these warnings in other ways , too , for example on the kind of information leaflets on how to stop smoking that they have in Canada ; the experience with this has been positive , and it also strikes me as an excellent idea .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to wish you a happy birthday , Mr Florenz , albeit belatedly .

We know that smoking kills .
Every year , it causes the deaths of 650 000 people , and a further 79 000 adults die as a result of passive smoking .
We are delighted with the energy and commitment that the Commission has shown on this and are pleased that the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety has made clear , firm proposals .
We also have the majority of citizens behind us .
Almost 70 % of them do not smoke , most smokers want to quit and Eurobarometer has clearly shown that 86 % of those surveyed want a ban on smoking in the workplace , while 84 % are for a ban on smoking indoors and 77 % want no smoking at all in restaurants .
We are therefore very concerned about the amendments introduced by the rapporteur , because Amendment 3 would signify a definite dilution of this strong report by our committee .
It basically means a ban with exceptions , and we all know what happens with exceptions - they quickly become the rule .
Take Germany , for example , where we have seen that progress has been made thanks to stipulations made by Brussels and the debate at European level .
It would be fatal for the EU to cease championing this cause of behalf of consumers in the area of health protection and if we failed to see it through .
Therefore , I hope that we reject Amendment 3 tomorrow and that we stand up for robust European health protection so that we can finally achieve a smoke-free zone throughout Europe .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Thank you . 650 000 people die each year from smoking and 80 000 people die each year from passive smoking in the EU alone .
These gloomy statistics show us clearly that we must do everything we can to combat smoking .
Karl-Heinz Florenz has put forward a number of good proposals for action , such as tightening up existing legislation , deterrent notices on cigarette packaging , measures to prevent young people from starting smoking , measures to help smokers who want to be free from their dependence and , in general , measures to support the Member States in combating smoking .
That is a good thing .
However , I am opposed to transferring more power to the EU in the field of public health , particularly when the Member States are already doing a good job .
The smoking ban in pubs is a good example .
At least ten EU countries now have some form of smoking ban in restaurants and pubs .
It started with Ireland in 2004 and quickly spread to Sweden , Italy , Finland , Malta , Belgium and so forth .
Many more are on the way .
Should we now stop this process of setting good examples and wait for EU central legislation ?
No , I don 't think so , but let the good examples continue to be disseminated .
I note that in his report Mr Florenz writes that he wants to call on all the Member States to introduce an unrestricted smoking ban .
That is good , as I interpret it as meaning that we do not need to take a roundabout route via the European Commission and still run the risk that it will be thrown out by lobbyists from the tobacco industry .
In conclusion , is there not a danger , after all , of giving with one hand and taking away with the other ?
We are urging people to stop smoking while at the same time the EU continues to subsidise tobacco cultivation to the tune of more than EUR 1 billion every year . EUR 1 000 million every year .
These subsidies obviously must be abolished . As soon as possible !
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not going to repeat things - four minutes of speaking time are too precious - except to say that , like most speakers , I welcome the broad lines of this motion for a resolution .
Information programmes and preventive measures to reduce the number of young smokers in the coming years are only to be welcomed .
This goes for deaths caused by tobacco , and in other areas it also goes for road deaths and deaths caused by alcohol .
Up to this point I join the consensus .
At the same time , however , we must remain reasonable .
Just as we do not stop traffic because of the fatal accidents or toxic exhaust emissions , or banish wine and beer to purgatory because of the cirrhosis of the liver suffered by some politicians , on tobacco , too , we must let common sense prevail , and avoid hypocrisy at all costs .
I am thinking of the green health apostles in my country , for example , who inveigh against tobacco , but who legalised soft drugs a few years ago .
These are a few marginal notes to this resolution , ladies and gentlemen .
In principle , it must continue to apply that no supranational regulation is needed in this area .
Europe should respect the principle of subsidiarity once and for all if it wants reconciliation with its citizens .
To give an example , years ago , a European directive laid down that tobacco , too , had to be labelled - which is all well and good , but then bureaucracy suddenly reared its head .
The label has to cover 30 % of the packet ; 35 % if it is bilingual .
The text must be in black lettering , with a black border of minimum 3 mm and maximum 4 mm thickness , the font must be Helvetica , and so on and so forth .
Europe wants to dictate everything , and no one understands where the subsequent irritation of the general public comes from .
Secondly , ladies and gentlemen , there is the hypocrisy of the subsidies for tobacco farmers , which even as recently as last year amounted to EUR 900 million a year .
This has now been reduced to EUR 300 million , but is still many times greater than the sum channelled into information to induce young people to stop smoking .
There is also a parallel with our nation-states : in Brussels a pack of cigarettes now costs EUR 4.30 , of which EUR 3.30 goes as excise duty to the Belgian State , which spends a few million on anti-tobacco information programmes .
Billions of euros a year in excise duties could serve to finance the health costs of combating lung cancer .
Forgive my cynicism .
What are we going to do , though ?
Abolish the subsidies and disadvantage our European farmers by importing tobacco products from abroad ?
These questions , too , must be answered if one is to lapse into grandiloquent lyricism ; otherwise , one pulls the wool over citizens ' eyes .
Unfortunately , I can find no answer to these questions .
Finally , let us also avoid overdoing it , ladies and gentlemen , as the didactic language used sometimes makes me feel rather queasy .
In fact , it all makes me shudder .
A smoke-free Europe .
What fine words .
What puritanism .
Sinners are to be punished .
Let us guard against excessive stigmatisation of the 30 % of the population who smoke .
Let us refrain from becoming anti-tobacco ayatollahs , as a Socialist Minister in France once implored me .
Let us refrain from lapsing into American conditions .
In California there are some who want to ban smoking in people 's own homes , too , from 2009 .
Just imagine !
How are they going to do that ?
With commandos and informers ?
Compulsory tobacco detectors in every home ?
Is this the example we wish to follow ?
Are we going to follow in their footsteps ?
Are we going to ban the reading of Simenon on grounds that Inspector Maigret with his pipe is a bad example to young people ?
Let us remain reasonable .
In many European countries - for example Italy , France , the Scandinavian countries and also my own country - smoking was banished from the shop floor and from restaurants long ago ; and a good thing , too .
They did not need Europe for this .
Long live freedom , I say .
Let us give those restaurant managers who want one a small room for customers who occasionally like to enjoy a good cigar after their coffee or pousse-café .
Who knows , though - perhaps coffee will also be banned and banished in tomorrow 's Europe , as caffeine , too , is addictive .
Perhaps it would be best if the Commission put people on bread and water .
( FI ) Mr President , in addition to smokers who are at risk from the dangers of smoking there are the millions of Europeans on the sidelines .
The creation of a Europe free from tobacco smoke and the prevention of passive smoking are two of the crucial tasks of the Union 's environmental and public health policy .
Member States have also committed themselves to this goal through international law , as , with the exception of Italy and the Czech Republic , all the Member States of the Union have recognised the protection of citizens from tobacco smoke in the WHO Framework Convention as a fundamental right .
This right must be effectively protected .
Of the choices presented by the Commission , adherence to the status quo is not a viable option .
Voluntary arrangements have not succeeded in protecting people from tobacco smoke .
I too would like to thank the rapporteur for advocating binding legal remedies as the most effective way of combating this problem .
We have to protect two groups in particular : children and young people , and employees .
We cannot , however , adopt just any rules .
We have to stay within the limits of rationality , as befits the powers we have under the EU .
Supporting a sales ban on tobacco products to under-18-year-olds applied within the entire EU area is quite a different matter from restricting smoking in private vehicles in the presence of minors .
In such a case I would appeal rather to the parents ' conscience and discretion .
Do not force your child to breathe in deadly air .
Legislators should be careful about aiming at compliance with laws which it is virtually impossible to monitor .
There is also a need to highlight the importance of preventive work and various campaigns .
To protect workers , though , it is absolutely essential that a comprehensive smoking ban be brought in in all Member States .
I also wish to raise the matter of the manufacturer 's responsibility .
The Tobacco Products Directive should be amended to include the manufacturer 's liability when healthcare costs are being financed as a result of tobacco consumption .
Smoking is not just something that concerns smokers , because the hundreds of billions of euros in costs which are incurred by society as a result of tobacco consumption have to be paid by the majority who do not smoke .
Making people feel guilty helps no one and is , moreover , a poor policy , but the facts have to be stated .
Smoking costs too much ; it costs lives .
Mr President , as has already been mentioned , every year 65 000 people die in Europe from smoking-related illnesses .
The number of victims of passive smoking is also tragically high - about 80 000 European citizens die every year owing to other people 's bad habit .
That is why a total ban on smoking in the workplace and other public places should be welcomed .
Our long fight against smoking has not been unsuccessful .
Ten or twenty years ago , it was natural for people to smoke almost everywhere : during meetings and even on buses in some countries .
Now it is almost an aggression to light a cigarette at social events .
The success of the anti-smoking campaign shows us that multinational companies , such as the tobacco companies , are not unbeatable .
If we have clear goals for the environment and health and we can mobilise society , NGOs and politicians - not forgetting good lawyers - then we can reach our goals , step by step .
This report is taking the right steps in the right direction .
We should of course mention that it is smoking we are fighting , not smokers .

Mr President , this motion for a resolution is balanced , precise and comprehensive , and the rapporteur , Mr Florenz , deserves our honest congratulations on his work .
My only criticism of this resolution is that it has come too late .
The supporting scientific evidence and the undisputed need for the policy options contained in this document have been clear for all to see for many years .
It is sadly certain that the delay in making significant progress towards achieving a Europe free from tobacco smoke will have brought about the deaths from a preventable cause of hundreds of thousands of EU citizens .
Who is to be blamed for this massive sacrifice of human life ?
I will mention only two of the main guilty parties so as to shame them , even though not in a sufficiently drastic fashion .
Firstly , the tobacco industry .
It has spent millions of euros on campaigns of lies and misinformation .
It has manipulated the media , politicians and even scientists in order to buy more time , and this it has done purely and simply for financial gain , knowing full well that thousands of lives were at stake .
Secondly , the governments and some political parties of many EU Member States .
They have bowed to the power and influence of the tobacco barons and have continued to hold back on taking effective measures to protect their citizens against the plague of smoking .
Even straightforward measures , such as increasing tobacco taxation and making free treatment of tobacco addicts widely available , have been suppressed .
I support an overwhelming vote for this resolution and I urge you not to forget the despicable behaviour of those who knowingly caused the tragic loss from tobacco-related diseases of so many lives .
( SV ) Karl-Heinz , congratulations on your 60th birthday .
I am pleased to see that you are just as full of life as the young Karl-Heinz .
The best present that the PPE-DE Group could give Karl-Heinz would be to let him withdraw the weaknesses in his own report that he has presented .
I think it is important to mention additives in the report .
We have been asking for legislation for a long time .
Harmful additives must go , and it is a disgrace that the information is so poor .
We therefore now expect a rapid proposal from the Commission to get rid of these terrible additives that make cigarettes even worse .
We all have a natural right to avoid smoke in our workplaces , just as children have a natural right to avoid smoke in their playgrounds .
Parliament is perfectly right to call on the Member States to address this problem .
If you take children to our own stairwell outside the restaurant here , they smell of smoke for half an hour afterwards .
I also want to mention one aspect that has come out of the debate .
Any credible tobacco policy must include the phasing out of all subsidies , and we must ensure that our companies do not undermine the work through heavy marketing in developing countries . Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , as the statistics show , approximately 30 % of the population continues to reach for a cigarette on a daily basis .
I agree unconditionally that non-smokers should be protected from the harmful consequences of inhaling nicotine smoke .
I cannot , however , agree with the Jacobinical methods proposed in the resolution .
We cannot create a repressive policy for smokers that involves the restriction of their civil liberties .
I believe we should place the emphasis on broad public education and regulate the sales price by raising taxes , as scientific studies have shown this to be an effective weapon in the fight against tobacco addiction .
The point proposing a ban on smoking at work is incontrovertible .
I do think , though , that it should be expanded by adding a rider guaranteeing that each entity must provide smokers with a place nearby where they may smoke without harming others .
In the current climate this space must not be merely an artificial and pointless manifestation of health promotion ; it must be an effective action .
In the time available to me I would like to touch on another problem , which has its origins in the anti-nicotine policy pursued by a number of governments , namely the rise in smuggling of counterfeit tobacco products , their main attraction being that they are cheaper than the original product .
This is currently one of the most lucrative sources of income for smugglers .
Please bear in mind that these products are sold in our shops , to our citizens .
Those who have taken up selling this product will not hesitate to sell to someone under age .
When drawing up an anti-nicotine policy , therefore , we must examine the problem from a number of angles to ensure that the legal reality we establish provides effective help in solving the problems linked to the use of nicotine products .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to add my congratulations to our rapporteur .
My primary concern is the protection of workers .
I join with all Members who want the Member States to respond quickly , and that is what we are doing with this resolution .
Results to date show that it has worked in some Member States but not in my own .
When it comes to the protection of workers , the question is , ' what steps can the European Commission take to prevent the creation of first- and second-class citizens ? '
How have the Member States reacted to this discussion so far ?
Are they for pushing ahead with worker protection at European level and for taking actions and measures such as a ban on smoking in restaurants , cafes and bars ?
Most of us approach this topic based on our situation and we often forget that we should be thinking about the workers who have to work under these conditions .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not only with regard to protecting non-smokers , but also in other matters , I believe we should not take the EU 's powers to extremes .
What are we really talking about here ?
Surely the point is to initiate discussion about a potentially smoke-free Europe , not to wage a crusade against people who consume a product that is legal in Europe .
However , some of the contributions to this discussion , and many of the amendments , sound more like a religious war than the debate that I feel would be appropriate .
In the same way , the report stated that this policy should create an environment in which smoking was no longer seen as normal .
I do not believe that it is the task of politicians to teach people how to behave or to dictate to people what they should think .
We should keep things in perspective when it comes to the question of what the EU should regulate and what it should not .
Regulations structuring the tax systems of individual Member States are not part of our competence , nor are wide-ranging bans on smoking .
Put simply , the Member States have not given us that authority .
Even though there is a trend towards non-smoking in Europe , to exploit this trend to adopt excessive rules and to ride the wave of public approval is bad form , in my opinion .
We are talking here almost exclusively of bans .
Bans usually only increase the attraction of whatever has been forbidden , especially for young people , the group that we are particularly concerned about .
Instead , we should focus our energy and money on educating people about the harmful consequences of tobacco consumption , targeting each group as individually as possible .
That is the only way to get people to make wise decisions in the long term .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the statistics on the consequences of smoking speak for themselves .
Mr Florenz is right not to tire of pointing out that 650 000 deaths due to active smoking and 80 000 deaths due to passive smoking cost our health system EUR 50 million every year .
There should be no need for us Parliamentarians to discuss effective protection for non-smokers .
Therefore , the discussion is not about ' whether ' , but ' how ' it can be effected .
There are several different models of effective protection for non-smokers in Europe .
Some countries , such as Sweden and Ireland , have imposed a strict ban on smoking in restaurants , cafes and pubs , and in public buildings ; others have provided for narrow exemptions .
We should respect these different models .
In principle , therefore , I think that protection of non-smokers is a matter for the Member States .
The rapporteur proposes that Europe should intervene in the event that Member States fail to provide effective protection of non-smokers in the workplace .
However , where these rules are infringed , I favour the EU keeping to the framework of EU powers regarding occupational safety and health .
I also advocate recognition of the existing rules in the Member States .
Functioning , existing national rules in the area of protection of non-smokers must be able to be retained .
Member States that are well along the way should be rewarded ; we need to recognise the effort they have made .
We should take national differences and regional distinctiveness into account on a case by case basis , and accept them .
However , this must still ensure sufficient special protection for children and young people , and for non-smokers .
We do not want to water down the protection of non-smokers .
This will achieve a high level of health protection while adhering to the principle of subsidiarity and respecting the interests and regional differences of Member States .
Mr President , I warmly welcome Mr Florenz 's report .
I strongly support smoking bans in public places to protect public health and to avert the dangers of passive smoking .
I was delighted when Scotland led the UK in introducing a smoking ban in March 2006 , and I am pleased that bans are now in place in England , Wales and Northern Ireland .
As a Scottish ban has now been in place for some time , we have evidence on what kind of health impact it has had .
Recent figures from Scotland show that , since the smoking ban was introduced , there has been a 20 % reduction in heart attack admissions to hospital .
We also continue to raise awareness of the health risks associated with smoking .
For this reason , on 14 November 2007 , I am launching a written declaration in the European Parliament calling for more research and resources for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( COPD ) .
COPD is a common and costly lung disease whose advanced stage is chronic respiratory failure .
It is an under-recognised , under-diagnosed and under-treated disease , neglected by health care providers and the public .
The rise of COPD makes it all the more important that the EU adopts comprehensive smoke-free policies and Mr Florenz 's report .
Thank you very much .
I would like to begin by saying that I am essentially sceptical about the idea of the EU banning smoking in public places throughout the Union .
Even those who are in favour of this kind of smoking ban must see the problem of us doing it at EU level .
After all , decisions like this are controversial .
If the citizens find out that they come from Brussels , that someone who is not directly concerned is introducing these decisions , I think that opposition will increase .
However , there are things that we can do here in the EU to reduce the harm caused by tobacco smoke throughout Europe .
For example , we can abolish the EU 's incomprehensible ban on Swedish snuff .
I am coming back with the obstinacy of a fool to take the opportunity to highlight the Swedish experience .
We have the lowest proportion of smokers anywhere in Europe , we have the lowest proportion of all tobacco-related illnesses anywhere in Europe , but do you know what ?
Despite this we have roughly the same tobacco consumption as the rest of Europe , but we use snuff rather than cigarettes .
The fact is that if the rest of Europe replaced cigarettes with snuff to the same extent that we have done in Sweden , 200 000 Europeans would be spared lung cancer every year .
I therefore think that it is immoral to keep our eyes closed .
Unfortunately the Commission 's reasoning seems to be precisely the opposite .
Today the Commission ordered the Åland Islands to pay fines of almost SEK 20 million for failing to enforce sufficiently effective bans on snuff there .
This is even though snuff on the Åland Islands is a traditional product , which there too has replaced cigarettes and saved lives .
Moreover , the Commission does this and has the nerve to claim that it means well and refers to concern for the health of the Ålanders .
But I have talked with the latter , and they politely reject this .
It is therefore on the Commission 's conscience if smoking increases on the Åland Islands .
However , I know that there are still Members here who are sceptical and do not really believe that it can be that simple , that the statistics are not really as clear-cut as I say .
I would ask you to meet me halfway , at least on one point , and to vote in favour of Jules Maaten 's proposal to evaluate the health effects of snuff .
Let us have the facts on the table as a scientific basis for further debate .
I am convinced that it will be the first step towards lifting the EU 's indefensible ban on snuff . Thank you , Mr President .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank the Members for a very interesting debate .
It was good to hear different views .
I must say that I am very happy that the majority supports smoking bans and all the other measures that promote smoking prevention .
First of all , we must not forget that the main target is to protect young people .
Do not forget that that new ideas come up all the time .
The new fashion now is to promote smoking among young girls as a weight-control measure .
All means are being employed to promote smoking , so we have to be imaginative and comprehensive in our response .
I understand that some Members are reluctant for the Commission or the Community to take measures .
They say that we should wait for Member States to play their part .
As I have said , we are now in the process of examining and studying what the next step should be at European level .
However , I must say that , even though the trend is very encouraging - over the last few years there has been a tremendous increase in countries introducing very comprehensive restrictions - the longer we wait to take measures , the more people die .
We must not forget that .
It is a very important factor .
There is the issue of subsidiarity , but subsidiarity does not mean doing .
Nor does Article 152 mean that we should just sit back and watch people die .
It means that we should complement , support , encourage and even legislate when it is necessary .
We do have the legal basis - we have the opinion on that .
So it is a matter of a policy decision , not a legal decision .
That is something we will be working on .
As I have said from the beginning , what is important for us is how we can best achieve results , not the legal instruments we employ to do so .
Do not forget that the new Treaty , agreed just two or three days ago , specifically mentions the European Union 's involvement in the tobacco issue .
That should be borne in mind as well .
The Commission 's Green Paper refers mostly to a smoke-free environment , and the debate mainly focused on that area .
However , that is just one measure .
We have to take a series of measures to achieve our goal .
We need a smoking ban , which I will come back to in a minute ; advertising bans , which we already have ; warnings and pictorial warnings , which we have covered ; and also educational campaigns .
It is true that this is a lifestyle choice , and that people will eventually make their choice .
However , we have to help them take their decision based on the true facts and , in a way , counterbalance the aggressive marketing techniques of the tobacco industry , which is spending billions of euros .
We have to be able to advise and explain the problems to people , and also give them incentives not to smoke or to give up smoking .
That is a very important area .
Concerning smoking ban exceptions , these are better than having no ban at all .
I accept that .
However , the fact is that this will not make things as effective as with a comprehensive smoking ban , with this being not only for the protection of passive smokers , as I have already said , but also an incentive for smokers to quit and a disincentive for non-smokers not to begin smoking .
We should not undermine that .
It is not strange that the majority of smokers also support the introduction of smoking bans , because they want to smoke when they decide to and not to have to breathe everybody else 's smoke .
This is not a theoretical discussion .
I know there were concerns a few years ago and , because this is a new debate , concerns are still being expressed .
However , we now have some experience and we know that it works , and we know that it does not lead to smoking somewhere else .
There is now a reduction in the number of smokers and smoking-related problems and , at the same time , we have seen that it has not affected certain sectors of the economy where there was a worry .
So we can draw on those experiences and explain to Member States - and even Members of this Parliament - who are reluctant what the benefits are and how effective they can be .
Concerning the issue of ingredients and additives , we are working on this .
We are taking very seriously into account Parliament 's position .
Mr Florenz has been nagging me on this for the past few years .
We are proceeding with that , but it needs a lot of work because the directive , as originally adopted , was not functional .
So now we are trying to streamline the provision of information , and we will proceed with the assessment of the risks involved .
Concerning illegal and illicit trade , we are working within the context of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control , and are currently working a protocol to control that trade .
The European Union is very active in this respect , and will remain so .
I again want to emphasise that we are not acting against smokers , and agree with those who have made that point .
On the contrary , all these measures will benefit smokers as well .
I know the issue of ' snus ' is a sensitive one for one Member State .
However , I have to say , first of all , that the case of Holland is totally different because that Member State did not ask for a derogation , as Sweden did .
However , at the same time - and I would be happy to have a more thorough discussion on this - snus is not a safe alternative .
It is just as dangerous , as it causes different forms of cancer and different forms of illnesses .
Very soon , at the beginning of next year , we will have all the evidence .
I am actually quoting Swedish experts .
So it is not a question of the rest of the European Union , which is not using it , showing prejudice .
I am quoting Swedish experts who have shown me a huge pile of evidence in this respect .
Snus might not cause lung cancer , because it is not inhaled , but it has effects and causes problems .
At the same time , there is no evidence that it can be effective as a tobacco-control or smoking-control measure .
I would therefore be very reluctant in this area , and really doubt there is any scientific evidence allowing this .
However , I have to say that I can see a tremendous effort on the part of the tobacco industry , because it now feels threatened by smoke-free policies , to promote snus .
We should be cautious in this respect , because it could cause other problems and it could be expanded and promoted in an aggressive commercial way .
I would be very reluctant to change the status quo as it stands today in the European Union , and we have the judgment of the European Court of Justice to support us in this respect .
In conclusion , I should like to thank all the Members again for this very interesting debate .
I take note of those who support and those who are against the Commission 's policies .
It is very important for us to hear all your views .
I shall be having a more thorough discussion with you in the near future - next year - with a specific proposal from the Commission based on the discussion today .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) Smoking is a major public health problem that claims several hundred thousand victims every year , including non-smokers .
As this is a problem on a global scale , it calls for multifaceted action , commitment on the part of Member States , and effective legislation that is even tougher than hitherto .
Protection of European citizens ' health demands this .
Clearly , the road to achieving the primary objective , a smoke-free Europe , will be a long one , requiring tremendous effort and commitment .
For this reason , we have to take things one step at a time .
Several Member States have set an example that we should follow , taking sound and effective action to avert the dangers of passive smoking .
One of the next steps should be to introduce a complete ban on smoking in all enclosed workplaces , including the catering sector , all public buildings and all public transport within two years throughout the whole of the European Union .
To combat smoking successfully , we need a sound basis , a comprehensive Community strategy based on relevant studies and the best empirical knowledge , aimed at controlling smoking and encouraging people to quit .
Planning effective legislative measures , prevention and education all have a key role to play in such a strategy .
in writing . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , every year cigarette smoking leads over 650 000 Europeans to a premature death .
None of them decides to take up smoking in the desire to kill themselves .
Smokers are addicts , slaves of persistent , decades-long propaganda .
Only tough PR can explain the fact that whilst 86 % of Europeans believe that the workplace should be smoke-free , only 61 % think that the same should be true for bars and restaurants .
Ladies and gentlemen , waiters and bar staff also have a right to life and to health protection !
Each year 80 000 people die from passive smoking .
Regardless of their own wishes they have breathed in a mixture of 250 carcinogens and toxins .
Waiters in establishments where smoking is allowed are 50 % more likely to contract lung cancer than staff working in smoke-free establishments .
None of this is news .
Yet 30 % of European Union citizens are smokers .
The free market economy has not stopped an unhealthy habit which causes hundreds of thousands of deaths and costs taxpayers billions .
It is clear that lawmakers must act .
I agree with the report that only a 100 % smoke-free environment is an environment which can meet today 's health requirements .
In addition to a ban , however , we also need measures which help smokers free themselves from their addiction .
We need only look at the sums spent by the tobacco industry on advertising to understand the enormity of the challenge we face .
Half-measures are no longer adequate .
It is time to act in earnest .
Protocol amending TRIPS ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation by Gianluca Susta , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the Protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement ( 08934 / 2006 - C6-0359 / 2006 -
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to take this opportunity to thank the Secretariat of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in Parliament for the support it has given me .
I would also like to thank all the shadow rapporteurs , as well as Mr Van Hecke , who preceded me in covering this dossier , for the excellent work carried out and for managing to maintain the unity of our institution right through to the end .
In my opinion , this has been Parliament 's greatest strength in the campaign to promote access to medicines in the developing and less-developed countries where they are most needed .
The right to health and access to health at affordable prices are fundamental rights and should be guaranteed for all citizens .
Unfortunately we know only too well that this is not always the case : all too often the prices imposed by the pharmaceutical industry are too high , with the result that countries where they are most needed find themselves in difficulty .
For this reason , as I have already said on several occasions , both in the Committee on International Trade and in plenary , Parliament could not blindly accept the Protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement as if it were a universal panacea , and then consider the matter resolved .
Parliament wanted more to be done , at least within the European Union , because the European Union can and must do more .
Even in the light of the regrettable events of this summer , such as the exchange of letters with Thailand , even if partially resolved , the European Parliament , which has always been a great advocate of using all the flexibilities offered by the TRIPS Agreement , could not give the go-ahead for the ratification of the protocol without obtaining real and effective guarantees from the Commission and the Council .
I think it is fair to stress that during these months of close collaboration with the Commission and the Council , we have undoubtedly achieved an important goal for the European Union , by putting an essentially technical dossier at the top of the European political agenda .
I believe that the end result can be qualified as a success , not only for this reason , but above all because we have succeeded in making progress in extremely sensitive areas , such as encouraging the use of the flexibilities provided for under the TRIPS Agreement so that we can promote access to essential medicines at affordable prices within the framework of national public health programmes .
I particularly support the explicit reference contained in the Council Statement - presented on Monday - to Article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement .
For my group , this represents a guarantee and an assurance that Member States will be able to use this instrument without coming under pressure and that there will be easier access to medicines in countries where they are most needed .
Secondly : I am also delighted at the results obtained in terms of TRIPS-plus , namely the more stringent provisions as regards those provided for under the TRIPS Agreement .
Parliament , the Council and the Commission have agreed that there should be no negotiations in future bilateral or regional agreements with developing countries on provisions that might have negative consequences for health and access to medicines .
Despite this , while recognising the efforts of the Portuguese Presidency , I would like to ask whether the text of the statement can be further improved , particularly in the section referring to poor developing countries .
This expression could create confusion , since it is now customary to refer only to developing countries and to the category of less-developed countries .
To insert a new category would complicate the situation .
Above all , it is important to stress that all developing countries , hence even countries such as Brazil , India , etc . , must be able to use the current system without running the risk of pejorative provisions being introduced in future .
Last but not least , it is vital to underline the efforts made to date in terms of the transfer of research and technological development to southern countries .
The ALDE Group is ready to give its assent because it believes that a ' no ' would send out a negative signal to the countries most in need , and would be irresponsible on the part of the European Union given that the reopening of the WTO negotiations is unrealistic .
However , this does not change the fact that we continue to have reservations about the efficiency of the mechanism studied and approved by the WTO .
For this reason , and I am almost at the end now , I would like to confirm that the EU will not stop here .
Parliament will do everything it can to ensure that the guarantees that have been given over the past few months will be honoured in practice .
Therefore we ask Commissioner Mandelson , who in his letter confirmed that he did not intend to negotiate TRIPS-plus provisions , to remove from the draft Economic Partnership Agreement with the Caribbean countries the request for adherence to and acceptance of the obligations of the Patent Cooperation Treaty , the Patent Law Treaty and the intellectual property provisions of Directive 2004 / 48 / EC on the enforcement of intellectual property rights , which unequivocally resemble TRIPS-plus provisions .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased that we have been able to find a solution agreeable to all on the important issue of access to medicines for poor , developing countries .
Our debate during the last months has been fruitful and I would like to thank Parliament for the intensity and the quality of our exchanges .
The Commission has always been receptive to the concerns expressed by Parliament and , indeed , shares most of them .
That is why the Commission was at the forefront of the debate on TRIPS and access to medicines in the WTO .
I have seen in this debate an opportunity for the Commission to clarify its position on a number of issues .
We all agree that the amendment of the TRIPS agreement is one part of the solution among many others to the problem of access to medicines .
Obviously , other measures are needed , in particular to improve health care systems and the infrastructures , notably in poor , developing countries .
Some Members fear that the mechanism will not work .
This is certainly too early to assert .
In our regulation implementing the waiver , and together with Parliament , we agreed to evaluate it three years after its entry into force , and we will do it .
We also support the work of the intergovernmental working group with the WHO to explore other measures to further improve access to medicines .
The Commission has been able to reaffirm its attachment to the Doha declaration on the TRIPS agreement on public health and its support for the flexibilities contained therein .
Similarly , this debate allows me to dispel any misunderstanding about what the Commission is doing in the economic partnership agreements with ACP countries .
Let me confirm that , in those agreements and in other future bilateral and regional agreements with poor developing countries , the Commission is not asking and will not ask for provisions which could affect access to medicines or undermine the TRIPS flexibilities contained in the Doha declaration on the TRIPS agreement and public health .
Thanks to this frank and direct debate Parliament is now in a position to give its assent to the Commission proposal .
The European Community will then join the other WTO members which have already accepted the TRIPS agreement .
This acceptance will enable the EC to continue to play a leading role in the WTO on the issue of access to medicines .
To conclude , I would like to insist that access to medicines remains a priority for the Commission and I am willing to continue to work in a constructive spirit with Parliament on this matter in the future .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry that the Council is not represented in our debate this evening because for once it is our main contact .
The atmosphere here is euphoric , everyone is in agreement and tomorrow we are going to vote - by a crushing majority , I think - for the ratification of this amendment to the TRIPS agreement , which is supposed to provide and should provide better access to medicines for countries that are not sufficiently developed and do not have a pharmaceutical industry that allows them this access .
What happened during the long debate we have had on this , is that Parliament was a little more doubtful than the Commission about the efficacy of this system .
I believe - and I would like to thank the Council here for having listened to Parliament more than the Commission , for once - that this is what led to the statement distributed on Monday morning , thanks to which we have accepted that an agreement between us enables us to make this small step forward .
It is an improvement , but it is an improvement the inadequacy of which we are aware of and regarding the effectiveness of which we have a few doubts .
These few doubts need to be removed by the stringency with which the Member States and the Council apply the recommendations .
I am delighted , however , by what has just been said by Mr Mandelson , who has himself announced a group of experts to find other measures , and an evaluation of these measures , and I think we will be discussing these matters again once we have seen whether the effectiveness meets our expectations .
In any case , I am pleased about the positive conclusion to this necessary stage , even if it does not go far enough .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , as rapporteur of the European People 's Party I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Sousa , and my other fellow Members for the productive cooperation we have enjoyed , for it enabled us to overcome certain differences between political groups and to maintain a united position on this important issue .
The European Parliament has not been limited to areas of responsibility as laid down by the Treaty ; it has not been restricted merely to giving its assent .
In the July resolution a political victory was achieved expressing a united will transcending party politics .
Making commitments by the Commission and the Council was sought and achieved .
They coincide to a great extent with the views of the European Parliament .
It could be said to have been a rehearsal for institutional cooperation in light of the new role the European Parliament will play once the Reform Treaty has been adopted .
The acceptance by the Union of the amendment is thus backed up by real commitments , which ensure the process works successfully .
The commitments also go much further : they lay down guidelines for an integrated approach to the issue of the public health of developing countries .
The acceptance by the Union of the amendment to the TRIPS Agreement sends a positive and hopeful message to developing countries .
We hope that it will also involve the active cooperation of other members of the WTO .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during our last debate in July on access to medicines , I concluded my comments by calling on the Council and the Commission to make clear and formal commitments that would guarantee Europe 's active involvement in finding new solutions and its desire to be a front runner in the fight for access to affordable medicines for everyone .
We could not be content with a debate in which no precise commitments were made , and I note today that , after several months of exchanges between the three institutions , certain proposals we had made and that we really wanted are becoming a reality .
First allow me to applaud the parliamentary work done , and done with a constant concern for accountability and openness .
The three successive postponements of the vote in Parliament were motivated by a commitment to global public health .
This showed us that the word ' solidarity ' still had meaning in European policies .
I would therefore like to thank first of all our rapporteur Mr Susta for his powers of persuasion and capacity for resistance , and all the shadow rapporteurs from the political groups , who throughout these months of collaboration , effort and Common conviction , have risen above party politics to show the quality of work that Parliament can produce .
I therefore hope that the Council and the Commission will be able to demonstrate that the commitments made over the last few months during our various exchanges and in the written statement we have received will be respected .

These commitments are : that the Member States are free to use all the clauses allowing them to produce generic medicines and export them to developing countries , and not only to poor developing countries ; that these developing countries can use all the flexibilities in the Doha Declaration to provide their populations with the essential medicines they need ; that the European Union will not negotiate public health-related provisions in negotiations on trade agreements - and I also note the statements by the Commissioner ; and finally that the EU will finance projects to develop research and manufacturing capabilities in these countries .

These are positive steps forward , and we want to make capital of them now , but I would like nevertheless to say that not all the issues raised by Parliament , or its legitimate concerns , have necessarily met with the desired responses from the other institutions .
Our fight for access to medicines for everyone in the world goes on .
That is why we will remain extremely vigilant regarding the application of the commitments made by the Council and the Commission today , and at the same time we will continue to demand that all our concerns receive a rapid , adequate response in the coming months .
I recall that the first of the commitments made to Parliament was to complete the evaluation of the mechanism that we are to adopt tomorrow .
Doubts persist over this , and they need to be addressed .
Should that not be the case , in line with the commitments made to the developing countries concerned , the EU should draw the appropriate conclusions to come up with a truly viable , sustainable solution .
I am therefore pleased about the commitments made by the Council and the Commission , and I will therefore call upon my group to vote in favour of ratification tomorrow , even though the long weeks of work we have just experienced lead me to think that , far from reaching an end , the collective agreement we have made is only just beginning .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) The WTO decision of 30 August 2003 , which provided for a temporary derogation from the TRIPS Agreement , has now been transformed into a permanent derogation by a new decision of 6 December 2005 .
In his report , Mr Susta makes a number of very pertinent remarks on the practicability of compulsory licensing .
I recognise very many elements from my 2005 report transforming the temporary derogation into a European regulation .
I fully support the recommendations of the Council and the Commission , which Mr Susta links with the avis conforme .
The mechanism created is indeed only a limited solution to the problem of inadequate access to medicines in poor countries .
The EU must help developing countries find a long-term solution in terms of obtaining the most essential medicines at affordable price , and must stimulate investment in local production facilities .
The transfer of technology , research and technical assistance are of course essential in this respect .
In this regard , I would refer to recent reports stating that the market share of generic medicines is falling once again , and giving the cause as the cheap production by pharmaceutical companies themselves of medicines whose patent protection has expired .
This must present opportunities for poor countries , where , in line with the WTO decision , compulsory licensing can offer a solution in respect of medicines still protected by patents .
If we do not want to give vain hope to the millions of people still unable to benefit from the most essential medicines , more - much more - will be needed than a mechanism whose practicability is and remains highly dubious .
Mr President , as it happens , 14 years ago I was involved in the issue of intellectual rights in the Polish Parliament , as chairman of a special subcommittee .
Today I have the honour of doing the same in our European Parliament .
Like those who have spoken before me , I would like to emphasise the significant progress that we have made over the last few months , and I would like to stress that , as we see it , the European Parliament has done a lot to put right what was proposed by the European Commission .
I am thoroughly convinced that the compromise we are proposing will help to improve access to pharmaceutical products in Third World countries , as they are what mainly concern us .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , if I have understood correctly the Council will read the statement before the vote , otherwise there will be no binding commitment .
I would then ask you to omit the word poor developing countries .
It is completely irrelevant and meaningless in previous agreements .
There are developing countries and there are the least developed countries , and Parliament wants both these groups of countries to be able to benefit from these mechanisms .
It is clear that we are speaking the same language here .
It is something I was wondering about in your speech , Mr Mandelson : you said that ACP countries had nothing to worry about , but then you also said poor developing countries , ACP countries .
I hope that we are not restricting the discussion to them , and that your letter to Thailand does not set the limits for this , but that we are perfectly clear that developing countries which are not among the poorest also really need to be able to protect public health in order to be able to develop effectively , and that we must give them all the help and support we can .
I hope that we agree on this .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has been called upon to express an opinion on whether the amendment to the WTO agreements on intellectual property - the ' TRIPS Agreements ' - can be made permanent , as this would represent a swift solution to the problem of access to medicines by developing countries .
Considering that up to now , this amendment has offered no proof of its real effectiveness , it is important for the European Parliament to seize the opportunity offered by the ratification of the TRIPS amendment to secure greater guarantees that EU policy on access to medicines will be comprehensive , coherent and effective .
The TRIPS Agreement , as the Council has recognised , represents only part of the solution to the problem of access to medicines and public health ; it is important therefore that the Council , as emphasised several times by Parliament , should declare its support for all those countries who intend to take advantage of the flexibilities offered by the TRIPS Agreements , to be able to provide essential medicines at affordable prices .
The European Union must do more to stem the health crisis in the world 's poorest countries , particularly by ensuring that these countries can meet their own needs , without burdening them with bilateral or regional agreements , the ' TRIPS-plus ' Agreements , on provisions relating to pharmaceutical products that risk having a negative impact on access to public health and medicines .
We also believe that it is the task of the Commission and the Council to support WTO initiatives to make TRIPS rules less complex , and specifically to maximise product availability .
( PL ) Mr President , halfway through it has transpired that among the millennium goals , we have done worst in combating TB , HIV and malaria .
World Health Organisation statistics show that in 2005 more than one and a half million people died of TB , which had a high mortality rate in Europe before World War II .
Each day 27 000 people die because of a lack of access to basic medicines .
Health is an inseparable condition for wellbeing and economic development , and I believe it is our moral duty to help less well developed countries in this respect .
One positive step is to provide support for the protocol amending the TRIPS Agreement in order to allow access to medicines .
It is not a complete solution , but we cannot not take the risk if we are to protect the lives of millions of people .
There is a risk .
To begin with , obtaining a licence for the production of generics for export to countries in need is hedged round by numerous conditions that might put people off such an undertaking .
Secondly , production of medicines of this type may create circumstances for abuse on the part of both the beneficiaries and the exporters themselves , and on top of that the infrastructure in poor countries is so weak that it is just not possible to undertake production there .
For this reason some kind of extra , multi-level aid instruments are needed .
It seems to me that the most important thing is financial aid intended for setting up local production centres , technology transfer , and investment in development and innovation .
We are obliged to show social solidarity with these countries , but we are the ones who have to work out a way that will do most to increase the effectiveness of the aid provided while at the same time protecting our own market .
Finally , Commissioner , I want to say that the Commission - and you , yourself , as head of a specific committee - have plenty of scope for new ideas to think about .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what we are discussing tonight and will be voting on tomorrow will be a small but important building block in the cooperation between the institutions , the Commission , the Council and Parliament .

In this procedure , Parliament 's only options are to agree with the proposal or reject it .
The way that Mr Susta , the rapporteur , and all the shadow rapporteurs - and here I would like to thank particularly Kader Arif from my group - have handled it increased considerably the predefined scope for Parliament to take action .
However , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for expressly pointing out that this accord , this Protocol , which we will vote on tomorrow and which Member States will then be able to ratify , is only a building block - an important one , but only a building block - and that there are many more steps to be taken to give developing countries with no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector a real opportunity , which they need , to provide their citizens with essential medicines .
This step will help us in our cooperation and it will especially help us when Parliament gains further rights of consent in the many other policy areas , in the area of trade , for example .
I extend sincere thanks to the Council and the Commission and all the Members who made it possible actually to achieve the flexibility that we now have .

( PT ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , given the ethical importance of this issue , the discussion that we are engaged in is of great political relevance .
The dichotomy between protecting intellectual property and promoting the health and well-being of the populations of less-developed countries arises out of a conflict of interests that can be resolved only by a comparison of values .
Simply put , this opposition is clear .
On the one hand we have a certain debatable model of protecting intellectual property based on the argument of the incentive for innovation and the consequent expansion of scientific knowledge , while on the other are millions of poor human beings , living in countries with scarce resources who cannot be condemned to suffer and die for economic reasons at a time when we have the knowledge that can save their lives .
This comparison makes it clear on which side the fundamental values lie .
In this light , at various times and in various places certain steps have already been taken to make the intellectual property protection system more flexible so as to promote access to medicines for all .
However , it turns out that progress so far is not sufficient .
The mechanism now being considered is merely a means of easing such a distressing problem .
We need to go further .
Parliament has pointed in this direction , making a decisive contribution to encourage the EU to adopt a position in line with its underlying values .
The solution now found reveals this concern and I would therefore like to commend the Presidency of the Council for its efforts to achieve , through statements and commitments , a position that shows Europe at its best : a political community always set on irrecusable humanist values .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Qualifications framework for lifelong learning ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mario Mantovani , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment of the European Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning - C6-0294 / 2006 -

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Mantovani and I would like to express the Commission 's thanks to him and to the responsible committees for their proactive engagement and supportive stance throughout the negotiations on the European Qualifications Framework ( EQF ) for lifelong learning .
This recommendation goes to the heart of what the EU is about : mobility , cooperation between countries , promoting prosperity and helping individual citizens .
We propose the EQF because you , the European Parliament , and the Member States asked us to find ways of promoting mobility and lifelong learning , without which we cannot achieve the Lisbon goals .
The EQF has been developed within the Education and Training 2010 work programme , the education dimension of the Lisbon Agenda .
The EQF seeks to overcome the barriers that remain to European workers and learners when they wish to change jobs or move to another country for work or for study .
Too often , Europeans have difficulty in using their qualifications in another European country .
Even in their own country they find their educational pathways blocked by poor integration of the different parts of their national education system .
The EQF will relate the countries ' different national qualification systems to each other , acting as a translation device .
It will thus make other countries ' qualifications more readable and so enable individuals to move to another country if they wish to work or study .
At the national level it will - indeed it is already doing this - stimulate the development of national qualifications frameworks .
Qualifications frameworks promote lifelong learning by , for example , making it easier for people to move between different types of education and training institutions , for example from vocational training to higher education .
I should acknowledge that the EQF is a technical , even complex instrument .
It will be used mainly by experts and educational authorities , but it is for the benefit of the citizen .
What we are debating today is the product of a collective endeavour between the Commission , countries , social partners , education and training associations and other stakeholders .
The EQF has very much been built on a consensus and we have sought to carry stakeholders with us throughout the process .
The EQF recommends that countries relate their qualification systems to the EQF by 2010 and ensure that individual national qualifications carry a reference to the appropriate EQF level by 2012 .
These dates were proposed by the Council and Parliament .
We have also been happy to agree to the insertion of a new recommendation on quality assurance proposed by Parliament , which we feel reinforces the importance of these principles .
We also agree to Parliament 's proposal to include a reference to credit systems which recognises the rapid development and application of these components of qualifications frameworks .
We believe that Parliament and the Council have indeed improved the text .
The approach adopted in the negotiations by the Parliament , Council and Commission reflects the consensus behind the EQF across Europe .
There is now a momentum behind the EQF ; the great majority of countries recognise its potential for mobility and as a lifelong learning instrument .
A large majority are now developing a national qualifications framework related to the EQF , so this proposal is already having a major impact on Europe 's education and training systems .
I hope you can agree to support this proposal at first reading so that it can formally be adopted by the Council in the coming weeks .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that tonight marks the beginning of a major project which Europe , the Member States and the regions and cities of the European Union have been waiting for for a long time , a goal that various stakeholders in the fields of education , employment , trade and the economy have been working towards for years , and something that society as a whole wants .
Tomorrow , with the approval of the European Qualifications Framework , we will lay the foundations for a better tomorrow , giving future generations a common point of reference for their cultural , educational and vocational engagement , training and of course employment .
In keeping with the Lisbon Strategy , the European Qualifications Framework represents a direct channel for improving links between schools , universities and the workplace , and between formal , informal and non-formal lifelong learning , ensuring transparency in the recognition of qualifications and certificates , both at national and sectoral level , and always within the European framework . Finally , it will strengthen cooperation between Member States in the sensitive area of comparing different systems .
This is the recurring theme which , in accordance with the Lisbon Strategy , has led us to assume the proper responsibility , with a choice that I am certain will promote growth , development and competitiveness in a Europe obliged to recognise social cohesion as one of its objectives .
It is a longstanding project , arising from the Bologna process as the system of accumulation and transfer of credits as an equivalent , before surfacing again at the Barcelona Summit system for vocational training .
It was improved at Bergen in 2004 , and again in the 2005 Council , which reiterated the need to adopt the current framework .
An historic journey that clearly illustrates the ambition of European decision-makers to create a new instrument , considered by many as revolutionary , but necessary for the European integration process which we have been persuing for so many years .
I am convinced , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , that this framework will not only encourage cross-border mobility , but will act as the driving force for the EU 's internal mobility - if we think of students , workers , researchers and volunteers in general , and all those who need to move freely through Europe without causing panic or undue concern .
You must remember the story of the Polish plumber , which terrified France : it was one of the main reasons why the French voted against the European Constitution in the referendum .
Well , the text we now have before us is the result of many months ' work , of close collaboration with the Council representatives under the Portuguese Presidency , which immediately saw the importance of this ambitious project .
The Commission , in the person of Commissioner Figeľ , has kept a close eye on this process throughout , and it is thanks to this spirit of partnership that we were able to improve the text , inserting key concepts close to the heart of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
For this , I am extremely grateful to my colleagues , to the shadow rapporteurs - I see Mrs Castex , Mr Kusstatscher , the liberals - as well as Mr Mann and Mr Kasoulides , and all those who contributed to this .

Thanks to their generous involvement and commitment , we were able to include the following concepts : social integration ; the requirements of the labour market ; personal development along different training paths ; non-discrimination with the inclusion of disadvantaged persons ; equal opportunities ; respect for the principle of subsidiarity and the creation of coordination points within the Member States .
We also made sure that the recommendation was non-binding , even though it remains legislative in nature .
Obviously this was not down to any weakness , but came more from a sense of responsibility and realism in order to encourage and promote the application of this instrument in those countries that need more time .
In short , there is no doubt that it can be improved , but in this life everything can be improved .
However , I am convinced that we have before us a text with a soul and a conscience .
It is my belief that the job of the European Parliament is to legislate in the real interests of citizens . Well , this is what we have done here .
The approval of the text at first reading is evidence of this , partly thanks to Mr Gaľa on the Committee on Culture and Education , the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , which all made a positive contribution .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , because he has really tackled a subject that goes much further than we might imagine .
Really , in a globalised world , Europe and the various EU countries will be defined by the qualifications of their human resources .
If we had to summarise in one pillar what it is that is going to enable Europe , and all the countries that make up Europe , to be competitive in this global world , it is the qualifications of the human resources , the citizens of Europe .
With this in mind , it is absolutely essential that lifelong education and training should be adapted to the demands of the labour market and constantly respond to them .
If this is not the case , it will be impossible to compete .
We will also come up against the following paradox : people are getting older , but these older people are getting younger and potentially more active , yet they have insufficient resources to continue being productive and giving to society and finding fulfilment in the world of employment .
With this in mind , the first aspect is that lifelong training , based essentially on a technological dimension , which is what gives added value , should be a fundamental concern .
There is , however , a second aspect , which concerns the future of Europe , and this is integrating these human resources into a competitive internal market , for which qualifications are needed that are recognised by all Member States , which will enable citizens from different countries to compete with each other based on training that is recognised by all .
Therefore , because it is necessary for individual development in such a competitive world and because it is necessary for the development of the internal market , this is a subject that has much greater importance than it is perhaps being given by being debated so late in the day .
Thank you , Mrs del Castillo , the evening debates are always the most interesting though .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( SK ) Firstly , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Mantovani , for his work on the report on the European Qualifications Framework .
We have been debating this subject in the European Parliament since spring 2006 .
As we know , a strong mandate for the European Qualifications Framework is an integral part of the Lisbon Strategy .
It will serve as a translation device between different qualifications systems and their levels , and its implementation will result in greater transparency , comparability and portability of citizens ' qualifications in individual Member States .
In addition , the European Qualifications Framework will help international sectoral organisations to improve the links between their sectoral qualifications systems and national qualifications systems , thus helping to increase the mobility of workers and learners .
In accordance with the principle of subsidiarity , I express my support for the non-binding nature of the European Qualifications Framework in the Member States and for the creation of national qualifications systems in accordance with national legislation and practice .
However , the European Qualifications Framework will become an effective instrument for recognition and comparability of qualifications at a European scale only if it is consistently implemented as a part of the lifelong learning systems in the EU Member States .
Since the EQF is directly linked to the way in which citizens assert themselves on the labour market and affects the quality of vocational education and training , it can also be considered a relevant tool for boosting competitiveness .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the European Qualifications Framework is the starting signal for the emancipation of vocational training at EU level , as it will enable vocational qualifications to be recognised throughout Europe , just as academic qualifications are .
This takes time and requires a willingness to cooperate , coordinate and change mindsets .
People who defend only what they know , and shy away from new experiences , should not be surprised to find that they lack mobility .
We need greater clarity .
National training qualifications must be comparable , although this does not mean that they have to be standardised .
I already called for this last year , in the EQF own-initiative report that I prepared for Parliament .
A great deal has happened since then .
Fears that Member States would lose powers have been allayed including in my country .
Lifelong learning and the EQF were major milestones of the German Council Presidency , which was acknowledged as successful .
Now it is full steam ahead with creating a national qualifications framework , which is not exactly easy , given Germany 's federal structure and the autonomy of each Land .
I would like to thank Mario Mantovani on behalf of the PPE-DE Group for his tenacity in dealing with the Commission and the Council and for keeping everyone in the Groups who followed the EQF informed .
I do hope that the report will be adopted in the first reading tomorrow .
From now on , there is a need for much discussion between trainers , teachers and training institutions , as we go into the details .
I experienced this just yesterday in a meeting with vocational college teachers in Hesse .
When ranking qualifications , for example , the German Master Craftsman or Tradesman Certificate belongs in at least the third or fourth of the eight levels .
Others are not familiar with this qualification at all .
The strength of the German dual system is not apparent to people unless they have experienced it for themselves .
In our European teaching and learning workshop , which is based on the principle of subsidiarity , the employment and vocational policy dimensions will be considerably strengthened in education and training .
Together we must and will achieve an ambitious goal : to incorporate a quality standard , the EQF , in certificates and diplomas by 2010 .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , first I would like to thank and congratulate the rapporteur for his excellent consultation on this recommendation on the European Qualifications Framework .
I would also like to thank the Commission and the Council for listening and being available to everyone .
In the EQF we have a tool that serves the mobility of European citizens , whether as part of training pathways or as part of professional mobility .
Free movement of persons , which is written into our Treaties , is still hindered by citizens ' difficulties in having the qualifications obtained in their country of origin recognised throughout the EU .
These qualifications , which are awarded by each Member States , according to its own procedures and systems , come under the sovereignty of each Member State and the EQF respects this .
However , qualifications increasingly need to be used outside the country in which they were awarded , something we wish to encourage out of respect for the value that the diploma or other qualification gives to its holder .
We therefore need a tool for comparing and especially for converting qualifications from one Member State to another .
This is a particularly necessary and sensitive issue for professional qualifications .
That is why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was keen to incorporate professional qualifications into the EQF .
This has been done and we are glad .
Employees and companies are increasingly mobile in the European job market .
However , employees and employers therefore need guarantees , in all Member States , concerning those things that measure the competence and value of a worker , namely their professional qualifications , regardless of how they were acquired .
Commissioner , I would , however , like to underline one other point .
At the moment the EQF is a nice but empty shell .
For it to exist properly , the diplomas , qualifications and certifications created in each Member State need to be calibrated and registered against references in the European Qualifications Framework .
This will constitute a large amount of work for all the Member States , and will require a lot of energy and specialist expertise .
The European Commission 's support will be essential , as will that of the European agencies - I am thinking in particular of Cedefop .
The participation of the social partners will also be essential , at all levels . They must be involved , as the recommendation states , by the Member States and the sectoral dialogue committees at Community level .
Finally , for the EQF to be complete and effective , it will also be necessary for the economic partners , the professional branches , to understand and appropriate it for themselves .
This is not only because they award the qualifications that should be included in the EQF , but because companies need benchmarks for classifying their jobs and for recruiting .
The EQF rapidly needs to become their common reference framework and I dream of an appropriate deadline by which the EQF will be the reference framework everywhere , even in collective agreements .
Mr President , establishing the European Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning is something that is of significance to the Europe of today and of the future .
Whether a person will be fulfilled in their personal life and in society depends , after all , on that person 's preparation for life and for work .
Historical and contemporary determinants have given rise to a need to devote particular attention to people aged 50 and over and to young people from families experiencing economic difficulties , especially in the new Member States .
Not all of them can , or should , go abroad in search of work .
Conditions need to be created for people to develop in their own environment , in the place where they live .
National qualification frameworks should mean an instrument serving to classify qualifications in line with criteria laid down for specific , attainable levels of study .
The European Union should support the efforts of Member States both legally and economically .
The Union should offer citizens not only the potential for free movement , but also recognition of their occupational qualifications .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , thank you very much to Mario Mantovani , who followed the footsteps of his neighbour on the bench in this question .
We have before us the result , which will require educational authorities in the Member States to use this shared framework as a translation device and a reference point .
There is plenty of room for more pressure to be applied for greater transparency , better comparability and thus equality and recognition of different qualifications within the EU .
I particularly welcome the fact that vocational training is specifically mentioned alongside general education , and given equal status , and that not only formal diplomas will be measured against the standard but also informal skills that people gain in the workplace or at home .
Tricks are often used to make access to the labour market more difficult .
Not infrequently , educational authorities , vocational boards and professional associations attempt to resist competition from outside by being reluctant to recognise tertiary and vocational education qualifications gained elsewhere , for reasons of form .
In 2010 that will be a thing of the past .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , ' encouraging lifelong learning ' sounds fine , does it not , with the EU working openly for the good of people and for employment ?
Only this morning , Mr Barroso said that he did not like opt-outs , but was in favour of compromises to respect diversity .
Those are fine words , but here we are with yet another attempt to bulldoze wonderful diversity into a common , harmonised , featureless landscape .
Now it is the turn of education , broadly speaking .
However , education is not within EU competence !
It is only covered by proposals under Articles 149 and 150 of the Treaty .
So this is also an attempt to smuggle in a competence by the back door .
If the EU wishes to assume competence over education , let it do so honestly , go through the usual channels and employ the transparency we hear so much about .
Following the model of the Bergen Framework , setting up the EUROPASS diploma and certificate supplements with the European credit transfer system will require a harmonised EQF level .
By issuing qualifications at sectoral and regional level , as well as at national level , this EU proposal will ensure an almost complete grip on qualifications .
By issuing grades and awarding qualifications it will ensure that the EU bypasses universities and national governments .
The UK Government is in favour of harmonising qualifications .
It is preparing for this by placing control of the universities under the Privy Council , ready to hand universities over to the EU .
What universities think of this seems to be immaterial .
HMG 's true position is revealed by its only objection to this scheme .
It does not want the EU logo on the qualification documents .
That is because they do not want people to know that education has been handed over to the EU .
Please tell me , why is it that my Government has taken that stance ?
Why is it in favour of an EU project but wants to keep it from the people ?
Are other national governments taking the same line ?
I would not be surprised if they were , because they , too , may wish to keep it from their people that their universities are being used in this way .
You may gather that I do not like this project , but it is not for reasons of national pride in Britain 's universities and colleges . No .
It is because , as a teacher , I value education and recognise that European countries have universities of which they are justly proud - great centres of learning whose alumni have contributed down the centuries to the arts , literature and science , enriching the lives of people everywhere .
I recognise also that this impetus to civilisation came about because those seats of learning evolved separately and independently , with each developing its own particular flavour and identity .
It is strange , is it not , in an age in which personal identity is being jealously guarded and identity theft is regarded as the crime it is , that some people thoughtlessly seek to destroy the unique identity of the institutions which made them what they are , denying others the education they acquired there ?

( EL ) Mr President , we should not have been able to debate the proposal to recommend a European Qualifications Framework ( EQF ) today had not our fellow Member , Mr Mantovani , made good use of the experience of former MEPs working on the subject or collaborated so well with the Commission and the Council .
Today we can thus deal with setting up the eight qualification levels covering general education , adult education , vocational education and training , and the three levels of tertiary education qualifications .
In answer to my fellow Member who spoke previously , we stress that Articles 149 and 150 of the Treaty are the right legal basis for the proposed recommendation simply because they allow for lifelong learning .
Under no circumstances do we accept that education should be an EU area of responsibility : it remains the preserve of national responsibility .
Comparing qualifications within the EQF , however , ignores teaching methods and types of educational establishment .
As a result , such a comparison refers only to knowledge , the capacity to understand , and the practical application of knowledge and skills .
Greece and many other states are particularly keen on the optional nature of the EQF .
The view has officially been expressed that promoting qualifications league tables has nothing to do with shaping the national educational system or recognising certification for studies .
Besides , for non-formal and informal education , because of its diversity and the special circumstances under which it is acquired , automatic certification is not possible , but a mere reference .
We must also bear in mind that the same person can have several qualifications at various levels .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the European Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning is a decisive document to enable the national and sectoral reference frameworks of qualifications to be compared at European level .
The certification of qualifications obtained is essential to enable progress achieved outside formal education , especially in working life , to be integrated with advances achieved in the formal systems .
It thus contributes to greater democratisation throughout the EU as regards the management of personal professional careers .
This directive , as moreover one of the amendments proposed and approved in Parliament emphasises , promotes the validation of these qualifications in accordance with the Council conclusions on common European principles for the identification and validation of non-formal and informal learning .
Mr President , this will enable us to advance towards a single European legal framework that aims to be coherent without diminishing the guarantees that in some cases exist already .
Ladies and gentlemen , the proposal for a directive that we are discussing will be a decisive tool for greater flexibility on the labour markets , offering a better defence of workers ' interests and a better chance of providing quality services .
At this point I can only welcome the Portuguese Presidency 's efforts in the field of education to move surely and relatively quickly towards approval by Parliament at first reading .
It is clear that in these circumstances we should also highlight the work carried out by the rapporteur Mr Mantovani and the shadow rapporteurs , notably Mrs Castex .
In order to be more effective , to derive more benefits from professional and academic mobility in the European area we need to work even more effectively in implementing the European Qualifications Framework and in linking it to the European credit system , and this report promotes a significant advance in that direction .
Thus , the proposal for a directive promotes equality of opportunity in the knowledge society we live in , with the aim of better integrating the labour markets of the various Member States , taking account of the rich diversity of the various national systems .
It therefore deserves a positive response from us .
( PL ) Mr President , transparency and comparability of qualifications acquired in differing circumstances , systems and countries make it easier to evaluate the level of knowledge both of employees and of employers , thus increasing mobility in the labour market .
This concerns both regulated professions - doctors , nurses and other medical professions , where qualifications are mutually recognised by EU countries - and other professions .
The introduction of the Qualifications Frameworks will give rise to greater social cohesion .
Different treatment should be accorded , however , to artistic educational institutions and professions , where talent and gifts should not be constrained by disciplines , or averaged out , and where the teacher is not objectivised , but continues to be master .
I congratulate the rapporteur .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this has been an extremely good debate which marks the launch of a very important project , which I think is timely , necessary and , as others have pointed out , is a platform for this and future generations .
It is essential for the working of the single market , it is essential for Europe 's social development , it is essential for the ability of Europe 's citizens to cope with fast changing economic and labour market change .
It is a passport to personal advancement as well as society 's integration .
It has been a very constructive and harmonious debate - apart , I suppose , from the intervention of one compatriot who allowed his mixture of gross exaggeration and overstatement , tinged with a fair amount of ideological prejudice , totally to misrepresent what is being envisaged and proposed .
This is a recommendation , and is exactly that - it is voluntary .
The EQF will not award qualifications : that remains up to countries , universities and other institutions , which remain autonomous .
There will be an EQF reference level on qualifications , for example on level 4 , but national level will also be on qualification .
So I am glad to be able to welcome this consensus - notwithstanding one individual - in this Parliament and Council behind the EQF legislative proposal , that this is reflected at the national level , where we see a serious momentum in building national qualifications frameworks .
The debate is closed .
At the end of this debate , I would first of all like to thank the interpreters , who chose to stay even though they were not required to .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The European reference framework will reduce the complexity of a system with 27 bilateral relations for the recognition of qualifications obtained from academic and professional education .
The Bologna Process of creating , by 2010 , a European Education Area is thus supplemented by an instrument of recognition of all qualifications that may be obtained in the Union 's Member States .
Although 9 out of 10 European Union citizens believe lifelong education is an important instrument for career development , the lack of financial resources leads to big deficiencies in the training required for the current economy .
A recent eurobarometer shows that only 58 % of the respondents are able to use a computer , and only one half of them declare that they are Internet users .
Moreover , over 60 % of the citizens cannot use a foreign language in their work .
National budgets designated to lifelong education vary from 40 % of the total amount used for education in Northern countries to under 10 % in the new Member States .
Thus , initiatives such as Grundtvig or Erasmus for Young Entrepreneurs should be extended and doubled by funds that would supplement the insufficient national finances .
Moreover , the European reference framework should be supplemented by programmes that would establish veritable European qualifications , recognized over the entire European Union territory .
in writing . - ( BG ) It is necessary to point out that the informal educational sector is underdeveloped , rather unknown and often isolated from the formal one .
The European Qualifications Framework is a key instrument in overcoming this discrepancy and also a tool to re-assess and re-organise the vocational orientation and information system .
The development of the EQF will facilitate the mobility of manpower within the 31 participating countries and promote the involvement of sectoral and industrial organisations from the new EU Member States in the absorption of resources from the European Social Fund allocated for the acquisition of new qualifications or upgrading of the existing ones .
The more recent EU Member States like Bulgaria find it important to have the opportunity to exchange good practices and to implement Community pilot programmes .
The development and implementation of the European Credit System for Vocational Education and Training ( ECVET ) intended to facilitate the accumulation , transfer and recognition of educational results , regardless of where and how they have been scored , is of great importance with a view to the transition periods applied to Bulgaria and Romania .
The credit system will foster the free movement and the expansion of the access to the labour market for most of the human resources in the Community , while ensuring reliable basis for comparisons .
I believe that the EQF will give further impetus to the development of this process .
in writing . - ( HU ) Recognition of citizens ' knowledge , skills and competence is indispensable for the European Union 's competitiveness and for social cohesion , as well as for individual citizens ' mobility .
Participation in lifelong learning and access to lifelong learning for all , including the disadvantaged , must be fostered and improved at both national and Community level .
Young people , adults , immigrants and manual labourers throughout Europe who have informally acquired skills that have never been recognised must be encouraged to participate in lifelong learning programmes , thus avoiding social and labour-market exclusion of these groups .
To do all this , an important role can be played by a common reference framework that serves as a translation device between different qualification systems and their levels , whether for general and higher education or for vocational education and training .
This will increase the transparency , comparability and mobility of citizens ' qualifications in different Member States .
The task of the reference framework is to integrate and coordinate national qualifications systems , to ensure non-discrimination , to increase access and progression of qualifications in relation to civil society and the labour market .
In the interests of ending the segregation that exists in education , I support the initiation of measures to provide information and engage in social dialogue .
I also think it is important to recognise informal learning acquired by workers , in order to enable them to change jobs more easily .
The European Union must become a knowledge-based society well prepared to meet the challenges of globalisation .
In such a society , citizens of each Member State must adjust to meet the needs of a competitiveness-driven labour market .
For this reason , learning will be a fundamental prerequisite for all age groups .
in writing . - The European Qualifications Framework ( EQF ) for lifelong learning is a good example of the European Union doing what it should be doing in terms of promoting mobility across national borders .
Over the years most of us will have made representations on behalf of nationals of our own Member States who find that when they take advantage of the freedom of movement available to them within the EU and actually move to another country they are discriminated against because their qualifications are not properly recognised in their new country of residence .
The EQF , by acting as a translation tool for national authorities , will undoubtedly help our constituents to overcome this senseless discrimination .
It should also work to the advantage of any Member State to which a person moves , as it will ensure that an accurate assessment may be made of that individual 's qualifications .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12.05 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Membership of political groups : see Minutes
Written declarations ( tabling ) : see Minutes
EU-Turkey relations ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on EU-Turkey relations .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Presidency would firstly like to thank the European Parliament , and in particular Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , for the motion for a resolution on EU-Turkey relations .
The Presidency acknowledges and welcomes Parliament 's active engagement with the enlargement process as a constructive contribution to the general debate on enlargement and Turkey 's accession process in particular .
There is no doubt that every debate offers a useful opportunity for creating awareness of Turkey 's accession process , engaging the citizens of Member States and Turkey in this process and supporting the Turkish Government in its accession path .
I can assure you that we pay particular attention to the views of the European Parliament .
In a few days the Commission will present its regular progress report on Turkey 's accession process .
The Council will examine and assess this report very carefully .
In the meantime , I would like to briefly mention a few points in this phase of Turkey 's accession negotiations .
We are of the opinion that the recent elections in Turkey demonstrated the wish of the Turkish people for democracy , stability - both political and economic - and progress .
We also welcome how the elections were conducted , the high voter turnout and the improved representativeness of the new Turkish Parliament .
The Presidency shares the views and concerns of this House regarding Turkey 's reform process .
We believe that the new Government enjoys increased legitimacy and a clear mandate that should enable decisive steps to be made in advancing and broadening the reform process in Turkey .
It is imperative that the new Government gives fresh impetus to the reforms - and their implementation - by focusing on key areas .
In this regard , the implementation of the Accession Partnership - in particular as regards its short-term priorities - is of great importance .
I would remind you that the Accession Partnership must be reviewed in the coming months .
In this context , I would also like to stress the need for broad consultation and national consensus on Turkey 's new Constitution .
We share your views on the importance of reforms in the crucial area of fundamental freedoms and human rights .
Further tangible progress is essential , in particular as regards freedom of expression , religious freedom , cultural rights and women 's rights , and also further strengthening of the fight against torture and ill-treatment .
Most of these issues are covered in the Accession Partnership as short-term priorities that Turkey needs to meet .
In particular , in the area of freedom of expression , we regret the lack of progress despite wide public debate on the issue and we are concerned about the increasing nationalism leading to self-censorship .
We continue to firmly believe that Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code , as well as other vaguely formulated articles , need to be abolished or substantially amended in order to guarantee freedom of expression .
Progress in this area is of paramount importance for the general advancement of the accession negotiations .
As for religious freedom , tangible progress is urgently needed , in particular following the tragic incidents earlier this year .
The adoption of legislation which will comprehensively address all problems faced by non-Muslim communities - such as legal status , property registration and training of the clergy - in order to guarantee religious pluralism in line with European standards is long awaited .
The Law on Foundations could be a positive first step in this regard and will be carefully assessed once adopted and implemented .
The recent Supreme Court ruling on the Ecumenical Patriarchate is also an issue of concern .
We share your views on civil-military relations .
Recent developments - in particular before and during the election campaign - demonstrate the need for further steps in this area so that the Armed Forces cannot exercise political influence .
Civilian democratic control over the military in line with practice in EU Member States is still to be ensured .
Regarding the south-east , we strongly condemned the recent terrorist attack in the province of Sirnak .
We have also condemned other acts of terror perpetrated in Turkey and will continue to do so .
Terrorist activities can never be justified .
We recall our solidarity with the people of Turkey in this regard .
On the other hand , terrorism should not make us forget about the urgent need to promptly develop and implement a comprehensive strategy that will guarantee the economic , social and cultural development of the south-east .
This is a complex area that we are closely monitoring as part of the ongoing reform process .
Apart from compliance with the Copenhagen political criteria , Turkey 's progress in preparing for accession will be measured against the requirements clearly set out in the Negotiating Framework .
In this respect , as agreed by the Council in December last year , progress made on the issues covered by the Declaration of 21 September 2005 , in particular full and non-discriminatory implementation of the Additional Protocol to the Ankara Agreement , will be monitored and reviewed .
Regrettably , no progress has yet been made on this issue .
I would also underline that recognition by all Member States is a necessary component of the accession process and that it is therefore vital that the European Union normalises relations between Turkey and all the Member States as soon as possible .
The work required to ensure compliance with the Union 's standards and membership obligations is difficult and demands continuous efforts and determination .
We attach particular importance to Turkey 's accession process and I can assure you that the Portuguese Presidency will also do its utmost in order to allow these negotiations to advance .
Commitments made need to be met .
Sustaining the reform process and meeting existing obligations will move Turkey 's accession process forward to the benefit , first and foremost , of all Turkish citizens .
Nevertheless , progress in the accession process depends fundamentally and primarily on Turkey 's performance .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first congratulate Ms Oomen-Ruijten on her solid report and for proposing a draft that is both rigorous and fair .
Turkey went through an extremely difficult period earlier this year with a severe constitutional crisis and high political tensions .
Despite such challenges , it conducted parliamentary and presidential elections in full respect of democratic principles and with a very high level of citizen participation .
The result was that democracy had the last word .
The new Turkish Parliament is largely representative of Turkish political diversity and , as Mr Lobo Antunes said , the new Government can now work with the support of a stable majority and a broad popular mandate .
Thus the way ahead has been cleared in this regard .
Now the time has come to regenerate a new momentum in the reform process .
Therefore the Commission shares the basic approach followed by the draft resolution , which is to identify challenges and to encourage Turkey to meet these policy challenges .
This means to support the commitment of the new Turkish Government to strengthen the reform efforts and to encourage it to translate this commitment rapidly into action .
This concerns both the reform process and the Ankara Protocol .
The Commission welcomes the fact that the Government has put the constitutional reforms at the top of its agenda , with a view to reinforcing democracy and expanding fundamental freedoms .
However , this should not result in any postponement of reforms that are urgently needed today , such as the revision of the infamous Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code and other articles related to freedom of expression or the adoption of the Law on Foundations to ensure freedom of religion .
Further efforts are also needed to ensure democratic supremacy of civil-military relations , to protect the rights of women , children and trade unions , to improve the judiciary system and to enhance the fight against corruption .
Let me say some words on the recent events and the current situation , on which we coordinate very closely with the Presidency and Mr Solana and we have taken due note of Parliament 's views .
Turkey faces continual cross-border terrorist attacks from the PKK , which is on the EU list of terrorist organisations .
The European Union condemns all terrorist attacks and understands Turkey 's need to protect its citizens .
The EU and Turkey are both committed to the independence , sovereignty , unity and territorial integrity of Iraq .
We continue to urge Turkey and Iraq to tackle this problem through cooperation between the relevant authorities and by respecting international law .
The recent bilateral agreement between Turkey and Iraq on the fight against terrorism provides a basis for this .
The Turkish authorities are understandably trying to engage the United States as well as the Iraqi and Iraqi-Kurdish authorities in their efforts , with some signs of progress recently .
The resolution passed in Parliament last week should be seen as part of that overall political strategy .
The European perspective for Turkey has proved to be a key incentive for reforms in the country .
In line with our core principle of conditionality in enlargement policy , the implementation of the reforms on the ground determines progress in the accession negotiations .
However , if we are to use this principle effectively to have serious political leverage to encourage reforms , the European Union itself must stick to its own commitments .
We have to keep our word - pacta sunt servanda .
All Member States continue to support accession negotiations with Turkey , and it is vital for the Union 's credibility that the process continues in accordance with the Negotiating Framework of 3 October 2005 and the Council decision of 11 December 2006 .
These were unanimous decisions of all 27 Member States .
We should therefore open further chapters once they are technically ready .
At least two chapters - consumer and health protection and trans-European networks - could be opened in the coming weeks .
We also encourage Turkey to work to meet the opening benchmarks already defined for 13 chapters .
Last but not least , please rest assured that your contribution will be duly taken into account in our forthcoming progress report concerning Turkey , which the Commission will adopt on 6 November .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , thank you , both to the Council and to the Commission , for the kind words that have been expressed .
The debate today and the resolution that we are about to adopt are indeed directed in the first instance at the Commission , because we intend to have some input into the progress report .
However , they are also directed at the Council , which will meet again in December in response to the progress report .
What are we doing in the resolution ?
What are we doing in the text ?
We describe the progress made and the agreements we have reached .
We also describe what has come of the commitment that Turkey entered into .
The resolution is , therefore , a compilation of what has been achieved , but it also contains all manner of things that have not been achieved .
Mr President , what it also includes is what we expect from the Turkish Government , because there is an opportunity now to give a new impetus to the reform process .
The third point I wish to make : we have tried to deepen and broaden the debate with Turkey .
That means , therefore , that I am asking for attention to be given to social cohesion , logistics , transport and energy .
Freedom of speech and religious freedom are rightly given a prominent place in our text .
The constitution , the new constitution should not be any excuse to not pull out all the stops immediately to ensure that all necessary reforms , especially those connected with Article 301 , are realised .
Another point that I would like to make is about the relationship with neighbouring countries .
Good relations with neighbours are an absolute necessity .
When I look at Turkey and Armenia , that means that the borders must be opened .
There must be an end to all economic blockades .
Moreover - my final point - if a people does not acknowledge its past , it has no future .
I am therefore also asking the Commission to support Turkey and Armenia on this issue .
Mr President , I cannot say anything more about the PKK because the procedures in this House do not allow me enough time .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on this very good report and thank her very much for the excellent cooperation .
There are a number of messages contained in this report , and when I visited Turkey with Martin Schulz , these were the messages I was able to convey to the Turkish authorities .
Firstly , the reforms must not only be continued but stepped up .
The Commissioner has already mentioned Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code and other reforms to guarantee full and genuine freedom of expression and plurality of opinion in Turkey .
The same naturally applies to freedom of religion and many other issues which will be covered by other colleagues later in the debate .
The reform process has to be moved up a gear .
Secondly , the Kurdish issue : I would like to make my position here very clear .
For many years now , indeed for decades , I have been trying to play my part to help resolve the Kurdish issue , but now the time has come when it is possible to have a political and parliamentary solution to the Kurdish issue and abandon violence .
That is why I cannot understand why the PKK is continuing with terrorism .
I can understand it because the PKK does not want a peaceful solution , and there may well be some people in the military who do not want a peaceful solution either .
Nonetheless , we should send out a clear signal that we do want a peaceful solution , and so does Iraq .
We had a meeting with President Talabani 's representative in Ankara and he also made it very clear that what they want is not continued PKK terrorism but a political solution .
I would hope that representatives of the Kurdish regional government will heed the message that the continuation of PKK terrorism damages not only Turkey but also Iraq .
That is why I myself , and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , can only endorse this appeal : Turkey and Iraq must come together to work on the basis of peaceful cooperation , which must include the Kurdish regional government , to put an end to terrorism .
At the same time , Turkey must make offers to the Kurdish population of Turkey so that they feel comfortable there and can consider Turkey as their home as well .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to start by thanking the rapporteur Ria Oomen-Ruijten , but also Jos Lagendijk and Hannes Swoboda , for the very good cooperation during the drafting of this resolution .
I believe we have produced a good text with a surprisingly high level of consensus , and I think that is a very good thing .
For my Group , I would like to highlight and underline the key points once again .
First of all , this resolution is a positive and constructive signal to Turkey .
We welcome the fact that the summer 's constitutional crisis has been overcome , and we welcome the fact that the new Government has a strong and clear mandate for further reforms .
However , we urge the Government unequivocally to use this mandate to genuinely drive forward the reforms .
What is important in this context - as the resolution says - is that these reforms are extremely important for Turkey itself , for the Turkish people , for Turkish society and for the Turkish economy .
Turkey must continue to improve steadily and of its own accord and I am glad to see that there is increasing consensus in Turkey on this issue , as expressed in the April programme .
It is good that this is still the case .
What is important for us is that the Copenhagen criteria will continue to be the key benchmark for the negotiations , just as the European Union 's own absorption capacity continues to be an important and indispensable criterion .
Reforms are urgently needed in the following areas in particular , some of which have already been mentioned .
The Penal Code : Article 301 has already been mentioned , that is quite clear .
To my mind , we should be starting to include Article 252 in the debate as well .
This concerns insulting the memory of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk and is problematical because this is also a restriction of freedom of speech .
A second important point is improving the situation of women .
The number of honour killings continues to be a matter of grave concern .
The constitutional reform must continue .
Fundamental human rights and personal freedoms must be protected .
Let me add that , from our perspective , electoral law is also a problem .
A 10 % hurdle is unheard of elsewhere in the OSCE .
Let me conclude by saying that we have to show some understanding for the difficult situation in Turkey , particularly in view of the dramatic events in the south-east on Turkey 's border with Iraq .
We unequivocally condemn the terrorist activities of the PKK in recent weeks and I would like to pass on my Group 's condolences to the families of the soldiers who have been killed .
We urge the Turkish Government to react cautiously to this situation .
There has been no sign , to date , that this has not been the case .
Nonetheless , the measures adopted to mitigate the threat to Turkish territory must comply with the following conditions .
They must be appropriate , proportionate and limited over time .
The European Union understands the difficult situation in Turkey .
It is important for Turkey to retain this understanding .
A peaceful solution is , of course , our highest objective .
Today 's resolution is a genuinely constructive signal for positive dialogue with Turkey .
Turkey will continue to be a very important partner for the European Union and must now press ahead resolutely with reform in its own interests .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one year on from the last resolution adopted by this House on EU-Turkey relations , it is sad to see that certain fundamental issues remain tragically topical .
Turkey does not recognise Cyprus , to all intents and purposes a Member State of the European Union ; freedom of the press is still curtailed , since Article 301 of the Penal Code has not yet been amended and Turkey persists in not acknowledging the genocide of the Armenian population in 1915 .
The recent appalling terrorist attack by the PKK , the ensuing robust response from the Turkish army and the threat to intervene in the northern part of Iraq unless the PKK ends its terrorist activities once and for all : these factors compound the dangerous and delicate geopolitical position in which Turkey finds itself .
Some progress has of course been made . I am thinking in particular of the increased representation of women in the newly elected Turkish Parliament , in economic circles and in the academic world , but we need to ask ourselves now more than ever whether the Europe of tomorrow wishes to be a large political entity or to have a strong cultural identity , because these uncertainties play into the hands of Turkey which does not wish to stop being itself .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is unfortunately overshadowed by the terrorist attacks in Turkey .
I would much rather have spoken about the desirability of picking up the thread of the reforms again ; unfortunately , I have come to the conclusion that , despite many fine words , in practice up to now far too little has come of this .
However , I think that the main question now is : what do we think Turkey should do ?
Let us drop the hypocrisy from this debate , ladies and gentlemen .
Every one of us knows , or should know , that there are no easy answers to this devilish dilemma .
On the one hand we realise , we know , that any country where fifty people have been killed in the last month has to do something in response , while at the same time many of us realise - including , I think , many in the Turkish Government - that large-scale military operations are no solution .
They do not root out the PKK , they cause immense diplomatic and political damage and - most importantly - they make a solution to the Kurdish problem in Turkey much more difficult .
Let us therefore hope that all the attempts now being made to find a diplomatic and political solution will be successful .
The problem , ultimately , does not lie in the Iraqi mountains , the problem lies in Turkey , but the solution to the problem - the Kurdish problem - is not Turks against Kurds .
In my view , the issue is one of those in Turkey , Turks and Kurds who know that the only solution to the problem is a political one - the AKP and the DTP - versus the radicals , on the Turkish side and on the Kurdish side , who are not interested in a political solution at all and who think that military violence can help : on the Turkish side the army and a section of the opposition and on the Kurdish side the PKK .
Let us be very clear : the present attacks by the PKK are , of course , directed at the Turkish state , but they are also an attack on the Kurdish DTP party in the Turkish Parliament , which is seeking a political solution to the problem .
That is why it is so important that this Parliament does indeed strongly condemn the PKK and its terrorist attacks , while at the same time expressing support for all those on the Kurdish side and on the Turkish side who are trying to find a peaceful political solution to this problem .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , with the prospect of Turkey 's accession to the EU firmly in mind , the Commission , and hence the Union as a whole , is called upon to complete , in the next few days , the assessment of Turkey 's progress , or lack of it , in the various sectors it is required to harmonise with the European acquis .
We have declared that , provided it complies with all the Copenhagen criteria and the obligations it has accepted according to the Negotiating Framework and additional protocol , Turkey should be able to join the EU .
We do not think that any compromise solutions will bring the results that either Turkey or the Union is hoping for .
We should like to point out that Turkey has made some progress , but we repeat that if its accession is to proceed smoothly , it must do as previous accession countries have done : comply with its Convention obligations to the EU as a whole .
Turkey must therefore fulfil its obligations towards Cyprus ; it must open its sea and air ports to ships and aircraft from the Republic of Cyprus and lift the veto on participation by Cyprus in international organisations and multilateral treaties .
As a Left-wing group , and especially as AKEL ( the Progressive Party of the Working People of Cyprus ) , we are confident that the prospect of Turkey 's accession to the EU will ensure compliance with its obligations , especially as regards ending the occupation of Cyprus by Turkish troops .
We also believe that by encouraging Turkey on its course towards Europe , assuming that Turkey simultaneously fulfils its obligations to the EU , we can exert pressure on it .
Thus Turkey must fulfil the following obligations : to defend and respect the human rights of all who live there , including Kurds and other minorities ; to recognise the genocide of the Armenians , and to open its border with Armenia , with all the socio-economic consequences that this will entail .
If Turkey hopes to continue and complete its accession course , then it is patently obvious that the measures and policies it adopts will have to lead to full compliance with the European acquis and absolute respect for international law , which ultimately governs the workings of the EU .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , what we have heard is astonishing , and it comes from none other than the competent Commissioner , who was all too ready to brand as terrorists those claiming to be fighting for freedom .
I wonder if we are not over-willing to describe Turkey as being attacked on all sides .
This is a country that keeps troops in an EU Member State , and is not the first and only country to adjust to EU requirements .
I shall end by turning to a much more technical matter .
Shortly before the adventure on its eastern borders , the price of oil in Turkey was USD 76 a barrel in Europe ; now , owing to its arms , to which it always has recourse when solving its own problems , oil has risen to more than USD 90 a barrel .
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , during the discussion of this resolution in committee , it seemed as if Parliament as a whole was half asleep .
Vague criticisms are formulated as a pure formality but , apart from that , it seems as if we have to accept the accession of Turkey as a fait accompli .
Yet Turkey has made hardly any progress since the beginning of the negotiations .
I refer , for example , to a recent report by Amnesty International about the human rights situation and the treatment of minorities .
Turkey 's position on Cyprus is hardly mentioned any more .
What is more , there is a serious risk that Turkey is about to launch a large-scale military attack on Iraq .
Then we would be faced with a situation where a candidate country is not only occupying part of the territory of an existing Member State with its military , but on top of that is going to wage a kind of local war in another neighbouring country , Iraq on this occasion .
Mr President , the majority of the population in Europe is against the possible accession of Turkey .
This is because Turkey is not a European country and so it does not belong in the European Union .
Instead of compromising the credibility of Europe even more , we would do better to pursue a favoured partnership with Turkey , in all openness and unequivocally , instead of full EU membership .
Mr President , I detect , particularly from the Commission , a tendency to present non-European Turkey in the best possible light .
Not surprising , maybe , considering the millions of pre-accession aid which we are pouring in , but there are uncomfortable realities to be faced .
Honour crimes , gross human rights abuses , lack of protection for non-Muslim minorities , absence of religious freedom and anti-Christian attacks and propaganda are my biggest concern .
This year , fatal attacks on Christians have continued , such as the slaying of three men in Malatya in April .
Genuine freedom of religion is often the touchstone of a country 's abiding commitment to human rights .
In Turkey 's case , it has much to do , including the legal status of religious groups and property rights , but fundamentally the right to worship freely and the right to convert must be respected .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for drawing up this report which will be submitted to the Commission and should be taken into account as Parliament 's contribution to the forthcoming progress report .
Turkey has overcome domestic problems , the Government has a clear mandate , the referendum on Sunday on constitutional amendments concerning the election of the President produced the right outcome , and there is now no reason to delay the reforms any longer .
I would therefore like to begin with an appeal to the Turkish Government : if it is serious about joining the EU , then it has to increase the intensity of the reforms .
Relatively little happened here last year , as we all know .
Secondly , the reforms are intended to benefit the Turkish people first and foremost .
They are not an end in themselves or any sleight of hand on Europe 's part ; they are intended to address the deficits which should not be present in a democracy , notably in relation to freedom of opinion , freedom of religion , women 's rights , minority rights , electoral law , etc .
Turkey must tackle these issues and dismantle these deficits of its own accord .
I would like to mention another subject as well , namely the Armenian question .
As a German , I think that we can expect a clear acknowledgement of its historical responsibility from Turkey .
Its refusal to speak out on this issue and remove the blockades of Armenia is a topic which must continue to be addressed in the discussions .
At present - as Mr Swoboda has just said - there is a concern that military conflict in the Kurdish region will spill over into Iraq .
Here , we clearly prefer a diplomatic solution , a negotiated solution , instead of a military solution .
I fully endorse the position of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament on this issue .
Ultimately , Turkey itself must determine whether and how it wishes to continue down the road to Europe .
From our perspective , full accession to the EU is not the only option ; the negotiations have purposely remained open-ended and it is ultimately up to Turkey whether it wishes to pursue this route proactively .
It is not only about whether Europe itself has the capacity to grant accession to Turkey .
( NL ) Mr President , I would also like to express my compliments to the rapporteur , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
My immediate response to Mr Langen 's remark is that in my Group we are definitely talking about negotiations with a view to membership of the European Union !
The resolution we are debating today is an encouragement to the Turkish Government to keep going down that route whatever it does .
Prime Minister Erdoğan was given a strong mandate to do that by the Turkish electorate .
That does indeed put him in a position to spur on the reforms .
We expect rapid results now and we therefore expect that the Commission will soon come up with a progress report to that effect .
Urgent issues should not be overlooked , of course .
I think that it would be a hugely important symbolic step , which would have a huge ripple effect , if the Turkish Government were to do something about Article 301 , if they were to repeal it or reformulate it .
That would create the necessary openness in Turkey for debate , including debate on issues from the past , and that brings me to the Armenian question .
We believe that it is very important that there be an internal debate on this in Turkey , but it is mainly up to Turkey itself to organise that and not so much for Parliament or the US House of Representatives to try to force the issue .
It is mainly an internal matter ; we can help , but there is not really much point in us continually pushing for this from outside .
The new constitution has been announced .
That also creates opportunities , we believe , to finally seek a political solution to the Kurdish question .
I share the view of those who say that we should do everything we can to prevent a military escalation in northern Iraq , but we can only do that if we first distance ourselves from the terrorist attacks of the PKK and demand the PKK to stop .
Secondly , we must also support Turkey in its dialogue with Iraq and the Iraqi authorities , and also in its dialogue with the regional authorities in Kurdish Iraq to cooperate in practice to stop these attacks .
We welcome new diplomatic initiatives , but we believe that it is mainly practical cooperation in the region itself that will drive down and end the violence .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council presidency said ' it depends on Turkey ' and many colleagues have repeated this idea , including Mr Langen who said ' it is up to them to decide ' .
Well , I do not believe that is so .
In my opinion Europe must assume its own responsibilities .
This is not just a problem about Turkey and its compliance with the formal accession criteria .
The truth is that in recent months Europe , Europe 's governments - beginning with , but not only , the French Presidency - have been sending out a message that Turkey will not join the European Union .
The Oomen-Ruijten report starts from this assumption and the text is probably the best that could be drafted in this House , but we need to have the courage to alter the overall context : the current political and military crisis on the border between Turkey and Iraq is partly the responsibility of the European Union , given that politically we have slammed the door in Turkey 's face even though the relevant negotiations are continuing .
What is needed is a major leap forward , whereby the European Union , the governments , explicitly call for a political report on the individual right of citizens living on Turkish soil to democracy and the rule of law , with a view to joining Europe .
This may help Turkey move towards Europe and not towards the Middle East .
( DE ) Mr President , unfortunately , today 's vote on Parliament 's resolution on Turkey is overshadowed by very distressing and worrying events .
Last Wednesday , Turkey 's Grand National Assembly voted by an overwhelming majority in favour of a Turkish military incursion into northern Iraq .
Since then , we have heard the distressing news of deaths and casualties on the Turkey-Iraq border , of bloody battles and combat , and we have heard that the Turkish military is firing on villages in northern Iraq .
We have heard about attacks on Kurdish institutions and DTP offices , and about enraged nationalists attempting to lynch their Kurdish fellow citizens .
Yet the signals that were sent out by Turkey after the end of the constitutional crisis in late August were so promising .
There was talk of a new civilian constitution , further reforms , and more intensive reform efforts to address still unresolved issues .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten and many of my fellow Members wanted to take account of these positive signals and developments in Turkey after the reform efforts in Turkey came to a standstill last year .
The motion for a resolution is balanced and fair in its assessment and evaluation .
However , in view of Turkey 's recent decision and the blatant threat of a military incursion which violates the territorial integrity of Iraq , I do wonder which aims Turkey is actually pursuing .
Is it really about the PKK ?
The fact is that the Turkish military has carried out 24 cross-border operations in recent years and not one of them has actually had any lasting effect .
Why should it be different this time ?
Or could it have to do with the oil reserves in the region around Kirkuk and Turkey 's intention of removing the autonomous status of the Kurds in northern Iraq ?
What is clear , at any rate , is that the Kurdish issue cannot be resolved with an incursion into northern Iraq .
From my perspective , however , it is also clear that Turkey cannot be seen to breach international law and violate Iraq 's sovereignty before the eyes of the European Union and the international community .
Europe must now take responsibility and participate actively in developing a strategy for the resolution of the Kurdish issue , for this is the key to achieving genuine peace and democracy in Turkey .
( NL ) Mr President , in a recent interview in the Dutch press , Commissioner Rehn stated unequivocally which reforms in Turkey are the most urgent for the EU , and I quote : ' they are in the area of freedom of speech and religion , core principles of democracy ' .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for this clear statement of position .
It also led me to bring to his attention a document from the Alliance of Protestant Churches in Turkey .
The document is dated 1 September 2007 and describes the serious distress and concerns of Turkish Protestants about the absence of freedom of religion .
Commissioner , I trust that you will speak firmly to your Turkish interlocutors about the vulnerable position in Turkish society of the Turkish Protestants , or all Turkish Christians .
Treating the symptoms , Mr President , is really not enough .
The media and politicians are creating a very intolerant , dangerous climate for non-Muslim minorities in Turkey .
Here too the situation calls for swift action from Brussels toward Ankara .
I will hand a second document on this to the Commissioner and eagerly await a swift response from him in writing .
( DE ) Mr President , a few days ago I was in the Turkish-occupied part of Cyprus and I gained a first-hand impression of the systematic destruction of around 500 Greek Orthodox churches and the destruction of European cultural heritage which can never be made good .
In my view , this conflicts with the spirit of Europe just as clearly as the continuing lack of tolerance towards Christians and other minorities , or indeed the offence of ' insulting Turkish identity ' which is used to suppress freedom of opinion and freedom of the press , to say nothing of the continuing human rights violations , the failure to address the issue of the genocide against the Armenians , and ongoing Islamicisation .
It is quite unacceptable that an accession candidate should still be occupying parts of an EU Member State , namely Northern Cyprus , to say nothing of planning a military attack on another country , as is currently the case against Iraq .
Brussels never tires of emphasising that compliance with fundamental rights , especially freedom of religion and freedom of expression , has the highest priority for accession to the EU .
In the case of Turkey 's membership aspirations , these are clearly nothing but empty words .
( EL ) Mr President , let me begin by congratulating Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her report .
And now , a timely issue : what will happen , Mr President , if Turkey , a candidate country , ignores the admonishments of the EU and invades northern Iraq ?
What are Turkey 's intentions ?
Are they , perhaps , to bring about another Cyprus situation , or to occupy territory in Kurdish-speaking Iraq , further complicating the efforts of many , including European countries , to stabilise Iraq ?
How can Member States or candidate countries be allowed to act as destabilising factors in an area in which European soldiers are losing their lives in an attempt to achieve stability ?
May I remind you that Turkish troops are occupying 40 % of Cyprus .
This has not prevented the country from starting accession talks .
May I remind you that Turkey is still not complying with the EU 's request to extend the Ankara Protocol .
I wonder what the European Commission 's report , which is expected on 6 November , will have to say about this .
If the message is one of tolerance , then why not be tolerant on so many other issues of principle and values that are at the heart of the EU ?
In the final analysis , the key question is : are we talking about spreading EU values or diminishing their sphere of influence ?
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for the constructive message we are preparing to send to the Council and the Commission , but also to the Turkish Government and Parliament .
I regret , however , that our Parliament did not express itself more clearly on an issue that is undoubtedly sensitive but no less important : I am talking about the Armenian genocide .
Since 1987 this Parliament has applied the word ' genocide ' to the massacre between 1915 and 1917 of 1.2 million Armenians , i.e. two-thirds of the Armenian population living at that time under the Ottoman Empire .
The US Senate and House of Representatives have just said the same and it is unfortunate that this Parliament is lagging behind the Americans on this issue .
As highlighted recently in a press release by the International Federation for Human Rights , many Turkish citizens are charged with insulting Turkish identity on the basis of Article 301 of the Penal Code .
In order to tackle this period in history publically , I believe that this article has to be abolished as soon as possible .
We are not benefiting our Turkish friends in any way by making them forget their history .
This duty to remember is also a duty to the descendants of the people who survived the genocide and to the international community itself .
I thus call on Parliament to support the amendments that call for recognition of the Armenian genocide and those that underline the need for complete respect for religious freedoms and minority rights .
Mr President , Turkey is an important country for political , economic , military and cultural reasons , and it is therefore important to the EU .
Realising this , the EU has decided to commence accession negotiations .
The path towards accession has not been very smooth , but it has helped initiate a much-needed democratic reform programme in Turkey .
Such reforms are welcomed both by the EU and by the citizens of Turkey .
Those reforms must continue , and for that reason , at least , our support for Turkish accession must be firm .
Nobody is ignoring the fact that problems exist .
My country , Cyprus , is at the centre of one such problem , but I , like most people in this Chamber , realise that problems are not solved by conflict , but by peaceful negotiation .
A more European Turkey is much better for discussing and solving problems with , and hence I fully support Turkey 's accession to the EU .
Consequently , I endorse the compromise reached through the wise handling afforded by Ms Oomen-Ruijten , with the honest and fruitful cooperation of all those interested colleagues , who may have differing opinions on certain specific issues , but who all agree on the principle that the EU can achieve more by cooperating constructively with the Turkish people than by destructively antagonising them .
Turkey is undergoing a difficult period right now , and the use by the EU of more carrot and less stick is presently the appropriate way to proceed .
Let our overwhelming support for this report be proof to the Turkish people that we do want them in the EU , and let it be a help for greater and faster reforms in Turkey and for enhanced facilitation of solving the far too longstanding Cyprus problem .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , many of us have invoked geopolitical reasons for opposing Turkey 's accession to Europe .
Now the facts on the ground are proving us right , given that Ankara has burst in like an elephant on the delicate balance of Iraq , where our troops are risking their lives every day and fighting for the population 's freedom .
I believe we need to think about this because , fellow Members , your dear democratic Turkey , that human rights paradise on earth , is knocking at Europe 's door at the very moment when a dreadful , unpredictable , tragic scenario of war is opening up on the Iraqi front .
When you return to Brussels , do what I intend to do : go and visit the Armenian restaurant .
Do not your non-EU friends include the Armenians ?
Yet their premises have been wrecked by hooligans , by Turkish criminals , who have burned down a restaurant in the capital of Europe just because it is Armenian .
Such is the democratic nature of Turkish nationalists !
Therefore , why should we welcome them , when they still do not acknowledge the Armenian genocide ? I invite you to vote in favour of my amendment .
Mr President , the resolution emphasises that Turkey must fully comply with the Copenhagen criteria as a basis for accession to the EU .
The report also urges the Turkish Government to bring its approach to freedom of religion in line with those principles as defined by the European Court of Justice .
Since Kemal Atatürk , Turkey has maintained a secular state against the growing power of fundamentalist and literalist Islam .
I wonder whether the Turks realise that entering the EU will fundamentally undermine their ability to resist militant Islam .
If Turkey joins the EU , their Islamists will use the human rights legislation as a shield from behind which to advance their jihad in Turkey and Europe .
The British people are coming to realise that if Turkey joins the EU , another 70 million people will have the right to come to Britain .
Turkish accession will be a disaster for the Turks and a disaster for Britain .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the debate on the Florenz motion for a resolution , it was rightly observed yesterday that a large majority of the population support strict measures to ban smoking at the workplace and in bars and restaurants .
I had hoped that this resolution would also take account of the view of an overwhelming majority of the population , that is that Turkey cannot join the European Union .
However , I am obviously cherishing too many illusions .
When it comes to crucial matters , such as the Constitution or the accession of Turkey to the European Union , the opinion of the people suddenly does not count any more .
Turkey , a friendly nation , is not a European country .
Full stop , amen , finished .
That should be the end of the discussion .
However , not only does Parliament not accept its responsibility , more than once it has been blind to specific recent developments that clearly demonstrate that Turkey does not belong in the European Union , and that the decision to start accession negotiations was a mistake .
Why does this resolution not mention the resistance of the AKP to a constitutional provision that would make conversion to another religion no longer punishable under the law ?
Why are people so vague about the Armenian question and about Cyprus ?
This is another example of European Realpolitik , which you can count us out of .
Mr President , according to The Times newspaper of London , the recent US Congressional resolution on the Armenian genocide was appallingly timed .
So , when is it a suitable time to talk about genocide ?
The Armenian lobby is so vociferous in this Parliament precisely because of the apparent conspiracy of silence that has surrounded the genocide question for almost a century .
The murder of the Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink should have provided a period of national reflection but , sadly , this did not happen .
Nevertheless , reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia , including the reopening of the closed border , is an important element of Turkey 's efforts to join the EU .
But , in my view , no true democracy can be in denial of its past , even its deepest and darkest secrets .
Just as important is a lasting settlement of the conflict in Cyprus , which remains at an impasse caused by the presence of occupying troops in an EU Member State as well as non-implementation of the Ankara Protocol .
Minority religious rights , in particular Christian , also give cause for concern .
For instance , the Greek Orthodox seminary of Halki remains closed since 1971 ; the Assyrian Christians who fled to Germany and Sweden during the war with the PKK have been stripped of their Turkish citizenship , preventing them from claiming back their homes lost in the conflict .
And Turkey sees the Alevis as no different from the majority Sunni Muslims and therefore does not recognise their separate religious needs .
Article 301 of the Penal Code on insulting Turkishness has resulted in many convictions and , in March - rather bizarrely in my view - a court in Istanbul issued an order denying access to the video-sharing website YouTube when allegations were made on the sexuality of the founding father of modern Turkey , Kemal Atatürk .
Speaking entirely personally and not on behalf of my party or my Group : a lot clearly still needs to be done .
( EL ) Mr President , today 's discussion gives us an opportunity to express our satisfaction with the election results in Turkey , and to welcome the Turkish people 's express wish to continue the reforms .
Turkey 's prospective accession to the EU , which remains the objective , has opened the way to attempts at reform .
Unfortunately , these efforts have reached a plateau and have slowed down .
The new government , with its fresh , strong mandate , needs to move very fast to fully implement all the provisions of the Association Agreement and its Additional Protocol .
The reform process is above all about democratisation , fundamental human rights and religious freedoms .
In line with this , it is essential to repeal Article 301 of the Criminal Code and respond firmly to the Ecumenical Patriarchate 's requests .
Unfortunately , the Turkish Government 's attitude towards this issue so far has allowed for extremist acts .
We must also mention the Turkish authorities ' inexplicable insistence on keeping the Theological School in Halki shut .
Another issue that concerns us is the tense situation in south-east Turkey .
I believe that the culture of settling disputes violently should not be allowed to prevail , because it will mean instability in the wider area .
It is the present government 's responsibility to take action in order to reach a peaceful settlement on the Kurdish issue , and this presupposes dialogue between the two sides .
The international community must play a peacekeeping role in this potential crisis .
To conclude , Mr President , I should like to say that we expect Turkey to honour all its obligations so that it can progress steadily towards prospective European integration .
( EL ) Mr President , let me first congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her excellent work .
Mr President , the popular mandate given to the Erdoğan Government and to Mr Erdoğan in particular allows for the continuation of a course of reform that has been under way since Turkey 's claim for a place in Europe became a firmer prospect .
At the same time , the mandate inspires a new desire for a fair and lasting solution to the Cyprus issue , with the withdrawal of Turkish troops from Cyprus as the first requirement .
There is a new desire for genuine neighbourly relations , both in general , and with Greece in particular .
Thanks to the mandate , human rights are respected under new laws such as the law on ecclesiastical foundations , and the laws protecting rights and freedoms .
This is a historic coming to terms with the past , and the genocides of the Armenians , Pontic Greeks and Assyrians are being recognised .
Thanks to the mandate , the Kurdish issue is being seen in a new light .
The potential invasion of northern Iraq is an issue that should be of serious concern to the EU .
Such a move must not be permitted , because the need , on which we are all agreed , to combat terrorism should never be used as a pretext for creating a fait accompli of occupied territory in northern Iraq , as happened in Cyprus .
Mr President , I am not sure what this morning 's debate is adding to the Turkish accession issue rather than giving an opportunity to a small number of vehement opponents of Turkish accession to repeat their arguments in this Chamber .
Of course we should urge Turkey to show restraint and to act proportionately in response to the terrorist threat from northern Iraq but I note the criticisms this morning are being made by the very same people who in other debates have been against the European Union 's contribution to reconstruction in Iraq .
I welcome the strategic partnership between the UK and Turkey announced by Prime Ministers Brown and Erdogan in London yesterday , including positive cooperation in combating organised crime and terrorism .
I call on other Member States to do the same .
I welcome the youngest female Turkish MP elected , Ayla Akat , who was in Brussels last week as one of a number of Kurdish MPs returned to the Turkish Parliament for the first time in 14 years , who give us hope that the problem of Kurdish cultural and political rights could be solved through democracy and not through violence .
( CS ) Mrs Ria Oomen-Ruijten carried out an outstanding piece of work when she found a compromise wording on a subject which divides this House .
I am convinced , however , that in the future adopting such resolutions and reports , which strive to find compromises at the expense of not expressing Parliament 's views on contentious key issues , should be abandoned .
Our efforts to achieve unanimity send Turkey a message which does not sufficiently reflect the different opinions on Turkish membership held both within this Parliament and among the European public .
I will not conceal the fact that I consider the opening of accession negotiations with Turkey to be in itself a fundamental mistake .
At the same time I am aware of and I respect the fact that not everyone in this House shares this view .
The European public is itself strongly divided when it comes to this issue of key importance for the future of European integration .
It is our duty to reflect this polarity .
I would therefore hope that our future resolutions and reports clearly bear witness to this division within Parliament regarding the possible Turkish membership of the EU .
While compromise is welcomed in many other areas discussed in Parliament , Turkish membership and EU-Turkey relations are not among them .
Let us change the approach .
Let us not continue producing reports and resolutions which attempt to give the impression of agreement and unanimity .
Instead , let us show , through our agreement or disagreement with clearly formulated positions , that there is a division among us in the matter of Turkish membership .
It is a question of our responsibility towards both the EU citizens and Turkey who do not deserve half-truths .
I am certain that the Turkish people will welcome much more a communication on disunity rather than a concealment of the real situation , which both Parliament and Europe as a whole have been doing for a long time .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's resolution on Turkey , the European Parliament is sending out a positive signal and has thus entered a new phase of constructive dialogue in its relations with Turkey .
Turkey is currently involved in an intense debate about internal reforms .
Turkey now has a government in power which has a clear popular mandate and can set to work .
This is a chance to give fresh impetus to the accession process in several key areas .
Calling for additional requirements to be met which are not part of the accession negotiations is counterproductive .
In Turkey , the development of a new constitution is now the highest priority .
The outline of this constitution is already discernible .
The call for the revision of Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code is being considered by the Turkish side .
Turkey now needs further positive signals from the EU .
We must encourage Turkey to continue this reform process with great zeal .
The Commission 's progress report is expected on 7 November , and I think it is very important that the current positive developments in Turkey are reflected in that report .
( EL ) Mr President , Turkey is a candidate for accession to a united Europe .
It has rights and obligations .
The rapporteur has given a balanced interim report .
This offers Turkey another chance to proceed with the reforms and fulfil its obligations , which relate mainly to economic changes , respect for the Copenhagen criteria , and human , religious and minority rights .
We want Turkey to change because Turkey itself is asking for change and also because the times demand it .
Change in Turkey means meeting its obligations towards Cyprus by recognising the Republic of Cyprus and ending the occupation of Cyprus .
The report correctly states that the withdrawal of the Turkish army will help to reach a solution , and that the Turkish army can be replaced with a small European force under the command of the Security Council .
Turkey must fulfil the following obligations : end colonisation and change the demographic character of Cyprus ; repatriate the settlers , who form the great majority in the occupied territories and are the time-bomb waiting to undermine any solution ; end the appropriation of Greek Cypriot properties in occupied Cyprus ; and stop the destruction of our cultural heritage .
As a first step , Turkey must respect the decisions of the UN and return the city of Famagusta to its lawful inhabitants .
Ankara regards Turkish Cypriots as isolated , owing to the presence of 45 000 Turkish soldiers , who are keeping Greek Cypriots away from their homes and properties .
Turkey holds the key both to its accession to Europe and to solving the Cyprus issue .
The Turkish policy of dividing Cyprus into two states is not a solution .
We live in an age of unification , not partition .
We say yes to a European Turkey and yes to a European solution , which have little in common with partition lines and zones ; they should be based , as the rapporteur rightly stresses , on the principles of a united Europe .
This will create a viable model state for the whole of Europe , where Greek and Turkish Cypriots , and Christians and Muslims , can live peaceful and productive lives based on mutual respect for the principles and values of a united Europe .
( ES ) Mr President , as you know , the enlargement of the European Union to include another country is always a dialectical process in which the candidate 's efforts must be determined but in which the Union 's efforts must also be clear .
In my view , when the European Union has a new Reform Treaty to enable it to be more democratic and more effective , it will also be in a better position to continue its enlargement .
That is the case following the Lisbon agreement .
Turkey is making significant progress .
We are all behind the Ankara Government , behind the Turkish people in the fight against terrorism . Nevertheless , in order to continue the progress I mentioned , we must call for restraint , moderation and compliance with international law .
A large-scale military operation in northern Iraq would only add fuel to the fire there and could also cause serious problems in Turkey .
Finally , I want to congratulate Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on her resolution , although there is one topic missing : why do we often forget that Turkey is not just a candidate country but also a vital Euro-Mediterranean partner in the Barcelona Process ?
This point is indeed missing from the report .
Turkey is vital in that Process just as we are vital for Turkey in the Euro-Mediterranean Process too .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her balanced resolution .
I was in Turkey ten days ago and while I was there I spoke to members of the new Turkish Government and the new Parliament .
I stressed the need to carry on with the reforms , with special emphasis on freedom of speech .
The Minister of Justice and other members of the Cabinet assured me that Article 301 will be amended .
The new Government also promised reforms on the path toward EU membership .
The resolution also refers to that membership as the ultimate goal .
The resolution will therefore make a direct contribution to the reforms in Turkey , including reforms in the areas of women 's rights , trade union rights and social legislation .
However , calm is needed for reforms to take place , and at the moment fear and anger are rife in Turkey .
Fear of attacks by the PKK , anger that could lead to escalation .
To prevent that , Turkey and the EU must join forces in order to use diplomatic and political means to prevent and punish terrorism .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this lively debate was very useful to the Presidency .
It has clearly demonstrated , if there were any doubt , how much the opinions and views of the many Members differ with regard to the negotiations on Turkey 's accession to the European Union .
However , regardless of the many opinions that may exist on this issue , I feel that this debate has clearly shown that Turkey is already a vital strategic partner of the European Union in political , economic and also security terms .
I also feel it is clear from this debate that the prospect of Turkey joining the European Union has been the driving force behind fundamental political and social reforms in Turkey .
Clearly , some people regret that these reforms have not been as rapid or as extensive as might have been hoped , but the fact is that Turkey 's people and Government are making gradual progress along the road set out by us , towards an increasingly democratic and pluralistic society which more fully respects the rule of law .
The Copenhagen criteria , as the guide or reference framework for this whole negotiation process , are extremely clear for both Turkey and any other candidate countries : only those countries which clearly respect our economic principles and , in particular and perhaps even more importantly , our political principles can be members of the European Union .
If Turkey fully complies with these criteria , then obviously it can become a member of the European Union .
This is absolutely clear and therefore cannot , or at least should not , give rise to any doubts .
As regards the PKK 's terrorist attacks on the border between Turkey and Iraq , I would draw your attention to the Presidency 's statement of 22 October on this issue .
In that statement , the Presidency totally condemned the terrorist violence perpetrated by the PKK and expressed our active solidarity with the victims ' families .
We also noted that it is vital for the international community to support Turkey 's efforts to fight terrorism , while respecting the rule of law , preserving international peace and stability and regional stability , and naturally calling on Turkey to refrain from taking any disproportionate military action .
We also call on both the Turkish Government and the Iraqi Government to effectively cooperate to address this problem and in particular to prevent Iraqi territory from being used for terrorist actions against Turkey .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I want to thank you for this very substantive and timely debate shortly before we issue our progress report on Turkey on 6 November - that is , in two weeks .
In the Commission we aim at presenting as objective and fair a report as the one presented by Ms Oomen-Ruijten .
With today 's debate and your subsequent resolution , this House sends some very clear messages to Turkey .
First of all , I think we all agree that now is the time to step up the reform efforts in the country for the sake of the Turkish citizens , yes , but also for making serious progress in the EU accession negotiations .
Especially , there is very strong emphasis on reforms without unnecessary delay as regards the freedom of expression , the infamous Article 301 and other equivalent articles , as well as religious freedoms .
Likewise , we need to see progress on women 's rights , trade union rights , as well as cultural and religious rights and international obligations over Turkey .
Moreover , we condemn terrorist attacks and we understand the Turkish need to protect its citizens , but we also urge Turkey to seek a political solution in cooperation with Iraqi regional authorities and the international community and to show a sense of proportionality in its response to PKK terrorism .
Concerning the Armenian issue , the Commission supports Parliament 's call , as expressed in your draft resolution , for a process of reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia .
This is the best and most effective way that in time would lead to genuine results over reconciliation and justice .
We also consider that all the issues in Turkey , including the Armenian issue , should be debated openly and peacefully within Turkish society in the name of freedom of expression .
Therefore , the reform of Article 301 is also essential for a serious and effective debate on the Armenian issue that could lead to genuine reconciliation .
The current restraints over freedom of expression have a chilling effect and even contribute to creating an atmosphere of intolerance and hatred , as was unfortunately and sadly shown in the case of the assassination of Hrant Dink earlier this year .
Finally , we have to recall one thing .
I do , and you have also , set very strong demands for Turkey as regards the reform process and rightly so .
At the same time , we need to recall that the equation works only if both sides do what they have got to do .
That means , when we are firm we also must be fair .
We have to keep our word and stick to the accession perspective of Turkey as outlined in the negotiation mandate .
( Applause )
Otherwise , we can shout as loud as we wish , but it would be like shouting for the forest .
There would be no response , only a long silence .
Two motions for a resolution to wind up the debate have been tabled .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - Turkey still has a long way to go before it meets the conditions for EU membership .
Despite considerable progress in recent years , there are still outstanding issues about freedom of expression ( particularly Article 301 of the Penal Code ) , human rights and Armenia .
However , I reject the arguments of those who say that Turkey should never be allowed to join on the grounds that it is not a European country .
We have accepted Turkey as a full member of the Council of Europe for more than half a century .
We have started accession negotiations , thereby recognising its eligibility to join the EU in principle .
Those claiming that Turkey is not European really mean it is not Christian .
But why should that be a criterion ?
The motto of the European Union is ' unity with diversity ' -we are not trying to standardise cultures , but to find ways of working together while keeping our different languages , religions and so on .
Accepting a secular state whose population is largely Islamic would enhance that principle .
EU-Russia Summit ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the EU-Russia Summit .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the 20th EU-Russia Summit will take place on Friday of this week in the Portuguese town of Mafra .
This represents , in our opinion , an excellent opportunity for the leaders of both Russia and the European Union to take stock of our relations .
We believe that relations between the European Union and Russia are generally good and certainly much better than the international press would sometimes have us believe .
Russia is a key partner for the EU and we take our relationship very seriously .
The summit will tackle the situation in the EU and in Russia .
We will report on developments in the European Union , in particular on progress made in drafting the new Reform Treaty which has just been adopted in Lisbon and on the energy liberalisation package proposed by the Commission and adopted on 9 September .
As for the common spaces , we will review the progress made in implementing the road maps .
This process continues to be wholly positive , although some areas need to be driven forward .
In certain important sectors , the Permanent Partnership Council ( PPC ) has helped to achieve this objective .
The PPC on Culture , which will be held the day before the summit , will help to intensify our cultural cooperation .
In terms of priorities for the summit , we intend to reach agreement on the launch of the early warning system in the energy sector , on which agreement in principle was reached at the last summit held in Samara .
Given the interdependence of the European Union and Russia in terms of energy , confidence must be increased and mutual cooperation reinforced .
We will therefore highlight the objectives and principles that the EU must respect in relation to our energy partnership , in particular reciprocity , transparency , openness and creation of an effective legal and regulatory framework .
In our opinion , the principles of the Energy Charter Treaty and the text on worldwide energy security adopted by the G8 in Saint Petersburg must be included in the new EU-Russia Agreement which will be legally binding and will replace the current Partnership and Cooperation Agreement ( PCA ) .
In the area of investment , we welcome the formal dialogue planned in the road map for the common economic space .
It is vitally important that transparent , non-discriminatory and predictable conditions are created for EU undertakings investing in Russia , bearing in mind the law on strategic investments which is being considered by the Duma .
We will also urge Russia to avoid the selective use of flanking policies , such as the environment or taxation , to hinder existing investments or create hidden obstacles for new investment .
We believe that Russia 's accession to the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) is a priority which is why we also intend to broach this issue at the summit .
The Commission may have something more to say on this .
I must point out that the summit will also be used to apply pressure , in order to ensure progress , if a satisfactory solution has not been found to the main outstanding issues , such as wood export duties or discriminatory rail tariffs .
We are aware that this summit comes at a time when both the presidential and Duma elections in Russia are imminent .
In the election process , freedom of expression , including freedom of the press and freedom of assembly , will be vitally important and a real test of the democratic legitimacy of Russia .
The Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights ( ODIHR ) must be given free access to observe the Duma elections .
As a member of the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe ( OSCE ) and the Council of Europe , Russia has a particular responsibility to protect our common values .
It is regrettable that certain issues have overshadowed relations between the European Union and Russia , given that our interdependence is increasing , not reducing .
Russia and the EU need to work together to overcome their differences as there is really no alternative to our cooperation .
Unfortunately , the start of negotiations on a new agreement between the EU and Russia is still deadlocked .
Russia 's bans on imports of Polish meat and vegetables continue to form a major obstacle to the start of negotiations .
The Commission has indicated its readiness to continue contacts in order to find a mutually acceptable solution .
Unfortunately , the situation has been further complicated by the decision taken by the Russian veterinary authorities at the end of last month to ban the import of meat produced by 36 EU undertakings .
The interruption to oil supplies destined for Lithuania through the Druzhba pipeline also represents a sticking point preventing negotiations on a new agreement between the EU and Russia from getting underway .
More than a year has passed without Russia having given any official information on the leak from the pipeline or on the prospects of resuming supplies .
It is therefore vital to find a satisfactory solution that will create the necessary confidence to continue developing the partnership between the EU and Russia in the area of energy .
Despite the current deadlock in the negotiations , the situation should not be overdramatized .
We actually agreed with Russia in 2006 that the PCA would remain in force , thus avoiding any legal vacuum in our relations with Russia .
Finally , we will certainly be raising the most important issues currently on the international agenda , in particular Kosovo and Iraq .
We will also stress how vital positive cooperation with Russia is in our common neighbourhood , so that we can tackle common issues of interest and concern , particularly the ' frozen ' disputes .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Russia is not only a close neighbour , for us it is a strategic partner .
If we look to trade and investment we see they are booming , and we also see , as our President has said , that interdependence is growing .
But we also know that Russia is a key partner in tackling regional conflicts and global challenges - also mentioned here - and that much remains to be done to develop the full potential of our relationship .
The upcoming summit on Friday is the next occasion to assess the state of our relationship .
While several of the outstanding issues will not be solved , we will make progress on some others and thus will also prepare the ground for future work at this moment of transition .
We know it is a critical period for Russia , a few months ahead of the crucial parliamentary and presidential elections , and we also know that the European Union has repeatedly expressed its concerns on the implementation of democratic principles and human rights commitments in Russia .
We , the European Union , are watching developments very closely - the forthcoming elections will be an important test in that regard - and we expect Russia will make a sensible choice and invite the OSCE observers to monitor the elections .
We shall also take the opportunity to raise our concerns on human rights issues , such as the limitations on press freedom , the attacks on journalists , the pressure on NGOs and also the situation in the northern Caucasus .
I had the occasion to discuss the forthcoming summit with the President 's key advisor , the special envoy Mr Yastrzhembsky , when I was in Kaliningrad on 11 and 12 October .
Let me start with a few good examples , but then say where we will not make progress .
I believe that Russia is about to announce a major financial contribution to several EU-led cross-border cooperation programmes .
This will be very welcome since cooperation across our developing borders is an important feature following the 2004 enlargement .
And Kaliningrad is , of course , a very special case , due to its unique geographic location .
This requires , as we have always found , special arrangements to facilitate cross-border cooperation and local border traffic .
Russia 's financial contribution , however , would also be very timely , considering the very serious traffic congestion on borders between the Member States and Russia in Kaliningrad and at border crossing points with several Member States elsewhere .
Lines of trucks of up to 50 km on the EU side of the border are clearly not acceptable .
We need to implement the measures and therefore we have agreed with Russia to reduce the bottlenecks .
We are just launching a pilot project in the Commission , exchanging customs information and financing modernisation of border infrastructure .
For its part , Russia must streamline its procedures at the borders .
In principle it is ready to do so but it takes a certain amount of time .
Our President has already mentioned energy .
I would just like to add that we should be able to announce an agreement on the early warning mechanism to deal with problems in supply before they come to crisis point .
Our President has spoken about energy culture and also investments so I need not add anything here .
I just would like to complement it by saying that investment and business relations will also be discussed at an industrialists ' round table in Lisbon , with the participation of Günter Verheugen and Andris Piebalgs , starting tomorrow , Thursday .
This round table will then report its conclusions to the summit on Friday .
I think this is a good contribution to what is really a growing business relationship .
Russia is a key economic actor and , on WTO , I would like to add that we will help Russia 's efforts .
You know we have always been committed to Russia 's WTO accession .
We also think it is very important to have a level playing field , and that is why we will place so much emphasis on the completion of Russia 's accession to the WTO .
The summit will give a new impetus to this complex process , which is at a critical stage .
We shall be signing a new agreement on steel on the margins of the summit , thus increasing the quantities which Russia may export to the European Union .
Another sign of positive elements in EU-Russia cooperation is the fact that the memorandum of understanding between the European Monitoring Centre on Drugs and Drug Addiction and the Russia Federal Drug Control Service is going to be signed on the margins of the summit .
On a less positive note , I would like to inform you that , although there was a clear Russian commitment in Samara in May to finally sign our agreement on the Siberian overflights , in time for the next summit in Mafra , prospects for this happening seem to be very slim .
We want to turn the page on this long-standing dispute .
A positive move by Russia would then allow us also to go ahead with the aviation summit , planned to take place in Moscow in November , to identify the enormous potential for cooperation in this sector .
As regards international issues , Kosovo will certainly be one of the most important and we need to consider jointly with Russia how to bring this question to a solution , based on the ongoing efforts of the Troika .
We must avoid a renewed conflict in the Balkans .
We will also discuss other important international issues such as the Middle East prior to the Annapolis Conference ; Iran , following President Putin 's recent visit to Tehran and Afghanistan ; Burma / Myanmar ; and the situation with regard to the frozen conflicts particularly in Georgia and Moldova .
We would like to work with Russia in a constructive spirit in the search for solutions for these vexed issues .
Therefore , what we have to do is continue our ongoing work and never lose sight of our long-term projects .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , we hope that , as the press pointed out , the Portuguese autumn will be warmer than the Russian spring as far as the Samara Summit is concerned .
As the Commissioner said , I believe that we need to continue working to build the strategic association with Russia , but the climate will depend more on Russia 's temperature than that of the European Union : to some extent in the light of what the Commissioner was saying , above all in the light of the new role that Russia wants to play on the international stage , and , in particular , as far as the security of energy supply is concerned .
However , Mr President , this relationship has to be built on a series of pillars .
The first is that any decision or any act against a Member State must be seen as a decision or act against the European Union as a whole .
Secondly , Mr President , the European Union is irrevocably and unquestionably committed to human rights and it has to be very firm when defending those positions .
In this respect , I feel that we should welcome the Russian Government 's decision to authorise and finally grant visas to the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance to allow it to have a meeting in Moscow .
One aspect that gives cause for concern is the statement made , in relation to the recent summit of countries bordering the Caspian Sea , about forming a type of broad front to combat to some extent the regional and international threats and some positions in the United Nations .
I am just finishing up , Mr President .
Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , defend with pragmatism the European Union 's interests , build this association , but do not forget that the figures have to match up to the ideals .
I remember something I read in a recent - naturally excellent - article in The Economist : apparently at the Wiesbaden Summit Mr Putin told the Federal Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , that that was where Dostoyevsky had lost at roulette .
I hope that the European Union is luckier in Portugal than the Russian writer was in Wiesbaden .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , in the run-up to the coming summit , the key assumption for my Group remains that Russia and the European Union have a number of important interests in common and , despite our many differences of opinion , the European Union should continue to operate on the basis of that assumption during the coming summit .
Russia and Europe need each other to tackle problems in Europe , but they especially need each other for tackling major international issues .
Sustainable security in Europe is only possible in cooperation with Russia .
For these reasons we , my Group and I , have always supported the strategic partnership with Russia .
There is a very full agenda for this summit and the Commissioner and the representative of the Presidency have already spoken about this .
All the same we hope that at some point there will be some movement on the question of the negotiating mandate for the new partnership and cooperation agreement .
We hope that a new Polish Government will be able to cooperate with Moscow better and as a result perhaps create some room for progress .
The energy relationship is extremely important and we also think that the starting point has to be reciprocity , but we do have to realise that we are dealing with a form of mutual independence here that we should try to manage better together .
We also want more cooperation in the Black Sea area , and we hope that issues such as Transnistria and Georgia will also be discussed at this summit .
Previous speakers have already mentioned the state of democracy in Russia and , of course , that is not something that can be left out of the discussion .
We are also concerned about the run-up to the Duma elections .
We also want the campaigns to be free and fair , and that all parties have an equal chance to have their say .
That is why it is so important that we press the issue of observers in Moscow : not only observers on the actual election day , but also observers during the campaign in the run-up to the elections .
We all know how important it is to be able to form a proper judgement of the elections ; a country that has ambitions to hold the presidency of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe really should also be able and willing to work with the OSCE when it comes to observing the elections .
Finally , and I reiterate what I said at the beginning , we should continue to be critical towards Russia ; critical when it comes to human rights and democracy , but we should not polarise things unnecessarily .
Our starting point should still be to be a good neighbour , to cooperate , and to try to tackle issues in Europe together and not to constantly make an issue of things .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , May 's summit in Samara exposed the cracks in our strategic partnership with Russia - on energy , on Kosovo and on human rights .
Those fissures have become fault lines that are now so deep and so wide that we are hard pressed to say how meaningful ' partnership ' based on common values can be pursued .
By Mr Putin 's own admission , ' Russia will not soon become , if it ever becomes , a country where liberal values have deep historical roots ' .
How long can we go on ignoring the growing evidence ?
Not that Russians refuse the cultural trappings of the West , because President Putin has spoken time and again of his country 's place at the cultural heart of Europe .
No , this vehemence , this denial , is directed primarily against what President Barroso calls Europe 's ' sacred values ' - values like freedom , democracy and the rule of law , which are conspicuously absent in Russia today .
Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra was right .
From the Council and the Commission we have heard too much Realpolitik and not enough Moralpolitik .
Our relationship with Russia is strategic , certainly , but it cannot be described as a partnership .
We need a pragmatic approach , cooperating where we can on issues of mutual concern , like border crossings , energy supply , and joining the WTO - although yesterday 's announcement on price controls on foodstuffs suggests a return to the economic policies of the past .
Some progress can be made with Russia , but without the fanfare , followed by frustration , which marks too many EU-Russia summits .
A bit more honesty is needed , too , as Russia comes up to two major elections .
If human cloning were better developed , President Putin would probably run for both President and Prime Minister following the Kaczyńskis ' example in Poland !
For a country which overturned oligarchy back in 1917 , it is quite incredible that a new autocracy is gaining ground , and we should not cut down our criticisms for fear of endangering a partnership which exists but on paper .
Only when an independent judiciary , freedom of expression and democracy exist as more than sound bites and when journalists , opposition parties , and NGOs can operate without fear of retribution , can Europe stand in solidarity with Russia .
It is for that reason that my Group sought a resolution to close this debate , and over 300 MEPs backed our calls .
We must be prepared to put on paper what we say in public and refute those who say this House is nothing but a glorified talking shop .
The Reform Treaty promises Parliament a real say on external action for the first time .
So let us raise our game to meet the challenge and deliver at the summit a message that President Putin cannot ignore .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) The decision taken yesterday by the leaders of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats not to adopt a resolution prior to the EU-Russia Summit demonstrates that we still have a problem with Russia .
The decision amounts to a serious error .
This is not the kind of Franco-German engine we expect in our part of Europe .
Our resolution of 2 May in advance of the Samara Summit was very helpful .
I trust our silence today is not indicative of an attempt to depart from a clearly defined and demanding policy towards Russia .
If the approach adopted at Samara is undermined , Russia will become ever more convinced that integration and especially the 2004 enlargement are developments that may be disregarded or played down .
The politicians who are currently attempting to turn a blind eye to Russia 's move towards dictatorship in the name of pseudo-realism are acquiescing to a repeat of the Finnish case .
They are consenting to discrimination against Central Europe and therefore to weakening the European Union 's position as a global partner .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen .
Minister , you said in your introduction that relations with Russia are good , or anyway better than is reported in the international press .
Minister , are you living on Mars ?
Are you living on Venus ?
Do you dare to tell the Russians what matters , or is the European Union for you ultimately just about money and naked commerce ?
Is that more important to you than democracy and human rights ?


Let us not mince words : Russia is sliding down the slippery slope to becoming a full-blown dictatorship with a strong leader : a strong leader who will not tolerate any protest and who deploys his secret FSB police whenever he thinks it necessary ; a leader who will not give up power under any condition and who will use all kind of trickery to keep his hands on the reins of power after the parliamentary elections in December and the presidential elections in March .
Russia , Minister , is evolving into a closed society where the ruling regime would prefer not to allow anyone to look over its shoulders .
I do not want to confine myself to theoretical considerations .
The reality is that human rights in Russia are constantly under pressure and the state of democracy there is lamentable .
The reality is that freedom of speech and press freedom are succumbing to a strict self-censorship .
The recently passed law on extremism can easily be used to gag independent journalists and political opponents .
The reality is that the Russian regime sees a strong and independent civil society as undesirable and that the position of NGOs is coming under severe pressure due to very restrictive legislation .
The reality is , Minister , that free elections are utopia there .
Only those who are tolerated by the regime can take part .
The ' Other Russia ' coalition united around Gary Kasparov , for instance , has been stopped from taking part in the imminent parliamentary elections .
To conclude , Minister , the situation in Chechnya may not be a topical issue in politics any more but the reality there is still extremely worrying .
People are still being murdered , people are being picked up and detained illegally , people are being blackmailed ; kidnappings are still a daily occurrence and torture is standard practice .
That is the reality in Russia , Minister , and I hope that you will remember this when you speak to Mr Putin at the end of this week .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , stability and development in Europe and the world are impossible without sensible cooperation between the European Union and Russia .
What would I like to see , in contrast to Samara ?
What I would like is for you to come back and tell us that you have a common strategy with Russia for the resolution of the Kosovo problem and a common strategy for the peace process in the Middle East , and that you have a common position on the nuclear problem in Iran and a common strategy to solve the Transnistria problem .
It is not just about energy supplies .
Let us forget about Galileo .
Industry does not want it , and the taxpayers are supposed to foot the bill .
Let us work with Russia on a sensible energy policy using new technologies .
Let us solve the problem of visa-free travel with Russia .
Why have we still not made much progress here , only for these specific groups ?
In my view , there is a great deal that could be done .
What will be the European Union 's position on the missile shield ?
Will we stand with Russia and say that we do not want a US defence shield ?
I think it would be wonderful if we could achieve that .
Of course , we also have to be critical of Russia and tell Russia that if I speak out against the anti-terrorism plans being forged by Mr Schäuble and Mr Jung in Germany , then I must also say to Russia that I do not want this anti-discrimination law .
That is quite clear .
If our view is that the situation in Chechnya is completely at odds with human rights , we need to make that very clear to the Russians , but we also need to follow up on it afterwards .
I think that if we have a sensible partnership agreement , this is something that good partners can and must say to each other .
We need Russia and Russia needs us , and we will go forward together if we put all the issues on the table and , above all , outline ways of resolving them .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , if we want to stand our ground in global terms , it is necessary that the EU as a strong grouping and Russia as a superpower integrate their economies .
Only in this way will they be capable of facing up to unavoidable political pressures , which might otherwise divide this rational partnership .
As it stands , Russian exports to the EU , excluding energy-related trade , correspond approximately to those to Morocco or Argentina .
This is why I support the appeal by the Trade Commissioner , Mr Mandelson , who asked the EU and Russia to stop acting as two cities connected only by a narrow road and a gas pipeline .
I am convinced that both partners should focus on building long-term , mutually advantageous economic and trade relations and not allow short-term political tactics to take over .
I believe that it is in the interests of EU citizens that the EU acts with consistency towards Russia , which is not the case at present .
We should push for the establishment of a more stable political and entrepreneurial climate in Russia , which would encompass fewer obstacles to imports and create a better platform for investors from the EU .
( FI ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two ways of examining the EU 's relations with Russia .
We can see them either as problems or as opportunities .
As we know , at present both are in plentiful supply .
Last week in Lisbon , Union leaders took a step towards a more coherent foreign policy .
Could not policy on Russia be the first port of call for both sides , which is to say for Russia too ?
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement needs revamping , and we know it .
In the area of the Northern Dimension something has been achieved in matters relating to the Baltic Sea , but we must move on to new areas .
The road maps exist , but there are not many travellers on the road .
We have endorsed Russian membership of the WTO .
We need to finalise the agreement . Then the duty on timber and illegal charges imposed at borders which Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner mentioned would be kept in check .
We are completely dependent on one another in the matter of energy , but that dependence needs to work both ways .
Exports represent dependence just as much as imports .
We therefore need to end the dumb act with Russia .
Unfortunately , the situation has been going on for a long time , but I salute Poland 's new leader , who wanted to improve relations with Russia , and Germany too .
Russia is obviously more of a problem .
Talks must also achieve results in the area of citizens ' rights , and not just when it is a matter of goods .
I would ask the Council if the timber duties will be mentioned at the summit .
Furthermore , what about the new law in Russia regarding the practice whereby a suspect is not handed over for questioning in the country in which the crime has occurred ?
That is a strange procedure .
In other words , a criminal who commits an offence in a Member State can seek asylum in Russia .
Will the Council be addressing this issue at the summit ?
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , from listening to this whole debate and the statements from the Council and the Commission , it has become abundantly clear how difficult it is , with respect to Russia , to combine the requisite respect for that large and important country and that large and important people with the propagation of our fundamental principles on the rule of law , a functioning democracy , free media and respect for human rights .
It is difficult to find the right balance , all the more so since President Putin , like no other , understands the art of exploiting every difference of opinion or different nuance of opinion between the Member States .
We have heard that there are soon to be elections in Russia and we know this will be in a few weeks ' time .
In this context I want to stress that the conditions being imposed on parties which are not represented in the Duma are completely unworthy of a democracy .
Whether we are talking about the amount of the deposit , the number of signatures required , the checks on this - look at what happened in St Petersburg a few months ago - on not one of these points do they meet the criteria that we and the rest of the world would consider constitute free and fair elections .
In other words , things do not bode well at all .
We have also heard some very worrying reports about attempts to keep a close check on students ' contacts and people on visitors ' programmes .
In other words - and I am coming to the end now Mr President - the Member States need to remain more united and vigilant than ever to allow cooperation to continue .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , Russia is an important partner , but its policies are a cause for concern .
No statues of Mr Putin have been erected in the streets of Russia as yet , but there are signs of a personality cult .
The candidacy of the State President in parliamentary elections is an unknown precedent in the history of a democratic state , just like the nomination of the head of the radical movement ' Nashi ' for the post of minister for youth affairs and the refusal to receive a delegation from the European Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights .
Russia 's manipulations of foreign nations are dangerous .
Investigations in Latvia show that Russia 's support for peoples is radically opposed to the integration of society .
I also fear that the history of the political activities of those persons who recently organised the Russian forum at the European Parliament gives cause to believe there may be destructive plans in other European states .
Our duty is to combat these manipulations , since Russia is pushing the limits of our patience .
In relation to the dialogue on energy , it is necessary for the principles and ratification of the Energy Charter to form an integral component of the new agreement , in spite of Moscow 's dissatisfaction with the reciprocity clause . Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us be clear !
The decision we took yesterday will be interpreted - and already has been in fact - by the Russian authorities as a great success : no resolution , no message .
That is a real bonus following the rejection of an official human rights delegation from the European Parliament .
Russian society is , more than ever , hostage to a propagandist press and is retreating into dangerous nationalism .
Today in Russia violence based on fear prevails while racism and xenophobia are taking hold .
The word ' independent ' can no longer be used .
' Independent ' human rights activists , journalists or political opponents are automatically labelled ' enemies of the regime ' .
A law adopted in 2007 is officially devoted to them .
Under the guise of combating extremism , it actually gives the authorities complete freedom in this unfair fight .
As Marie Mendras told us yesterday , this climate of permanent violation of human rights is not spurring the people there into action .
Mr Putin 's gamble has thus paid off : he has managed to convince his fellow citizens that Russia has its own special rules when it comes to democracy and human rights .
With such a belief , it is no surprise whatsoever that Russia is still the last member of the Council of Europe not to have ratified Protocol 14 .
This is for Putin a godsend , a blessing .
It means that he does not have to comply with the rulings and can prevent the cases from going anywhere , particularly those of tortured Chechens .
In light of this situation , it would be naive to think that free and transparent elections will take place in Russia on 2 December .
Given the circumstances , are they not really just a plebiscite for or against Vladimir Putin ?
Without any amendment to the Constitution , he will continue to have power over all political , economic , financial , administrative , judicial and security matters .
On the eve of the EU-Russia Summit , I am calling on the Council and the Commission to include human rights at the highest political level .
It is vital that they play a key role , whether discussing the future agreement , Kosovo or energy .
That is what Russian democrats ask of us .
They simply say : ' Continue to talk about them , continue to tell the truth ' .
At least we are not risking our lives when doing so .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , debate on the EU-Russia relationship is one of the most frequent themes in this House .
The same clichés are regularly heard , whether intentional or motivated by misunderstanding or ignorance of the issues .
In spite of this , whether or not we want to , we must deal with Russia as a partner .
If we cannot find a shared language and do not strive to gradually improve relationships , the EU will suffer from it more than Russia .
This does not imply closing our eyes to difficulties , but rather looking reality in the face and judging everyone by the same measure .
It is a fact that today 's Russia is stronger economically and is as a consequence more self-confident .
It also protects its own interests just as the US does or for that matter the EU .
We need a sober approach .
This is why I am happy that by postponing the resolution we gave a freer hand to our representatives at the summit in Portugal .
Today 's Russia is not the former Soviet Union .
I am saying this not only from my own long experience of work in this country , but also on the basis of words borrowed from the head of American diplomacy .
( NL ) Madam President , I would like to thank the Presidency-in-Office and the President of the Commission .
I do not plan to measure the success of the summit by the length of the final joint declaration .
What is important to me - and I hope this will be discussed - is that we flesh out the details on those topics where we know that we have to find solutions together .
Relations between the EU and Russia are incredibly complex .
That is not going to change at this election time .
However , we really must acknowledge that for Russia and the EU there is no economic and political alternative to partnership .
Madam President , we have an excellent agreement for that partnership .
It has been in place now for ten years .
How are we going to handle that creatively in the future ?
The summit is also an important occasion to ask for clarification about the concept of democracy and I thank the Commission for what it plans to do on this point .
What always strikes me is that in Russia stability and democracy are seen as opposites ; that is not and never can be our view , of course .
It is very important for all of us that Russia enters the WTO .
( DE ) Madam President , there is not much point in playing Realpolitik and Moralpolitik off against each other , as Mr Watson has said .

The fact is that we need both : in our dealings with Russia , we need to be realistic and we need to be clear and firm about our ethical and moral standpoint .
Many of us thought that , after the collapse of communism , Russia would simply vanish from the world stage , and that is what many people wanted .
However , that did not happen . It did not happen mainly because , due to rising energy prices , Russia has been able to increase its revenues and thus regain power in the international arena .
We have to recognise that ; if we do not , we fail to recognise reality .
There is something that we do not want to accept , however , and that of course is the negative developments , and both the Council Presidency and the Commissioner have made that clear .
We are not prepared simply to accept that more and more steps are being taken to dismantle democracy in Russia .
These are steps which we cannot accept and which have nothing to do with democracy-building and everything to do with its erosion .
We do not want to accept that Russia , unfortunately , is unwilling to offer its neighbours - our common neighbours - an open partnership .
That would be in our interests , and we should make it very clear that we want to work with Russia to foster this partnership , but with a Russia which recognises the independence and sovereignty of all its neighbours .
What we cannot accept is a situation in which Russia rightly seeks to influence other countries through its membership of the Council of Europe or the OSCE , for example , yet on the other hand does not wish to take on responsibility and therefore objects to election observation , for instance .
We should not distrust the elections on principle , but a country such as Russia which thinks that it has fully developed its democracy must also allow some measure of scrutiny .
If Russia wishes to play a major role in the Council of Europe and the OSCE , then we must call on Russia to demonstrate this by admitting election observers to ascertain whether its own elections are transparent and fair .
That is the clear message that the European Union should be sending to Russia .
( PL ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I believe that as we debate relations between Russia and the European Union we should ask ourselves what Russia wants from the European Union and what the European Union expects from Russia .
A certain Russian politician has stated that Russia should now opt for a so-called policy of containment .
If Russia does indeed do so , this will in a sense imply a return to the Cold War era .
We should consider what exactly Russia would be attempting to contain .
Perhaps the winds of freedom , originating in the European Union ?
This is a major problem .
At the same time , the European Union claims to be seeking a strategic partnership with Russia .
The challenge is certainly a difficult one , and we would do well to bear in mind that the principles of the rule of law are an essential prerequisite to developing a sound partnership with Russia .
The rule of law involves the independence of the courts .
It involves freedom for the media , freedom of expression and economic freedom .
It also involves not jailing entrepreneurs .
Furthermore , it involves applying the principles of the rule of law in the area of international relations , which implies unfreezing the conflicts in the Caucasus and in Moldova and urging the international community to take up the issue of Kosovo .
( PL ) Madam President , the EU-Russia Summit coincides with a crucial time in the history of Russia , namely the end of Mr Putin 's era .
Will this era really come to an end , though ?
The presidential elections in the Russian Federation will not result in change .
Power will remain in the hands of the same individual who will this time bear the title of Prime Minister .
Andrei Lugovoi , the alleged murderer of Alexander Litvinenko , is set to become a Member of Parliament , thus acquiring immunity .
The Russian authorities are therefore openly protecting an individual who appears to have committed a serious crime on the territory of the European Union .
In so doing , they are sending out a clear message that the Kremlin 's interests take precedence over all laws and over respect for European Union Member States .
Nothing will change after the elections . The people of Chechnya will continue to be exterminated , the press will continue to be silenced , and the Kremlin 's abundant reserves of natural resources will allow it to continue implementing a brutal foreign policy .
I very much hope that the European Union 's representatives will bear this in mind during their talks with the Russian delegation . Our representatives should also remember that the talks themselves are not significant .
They will only become so if they lead to genuine changes within the Russian Federation .
Madam President , I would ask the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commissioner to provide this House with assurances , as was requested yesterday , that the views expressed by it will be put directly to President Putin and to his advisers at Mafra on Friday .
We have heard about the three guiding principles , which President Barroso describes as sacred principles , of solidarity , reciprocity and the rule of law .
Being Portuguese , the President-in-Office will know that my own country , England , has one of the oldest of alliances with his country .
We therefore understand what solidarity and mutual support means .
If we forget , our mutual patron saint , São Jorge , is there to remind us .
An attack on one Member State or on one Member State 's diplomats , or cyber attacks on one Member State , are an attack on the whole of the EU .
It is surely appropriate that President Putin be reminded that this solidarity and reciprocity are essential to us .
We cannot accept the concept of sovereign democracy if it means , on the one hand , that Russia accedes to international organisations - Commissioner , you have referred to the WTO - promising to abide by undertakings , and then fails to meet those undertakings .
That has to be underlined .
Tomorrow , Mikhail Khodorkovsky comes to the end of his four-year prison sentence in Siberia .
According to Russian law , that sentence should have been served in Moscow .
It might be appropriate to remind President Putin that the rule of law is a two-way thing , as far as our relationship is concerned .
Mr Khodorkovsky will not be freed , as new charges have been raised .
You might ask what relevance this has to the EU .
The answer is that many EU shareholders are concerned that commercial and legal commitments are not being followed through .
Finally , President-in-Office , we are not condemned to cooperation , and cannot have a partnership without mutual respect and mutual understanding .
We are trying very hard from our side to ensure that .
We need assurances from President Putin that he understands our guiding principles .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree with the words of Minister Antunes when he says that the EU-Russia relationship is stronger and more solid than it might at first glance appear .
The EU and Russia share an interest in a strategic partnership .
After all we inhabit the same continent .
There is a mutual economic dependency .
Without a mutual collaboration we cannot solve any serious international issue , be it global warming , non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , conflict in the Middle East or in Kosovo , and so on .
In other words , strong , versatile and balanced neighbourly relations between the EU and Russia have a fundamental bearing on the stability , security and prosperity of the whole of Europe .
While cultivating and strengthening this relationship we should not forget , however , the fundamental values underlying the EU , such as human rights and civil liberties , democracy and the rule of law .
I am convinced that we should keep reminding our Russian colleagues of these values now in relation to the imminent elections in Russia .
At the upcoming summit in Mafra , the EU should also be reminding our Russian partners of the principles of transparency and reciprocity in economic relations .
European markets should in fact remain open to Russian firms .
Equally , however , Russian markets should be fully open to European firms , including the energy markets and associated firms .
( EL ) Madam President , the transition to a new Strategic Partnership between the EU and Russia is not an easy undertaking .
It is hampered by successive divergences , which are sometimes a source of considerable tension .
Over-dramatisation of these divergences allows the constraining patterns of the past to re-emerge , makes the present uncertain and hinders constructive progress .
Some reasonable questions may be asked about the EU-Russia partnership .
Has Russia come to terms with the reality of the enlarged Union ?
Has the Union got over its teething troubles with expansion in the east ?
Do the new Member States feel they are participating in an effective European security system ?
How is the Union responding to Russia 's attempt to redefine and strengthen its new role in the international balance of powers ?
Will the two sides continue in a climate of distrust and ' quiet diplomacy ' , or will they seek to achieve common action plans ?
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that sector-based approaches alone are not the best option .
The declared aim of creating four common spaces must remain politically binding , and likewise the aim of Russia 's accession to the WTO .
Broad , robust partnership structures are therefore needed for cooperation in the areas of : economic issues ; freedom , security and justice ; external security ; and research , education and culture .
Russophobia is inappropriate for an EU based on democracy , the rule of law and fundamental freedoms .
I understand the sensitivities among some citizens of the new Member States , but over-emphasis on past experiences may cast doubt on the prospects for transparent political cooperation and close institutional interconnection .
President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , it is in the mutual interests of the Union and Russia to set common political and economic targets for the sake of democratic principle , peace , stability and security .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by highlighting the importance of a strategic partnership between the European Union and Russia , and by stating my affection for the people of the Russian Federation , and indeed for all the nations of Russia .
I also wish to recognise Russia 's achievements in terms of economic development and dealing with the social crisis .
A genuine strategic partnership demands a serious and honest approach to mutual relations , however .
The European Union has noted with concern the emergence of a new system of authority centred on President Putin .
This system threatens to permanently weaken liberal democracy in Russia itself . It is also fanning the flames of neo-imperialism in Russian foreign policy .
In the documents it has prepared in advance of the EU-Russia Summit , Amnesty International draws attention to human rights violations in Russia .
The information provided by Amnesty relates to the infringement of human rights by governmental authorities in the northern Caucasus , notably in Chechnya and Ingushetia , to the worsening situation regarding freedom of expression and association , to the murder of journalists and to the increase in racially-motivated violence .
The Portuguese Presidency should raise the issues referred to by Amnesty International at the summit due to take place in Mafra on 26 October 2007 .
Russian civil society , journalists and human rights activists need to be able to perceive the European Union as a guardian of fundamental rights and as an ally of a Russia that is democratic , liberal and open to the world .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that the EU-Russia Summit will prompt us to pause for a moment and define our common interests for once , for these common interests undoubtedly exist .
They include economic interests and security policy interests , notably on issues such as the Middle East , Iran and combating terrorism and so on , where we must recognise that we cannot achieve our objectives without Russia on board .
However , Russia must also understand that if it does not come on board , it will be undermining its own interests .
Looking at Russia 's demographic development and the vast expanses of Siberia , and at the countries with large populations here , if I were on the Russian side , I would not be imagining a threat from Europe .
In the long term , I would see the threat as coming from elsewhere .
I think that here , there is a high level of consensus on where we need to act .
On the so-called Western side , we - and I include the Americans here - did not really take Russia seriously when things were going badly for that country , with the result that it is now reverting to a more imperialist type of behaviour .
This also applies to developments in Russia itself , notably in respect of human rights and press freedom , and its increasingly frequent and unacceptable statements concerning the independence of its neighbours .
It is not acceptable that demands are being made of Russia 's ' near abroad ' to the effect that certain types of conduct must be adopted towards a specific country .
Every country has the right to take its decisions on a free and independent basis , and to determine where its path should lead .
Russia has to accept that .
There can be no reversion to outdated notions and the use of energy as a weapon , which is even less acceptable .
We can only move forward if we embark on a careful analysis of our interests again .
I think that , once the elections are over in Russia , this will again be possible , and I also hope that it will stop Russia from proceeding down the wrong economic path .
The large amounts of revenue flowing into the country from its oil and gas operations are being used to revitalise the old heavy-industrial combines in the aerospace , shipbuilding and similar sectors .
If the situation takes a turn for the worse , they will face the same disastrous scenario as before , for Russia has not built up a sound , broad-based economic structure with small and medium-sized enterprises , and the consequences of that failure are obvious .
It is in our interests , too , to ensure that no new vacuums emerge in Russia if oil prices fall .
( PT ) The summit may prove useful in resolving the ambiguities that continue to affect relations between the European Union and Moscow .
However , Minister Amado has already been careful to lower the bar by explaining that the Presidency does not have an ambitious agenda for the Mafra summit .
In a recent interview with LUSA , his counterpart , Mr Lavrov , complained about the growing disease in the European Union , alluding to the unconstructive attitude of certain members .
Yet what is poisoning our relations is the slow death of democracy , human rights , freedom of the press and rule of law in Russia and the impunity with which former members of the security forces are defining the agenda of the Russian Federation .
This is worrying European public opinion and is reflected in our relations .
The growing disease in the European Union , namely disagreement , is being treated and the Reform Treaty is a potent remedy .
Unfortunately , there is no cure in sight for the drift towards autocracy of Putin 's Russia and , if the Council of the European Union continues to shut its eyes to the situation , it will take even longer to find a cure .
( RO ) The Mafra Summit of 26 October 2007 will take place on the brink of events of major importance for the future of the relations between the European Union and Russia .
I would mention only a few of them : the expiry of the partnership and cooperation agreement between the European Union and Russia , the parliamentary elections of December 2007 and the presidential elections of March 2008 in Russia .
This context offers the possibility not only to urge Russia toward an open and honest dialogue with the European Union , but also to make a cold review of the last 10 years of cooperation .
Joining the previous speeches of my colleagues , I would like to focus my speech on the important role Russia should play in the common neighbourhood and in the Black Sea region .
The review of the last 10 years proves to us that frozen conflicts have persisted in this region and that Russia 's economic and political relations both with the countries in the region and with its neighbours , current European Union Members , are not always based on reciprocity , confidence and the principle of good relations .
If we speak about frozen conflicts , a good recent and well-known example in this respect refers to the conditions under which the political prisoners Andrei Ivanţoc and Tudor Popa were released , they being living proof of the fact that there is instability in the area , that there is an area of insecurity that affects the entire region .
Consequently , the Mafra Summit should also approach these themes , reminding of the fundamental objective that the European Union has undertaken - namely to create a true area of democracy , stability and prosperity in the Black Sea region and common neighbourhood .
In this context , Russia 's position and constructive involvement in this respect , in compliance with the international standards and obligations , should be a permanent theme in the European Union dialogue with this country .
A truly strategic partnership and a strong and advantageous relationship involve increased responsibility and a firm commitment from both parties .
( ET ) Yesterday a Hungarian puppet show opened in Parliament .
I was struck by the thought of how we sometimes vote here , by numbly raising our hands .
Have we become puppets too ?
There are rumours of back-door deals on a proposal by the Presidency to allow the resolution on Russia to slip through , ostensibly so that it would not cloud the atmosphere of the European Union-Russia summit .
It is scandalous that we so meekly surrender our own stance on self-expression .
This is the best example of how Europe has failed to understand that the problem in relations with Russia lies not in the details but in how we conduct ourselves .
Previously the European Parliament has opposed situations such as these , but today it would appear to me that the fear which continues to paralyse Russian society has begun to affect us .
Why are we repeatedly making exceptions for Russia ?
Do we continue to believe as before in our own principles or do we allow the thought to force its way into our heads that Russia is so different that not only our pancakes but our relations as a partnership must be after the Russian fashion .
Such behaviour is destructive to both sides , to the European Union as well as to Russia itself .
Madam President , I think it is high time to face realities .
Mr Watson has said that there are cracks in the present cooperation mechanism which are developing towards becoming fissures .
The Partnership and Cooperation Agreement declares that we share the same values .
However , some years ago , Chris Patten wrote that he does not believe that we really share the same values at this point .
The traditional feature of Russian state policies is pretending - building Potemkin villages - and Mr Putin is still pretending to have democracy while having almost completed building up the authoritarian highly nationalist state .
We also pretend that the coming elections will be crucial .
I doubt it , because everything has been prepared to manipulate these elections and to obtain results in accordance with Mr Putin 's wishes , including artificial opposition parties and the creation of phoney NGOs .
If we now agree to play along with this game of pretending , pretending we believe in this sort of democracy , we are going to take co-responsibility for what is going to happen in Russia and for the fate of ordinary Russians who deserve better than this fake democracy .
I strongly disagree , therefore , with the Council statement that there is no alternative to cooperation .
Democracy is based upon creating and having alternatives and we also have to commit ourselves to strongly defending human rights .
We have to balance our relations and we have to signal that we are prepared to stop our cooperation if Russia does not answer with reciprocity and openness .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have paid close attention to all the speeches made here today on the imminent summit between the European Union and Russia and in general on relations between the EU and Russia and also on Russia 's internal situation as you see it .
I must say that , as of course is my duty , I have duly noted and will take due account of these opinions .
In my view , there is one common thread running through all the comments and analyses made here today which is that Russia is a strategic partner for the European Union .
The EU needs Russia in the same way that Russia needs the EU .
It is based on this absolutely undeniable finding that we must build a relationship which is course mutually beneficial but which is also solid and firm , based on common values and principles .
Mention has been made of solidarity , human rights and reciprocity .
Now more than ever the European Union must stand firm before Russia in terms of its internal solidarity .
A problem for one Member State - and I have always said this - is a problem for all Member States .
This solidarity cannot under any circumstances be called into question .
On the issue of human rights , we all know that at the root of our Union lies respect for rule of law , democracy and human rights .
These are our inalienable values and principles which must guide our relations with third countries in all cases .
For our part , we must of course ensure reciprocity .
However , in so doing , we are also entitled to expect reciprocity from others .
If , at this moment in time , there are fracture lines as the Member has stated , I consider that the European Union and Russia can only stand to gain by doing everything possible within the reference framework that I mentioned , in other words a framework of solidarity , reciprocity and respect for human rights .
It is certainly essential for the European Union that these fractures are healed and so this is what we are going to work towards .
In our work we will naturally be aware of the difficulties and different goals , but we will also be determined as we are also aware that the current situation does not serve the best interests of the Union .
It is of course our duty to work in the interests of the European Union and we will do this openly and transparently , by talking face to face as we must always do with partners who we regard as strategic .
It will certainly be an intense and important dialogue .
We will talk about economics , trade , human rights and of course the international political situation and the regional political situation .
We hope - and this is what we will work towards - that , despite the difficulties , problems and differences of opinion , despite everything , we will be able , at the end of this summit on Friday , to say that some progress has been made in our relations and that , despite the difficulties , we have managed to achieve our objectives .
Member of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to pick up on some of the points made .
The debate has made one thing very clear : the very wide relationship of tension here today .
I am still of the opinion that Russia is a strategic partner .
However , I also said that it is of course a neighbour country and that is why it is especially important to take issues such as those raised by Graham Watson , Christopher Beazley and others very seriously .
We do indeed take them seriously .
Let us just cast a glance back to the previous summit in Samara .
On that occasion , Angela Merkel , as the President of the Council , put her cards on the table , not only in the meeting but also to the media .
Please do not think , therefore , that these values are not important to us .
We know that there are some very worrying developments as regards media freedom , the independence of the judiciary , and the issue of fairness , also in relation to the elections .
All the issues which have been raised today are of course the right ones .
However , let me also say that Elmar Brok 's comments describe a little of my own view , namely that we need to define our interests clearly .
On the one hand , there are very substantial security issues at stake here , of course , while on the other , there are human rights and democratic interests .
It is also important , of course , to mention the three major principles which Mr Beazley has referred to : solidarity , reciprocity and the rule of law .
Naturally , they appear in various forms and we cannot argue with that .
You are absolutely right , Mr Beazley , but I can assure you that they will be on the table as well .
I know that President Barroso will address these issues very clearly , especially in the context of energy , for example .
As you are aware , the Commission has just adopted a package of measures which point in this direction .
We want clear rules here which are upheld by everyone in the interests of true reciprocity .
Having said that , I would just like to remind you of one point : the more we are prepared genuinely to speak with one voice in the European Union , the stronger we will be .
As we all know , we do not always manage to do that .
However , the stronger Russia becomes , the more we should speak with one voice .
We have this energy dependence , but we can only defend our interests effectively if we send out a strong and clear message .
Perhaps we have not paid enough attention to that in the past , and when Russia was in a weaker economic position , so to speak , we probably did not give it enough support .
Today , however , we must pursue a position which is based on reciprocity and seek a genuine partnership approach , but this means that Russia must recognise what is important to us as well .
Six motions for a resolution to wind up the debate have been tabled pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) In connection with the EU-Russia summit , I would like to draw attention to a few factors concerning energy policy .
It is no exaggeration to say that the rules of the market economy are not applied at present in the Russian energy industry .
Russia does not identify with the principles of protecting foreign investment and non-discriminatory trade .
It seeks admission to the European energy sector , but meanwhile does not open its own market to foreign businesses .
In matters relating to energy in recent years , we have also seen Moscow use its energy exports to exert political pressure on numerous occasions .
This has gone hand in hand with efforts aimed at sowing discord among European Union Member States .
When devising a common European energy policy , we need to take into consideration the fact that Russia is already unable to meet its natural gas consumption and export requirements from its own gas resources .
A not insignificant percentage of its gas requirement is therefore imported from Central Asia .
A decline in supplies could mean Moscow using politics to an even greater extent as the basis for fulfilling its energy orders in future .
We believe it is important to apply the principle of free competition in the European Union 's foreign relations too .
We must make it clear that we consider it unacceptable to try to create a monopoly over energy resources .
Ensuring a stable energy supply is a fundamental concern of the European Union .
We are convinced that the mounting pressure being exerted on Member States can be combated successfully only by a united European Union acting on the principle of Community solidarity .
At present it is impossible to conceive of Europe 's energy supply without Russia .
At the same time , however , this special relationship must be based on reciprocity .
Now and in the past , the EU and Russia have been linked by their common history , strong economic and political contacts and shared traditions .
Their close cooperation has deepened further through the ongoing process of globalisation and the European countries ' growing demand for fossil fuels .
In order to safeguard energy supplies in future too , the EU Member States have relied on more intensive cooperation in this sector since the 1990s .
The Energy Charter is a key instrument in this context .
This treaty serves to promote the development of the Eastern European countries ' energy potential while guaranteeing the EU Member States ' continued energy supply .
As the line between foreign policy / external trade issues and energy supply issues is becoming increasingly blurred , Russia 's failure to ratify the Energy Charter is worrying .
In this respect , the rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights must never be put at risk , also in the EU 's external relations .
In light of the strong economic interdependence between the EU and Russia , threatening economic gestures can never be a useful means by which to achieve foreign policy objectives and must therefore be rejected .
I urge the Commission and the Council to withstand Russian attempts to secure unilateral advantages in the European energy markets .
Full reciprocity in market liberalisation and protection of investments must be safeguarded .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.40 a.m. for the award of the LUX Prize and resumed at 12.00 noon )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I have a request to make to the President of Parliament , not to you as President in the Chair , but to the President of the House .
I have a request to make on behalf of my Group .
However , I am sure I speak for all democratic groups in the House .
I take the view , as do my colleagues , that the matter which I wish to raise is so serious that I must ask President Pöttering to take action against the individuals I am about to name .
Major protests have occurred in Budapest over the last two days .
There is nothing unusual about that : demonstrations are a normal occurrence in Europe 's capitals , and they sometimes spiral into violence .
One might certainly object to that , but they cannot be prevented .
However , there is a new dimension to the events that have occurred in Budapest in recent days , and I would like to tell you why .
You can think what you like about Prime Minister Gyurcsány .
You may be for him , or you may be against him .
What is not acceptable , ladies and gentlemen ...
( Uproar in the Chamber )
You may be for Prime Minister Gyurcsány or you may be against him .
What is not acceptable , ladies and gentlemen - and I suggest that you look very carefully to see who is already trying to shout me down - what is not acceptable is that a Prime Minister in the European Union is branded a ' dirty Jew ' during demonstrations .
That adds a new dimension , and it is a dimension of the Fascists , on this side of the House .
( Sustained applause )
I would be grateful , Mr President , if you would ask Mr Pöttering to express the House 's overwhelming support for the issuing of a reprimand to these people .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
Thank you very much .
I think that the message has been fully understood but I will of course pass it on .
Mr President , I rise on a completely different matter .
I should just like to express , on behalf of many in my Group and I am sure of many others , our thanks to you for organising this presentation of the LUX Prize .
It is the kind of thing we have not done as a Parliament before .
It is the kind of thing we should do , and , as a former Swedish Prime Minister once said , ' politicians would do well to go the cinema more often ' .
( Applause )
Thank you , I am grateful to you for your comments .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have the pleasure of reminding you that today we are celebrating the 62nd anniversary of the United Nations .
You should have received in the last few days a copy of the message from the UN Secretary-General to mark the occasion .
I also wish to inform you of the official launch today in the European Parliament in Strasbourg of the annual report on cooperation between the European Union and the UN on crisis management , development and the promotion of democracy and fundamental rights .
This act is testament to the importance of the relationship between our institutions , our common commitment to multilateralism and the importance of us working together for the peace and welfare of our fellow citizens .
Statement by the President : see Minutes
Welcome
I have the pleasure of telling you that , in the framework of interparliamentary meetings , a Mauritanian delegation , led by Mr Ould Tolba , is currently visiting the European Parliament .
I would like to wish our guests a warm welcome and emphasise the importance we place on such a visit , the first in Europe for almost 10 years .
Through its election observation missions the European Union has been paying close attention to the recent political transition in Mauritania , which could set an example for the region .
We congratulate you on the democratic election of your Head of State and Parliament and , on behalf of this Parliament , I hope that your meetings here are fruitful and that your visit to Strasbourg can actively contribute to bringing our two institutions closer together .
Thank you once again for your visit .
1 .
Service of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters ( vote )
- Recommendation for second reading : Gauzès
2 .
Agreement between the EC and Bosnia and Herzegovina on readmission ( vote )
- Report : Fava
3 .
Agreement between the EC and Bosnia and Herzegovina on short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Fava
4 .
Agreement between the EC and Serbia on readmission ( vote )
- Report : Fava
5 .
Agreement between the EC and Serbia on short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Fava
6 .
Agreement between the EC and Montenegro on readmission ( vote )
- Report : Vălean
7 .
Agreement between the EC and Montenegro on short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Vălean
8 .
Agreement between the EC and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on readmission ( vote )
- Report : Vălean
9 .
Agreement between the EC and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Vălean
10 .
Agreement between the EC and Albania on short-stay visas ( vote )
- Report : Vălean
11 .
Immunity and privileges of Gian Paolo Gobbo ( vote )
- Report : Wallis
- Before the vote :
Mr President , I believe that the next report is the report by Mrs Wallis .
On behalf of my Group , the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty Group , I would like to invoke Rule 168 and table a motion for this report to be referred back to committee .
Mr President , this motion is based on Rule 168 of our Rules of Procedure .
Upon reading Mrs Wallis 's report it is very clear that the rapporteur and perhaps the committee are confused over Article 9 and Article 10 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities .
The report states that Mr Gobbo 's behaviour did not comply with Article 9 but Article 9 refers to the words and acts of the Member in the exercise of his functions , notably in this Chamber .
Consequently , it was not Article 9 of the Protocol that should have been examined , but Article 10 , which refers to other acts by a Member .
What needed to be examined was whether or not Mr Gobbo 's acts - which , I must add , I do not support on a political level - fell into the political sphere .
These acts obviously do fall within the political sphere .
Mr Gobbo committed a number of acts in the name of what he calls ' Padania ' .
These are naturally political acts and there is no doubt that , given the traditional case-law on immunity , a Member of any other political bent would have had his immunity confirmed , as was the case in the Italian Parliament for the national members of parliament who carried out the same actions as Mr Gobbo .
As a result , if Mrs Wallis 's report is adopted as it stands , we risk introducing a distinction , a form of discrimination between national immunity and European immunity , contrary to the Protocol , which refers precisely to national immunity .
That is why I believe that this report should be referred back to committee .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too am in favour of referring the matter back to committee , although my reasons might be a little different .
In actual fact , judging by Rules 5 , 6 and 7 of the Rules of Procedure and Articles 9 and 10 of the Protocol , Parliament clearly is not competent to express a view on the facts alleged against Mr Gobbo , simply because at the time of those facts Gian Paolo Gobbo was not a Member of the European Parliament .
Article 9 of the Protocol , which safeguards MEPs ' freedom of expression , refers to people who were Members of this House when they used certain terms or committed acts identifiable with them .
Since Mr Gobbo was not an MEP at the time of the facts , I believe that the most proper solution should be for Parliament to refrain from taking a stance because he was not a colleague of ours .
rapporteur . - Mr President , as the author of this report on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I can confirm to the House that there was a full debate in committee before the report was presented in plenary .
The committee also heard from Mr Gobbo , and there was a clear majority in favour of the report .
It is a shame that Mr Gollnisch did not raise the issues he mentioned before , but I am perfectly comfortable and perfectly confident that the committee adopted its position in full knowledge of all the facts and all the regulations .
I see no reason why the report should now be referred back to that committee .
( Parliament rejected the request to refer the matter back to committee )
12 .
Mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund ( vote )
- Report : Böge
13 .
Draft amending budget No 6 / 2007 ( vote )
- Report : Elles
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to make a statement on behalf of the Commission .
In its preliminary draft amending budget 6 / 2007 , the Commission proposed the creation of a new budget item - ' Damage requests resulting from legal procedures against the Commission 's decisions in the field of competition ' and the classification of the related expenditure under Heading 1a of the multiannual financial framework as it refers to an operational activity in the competition policy area .
The Commission would charge against this budget item possible budgetary implications stemming from rulings of the Court of Justice or the Court of First Instance in the field of competition .
The need for this budget item derives from recent judgments of the Court of First Instance and from the structure of the budget .
While fines in the field of competition policy are entered as general budget revenue , the amounts to be paid require the creation of a budget item in the expenditure side of the budget , which does not exist at the moment .
The Commission takes note that the budgetary authority does not intend to support the creation of this budget item for the year 2007 .
Despite this decision , if necessary the Commission may have to proceed to payments in order to meet legal obligations that might result from the Court 's decisions in 2007 within the limits of the current budget and in application of the relevant rules .
It does not prejudge the final decision on the creation of the dedicated budget line and on the classification of the related expenditure within the multiannual financial framework .
14 .
Protocol amending TRIPS ( vote )
- Recommendation : Susta
- Before the vote :
Mr President , the basis for agreement with the Council on this report was a statement made by the Commission which was supposed to be read out yesterday during the debate .
However , that statement was not read out .
If the Council would agree to attach it to the Minutes or give it some kind of legal status and transparency , then that would help further the process on this issue .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , access to affordable pharmaceutical products in poor developing countries and LDCs is essential to attain the proposed EU development goals and would contribute to poverty reduction , increase human security and promote human rights and sustainable development .
I think we both agree on the importance of ensuring the coherence of EU policies and that consistency in the EU 's external actions , namely trade and development policies , should go hand in hand .
We recognise that the mechanism created by the WTO decision and the protocol to the TRIPS Agreement represent just a part of the solution to the problem of access to medicines and public health , and that other measures to improve health care and infrastructure are equally indispensable .
Even if the TRIPS amendment is not the complete solution , we believe that the positive acceptance of the protocol represents an important step .
To this effect , it is worth recalling that the Member States of the European Union remain free under WTO rules to use the different exceptions provided under the TRIPS Agreement in their domestic patent laws , including those provided for under Article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement .
Furthermore , in order to facilitate access to medicines in countries with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector , the Council , the European Parliament and the Commission all worked hard to adopt Regulation ( EC ) No 816 / 2006 on compulsory licensing of patents relating to the manufacture of pharmaceutical products for export to countries with public health problems .
Let me add that we support the use of the ' flexibilities ' built into the TRIPS Agreement and recognised by paragraphs 4 , 5 and 6 of the Doha Declaration as well as the additional flexibilities for less-developed countries made available pursuant to paragraph 7 of the Doha Declaration , in order to be able to provide essential medicines at affordable prices under their domestic public health programmes .
In view of the Doha Declaration in the framework of the EPA negotiations with the ACP countries and other future bilateral and regional agreements with poor developing countries and LDCs , the European Union is not asking , and does not foresee asking , to negotiate pharmaceutical-related provisions , sometimes referred to as TRIPS + provisions , affecting public health and access to medicines .
Finally , we look favourably upon initiatives encouraging the transfer of technology , research , capacity strengthening , regional supply systems and help with registration in order to facilitate and increase the production of pharmaceutical products by the developing countries themselves and we will work with Member States towards that end .
Concerning the corresponding measures and the budgetary procedures , we are sure that the commitment of the European Parliament which has raised the visibility of the issue of access to medicines will help to increase their efficiency .
15 .
Verbatim Reports ( amendment of Rule 173 ) ( vote )
- Report : Corbett
- After the vote :
( FR ) Excuse me , Mr President , but I have something very important to say .
The vote on the Corbett report will now allow us to return to normality .
All the debates in plenary will be translated into all the languages .
Now we need to have effective implementation , and as we are voting on the budget tomorrow , I am suggesting that we prepare amendments to the budget so that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
New provisions will enter into force on the first day of the next part-session , i.e. 12 November .
16 .
European Statistical Governance Advisory Board ( vote )
- Report : Bowles
17 .
European Statistical Advisory Council ( vote )
- Report : van den Burg
18 .
Qualifications framework for lifelong learning ( vote )
- Report : Mantovani
- After the vote on the Commission proposal :
Mr President , on a point of order , you are again conducting business at a speed at which it is impossible to vote .
Yesterday , the President of Parliament told us that it was acceptable to make a number of mistakes , getting the vote wrong , because statistically that would happen anyway .
That does not apply in your case because we are voting so fast it is impossible to see how people are voting anyway .
Can you please slow down ?
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , let me just show you how much work we still have to get through today .
As you can imagine , if we slow down , we will never finish .
( Applause )
19 .
Batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators ( implementing powers conferred on the Commission ) ( vote )
- Report : Blokland
20 .
Communication infrastructure for the Schengen Information System environment ( regulation ) ( vote )
- Report : Coelho
21 .
Mutual assistance and cooperation between customs administrations ( vote )
- Report : Toma
22 .
Thematic strategy on the sustainable use of pesticides ( vote )
- Report : Belohorská
23 .
Conventional energy sources and energy technology ( vote )
- Report : Reul
24 .
Community Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles ( vote )
- Report : Davies
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I have a request .
I request that the order of voting on the amendments be amended under Rule 155 ( 2 ) .
It is clear from the voting list that Amendment 51 is more far-reaching than Amendments 42 and 52 , so I would ask that we vote on Amendment 51 first and then on Amendments 42 and 52 .
The Sittings Service is not in agreement , but I will ask Mr Davies to explain briefly .
rapporteur . - Mr President , very simply I agree with the voting list as presented to the House .
That being the case , according to tradition we must following the advice of our rapporteur .
25 .
Taxation and customs policies and the Lisbon Strategy ( vote )
- Report : Wagenknecht
- Before the vote on paragraph 37 :
Mr President , the change we would propose is that Parliament , at this stage , ' notes ' rather than ' welcomes ' that the Commission has forwarded a communication on loss relief , as work on the report on that topic is in progress in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- Before the final vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is most regrettable that the House has not had the courage to voice genuine and serious criticism of a tax policy trend in the European Union which is moving in completely the wrong direction , which benefits multinational corporations and the wealthy to an unbelievable extent , while consumers , workers and especially the low-paid face an ever heavier tax burden .
In my view , the report is unacceptable as it stands .
I wish to withdraw my name from this report and appeal to everyone in this House who genuinely wants a tax policy for the European Union which not only serves the interests of the top ten thousand but genuinely benefits the majority of Europe 's citizens : please , vote against this report .
We take note of your statement , Mrs Wagenknecht .
26 .
Tobacco smoke : policy options at EU level ( vote )
- Report : Florenz
- Before the vote on paragraph 23 :
Mr President , I would just like the word ' urgently ' to appear after ' Commission ' , for obvious reasons .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
27 .
EU-Turkey relations ( vote )
- Motions for a resolution ,
- Before the vote on paragraph 19 :
Mr President , I have an oral amendment but it is in the text .
My oral amendment is : ' and to promote the application of EU environmental standards to large-scale mining and water barrage projects ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
( in writing ) . - ( CS ) It can be reasonably assumed that the regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the service of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters , as recommended for second reading ( Council common position ) , will contribute towards reinforcing legal security of both natural persons and legal entities within the Member States .
It is well-known that the service of the above documents is a serious issue , with a significant impact on both the process of justice and civil and commercial relations .
I believe that the recommendation of the European Parliament is in line with the effort to produce high-quality legislation at Community level .
In relation to the agreements between the EC and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia on readmission and the facilitation of issuance of short-stay visas which are to be approved by the European Parliament , I believe that insofar as these agreements - and similar agreements with the Western Balkan countries - have a significance in terms of generally strengthening the rule of law and fighting against crime , issues related to illegal migration should be resolved first of all by economic and political means .
In addition , I would like to underline another important factor mentioned in the relevant reports which is that the conclusion of these agreements will imply a considerable financial burden for Macedonia and other Western Balkan countries .
Taking into account the economic situation in these states it is essential that the Community provide appropriate and effective assistance , in particular financial .
in writing . - ( NL ) I remember in the early ' 60s there were reciprocal visa requirements for inhabitants of the countries of the then European Community and those of the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Shortly after that those visa requirements were abolished .
This meant that the populations of the seven countries that together still made up Yugoslavia at that time were free to travel throughout much of Europe .
Only for EU Member State Slovenia and candidate country Croatia has that not changed .
The inhabitants of all the other territories , including candidate country Macedonia , have been cut off from the EU Member States since 1992 .
The young generation that has grown up since then has hardly been able to go outside their own borders .
At the embassies of the EU countries in the Macedonian capital Skopje , for instance , you find large signs listing a large number of strict obligations .
Only criminals can easily meet them , but students , researchers and journalists cannot .
I support the improved access for those groups from 2008 and the lowering of the visa fee to EUR 35 .
Unlike some other members of my Group , I do not see the introduction of biometric registration as a reason to reject this improvement .
I regret the conditional sale with the readmission policy , which does not adequately guarantee the safety of the refugees concerned .
in writing . - ( PT ) The mobilisation of the Solidarity Fund to help the populations of Germany and France ( La Réunion ) who were the victims of natural disasters in January and February respectively proves , despite the delay , the relevance and importance of this Fund in assisting Member States .
Bearing in mind the deadlock in the Council on a decision on the Commission proposal to improve this Fund , we would reiterate that the continued eligibility of regional disasters must be defended .
The European Parliament has previously confirmed that ' the EUSF should continue to enable action to be taken in the case of disasters which , although significant , do not achieve the minimum level required and that assistance may also be provided in special circumstances in cases where most of the population in a specific region has been affected by a disaster which will have serious , long-term effects on their living conditions ' .
It is also essential to recognise the particular characteristics of Mediterranean natural disasters , such as droughts and fires - particularly in terms of time limits and eligible actions - and the possibility of higher levels of financial assistance for ' cohesion ' countries and ' convergence ' regions in the event of a disaster .
The creation of an EU agricultural disaster fund must also be assessed .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Castex voted for the Susta report on the Protocol amending the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights ( TRIPS Agreement ) .
For French Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the agreement hereby obtained , which will allow countries to produce generic drugs and export them to poor developing nations with no capability of producing these medicines themselves , constitutes an important step forwards .
For French Members of the Socialist Group , this report makes a positive contribution to resolving a public health problem that is clearly a matter of serious concern .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the protocol amending the agreement on TRIPS and Access to Medicines because I strongly believe the EU should be a key actor in the promotion of public health and access to medicines to all in the third world .
This protocol is a step in the right direction .
in writing . - ( PT ) The costs associated with introducing ' intellectual property ' protection standards in the pharmaceutical sector in ' developing countries ' have been known about for a long time .
The dramatic and unacceptable situation caused in these countries by the application of ' intellectual property rights ' in the area of health , particularly in the fight against diseases such as malaria , HIV / AIDS and tuberculosis , has been highlighted and warned about for a long time .
We therefore feel that this report represents an opportunity lost by the majority of this House , within the scope of its powers , to assume a humanist position and to clearly fight for a policy which could bring an end to intellectual property rights in the pharmaceutical sector .
Hiding behind the idea that a negotiation of the Protocol seems very difficult , the majority of this House have signed a blank cheque to the Council because such vague recommendations can only cause the current situation to continue , creating financial and legal obstacles which will prevent those countries with fewer resources from being able to access the advances made in science and technology in this field .
We abhor the fact that it is particularly the pharmaceutical multinationals that will gain through this inhumane policy , by maintaining their fabulous profits at the cost of many lives .
Madam President , following the vote , Parliament has decided to have both a written verbatim record of its sessions and an audiovisual record of its sessions .
This obviously has budgetary implications and I would urge the Bureau to examine the situation , enact the necessary changes to the budget or come up with a new proposal if it wishes the committee to re-examine this matter .
I rather suspect , given the very large majority of the House on this issue , that the will of Parliament is rather clear , so I think it is rather the first course of action that will have to be taken .
in writing . - Keeping a record of all debates and making them available to the public could help Euro-scepticism .
However this will also allow the EU to boast of greater transparency when in fact it will in reality do little to enhance democracy , because the European Parliament cannot initiate legislation and can be ignored by the European Commission .
In the EU the unelected Commission initiate EU legislation and they offer no transparency at all .
The opportunity for a week to make corrections to speeches ( amendment 4 ) was well intended and would protect MEPs from errors , but up to date news on the EU could potentially be buried by a week 's delay , hindering the free press in informing the public .
Therefore I voted against the report
in writing . - Keeping a record of all debates and making them available to the public could help Euro-scepticism .
However this will also allow the EU to boast of greater transparency when in fact it will in reality do little to enhance democracy because the European Parliament cannot initiate legislation and can be ignored by the European Commission .
In the EU the unelected Commission initiate EU legislation and they offer no transparency at all .
I do not support the opportunity to make corrections to speeches ( amendment 4 ) the verbatim report should be as spoken .
I make mistakes as much as anyone .
Up to date news on the EU could potentially be buried by a week 's delay , hindering the free press in informing the public .
A separate note by way of explanation might be acceptable .
Therefore I voted against the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Corbett report recommends that , in order to save about EUR 10 million a year , we should no longer have the verbatim reports of proceedings in this Parliament translated into all the official languages .
Access to the debates in each language would then only be guaranteed by way of the audiovisual recordings available on the internet , though individual Members of Parliament would be able to request the translation of certain extracts .
However , not everyone in Europe has broadband internet access and , moreover , it has been suggested that requests by Members for translations should be restricted to some thirty pages a year .
What Mr Corbett is proposing is therefore to limit the access of European citizens to the work of those whom they have elected to represent them and to defend their interests within the European Union .
This is unacceptable .
It is all the more unacceptable because at the same time the same institution is spending EUR 100 million a year on its own propaganda .
To say nothing of the Commission , which spends more than EUR 200 million on vital activities such as the large-scale broadcasting of pornographic internet videos that are supposed to be promoting European cinema .
Fortunately , good sense - or rather the mortal fear of the electorate - has prevailed among most of our colleagues and multilingualism has been preserved .
in writing . - ( SV ) We firmly reject the report 's proposal that oral contributions should appear only in their original language in the verbatim report .
The European Parliament is trying to make a big thing of the fact that speakers are speaking to the whole of Europe as spokespersons for their European groups , but at the same time we are going to refuse subsequent access to their statements and restrict availability by cutting back on translations into different languages .
If we are to have a democratically functioning EU , we must be prepared to pay for it .
An organisation that pours out more than SEK 360 billion on a protectionist agricultural policy must be able to pay SEK 90 million to show respect for the EU 's citizens .
However , if the translation costs are deemed to be insupportable in future , the minimum must be that the verbatim report contains the speaker 's original language and an English translation .
in writing . - ( FR ) The French Members of the Independence and Democracy Group voted against the Corbett report on the amendment of Rule 173 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament which seeks to abolish the full and systematic translation of parliamentary debates .
The idea behind publishing the debates , which applies to judicial proceedings and political deliberations alike , is one of the fundamental principles of democracy .
Publication helps to reduce ideological bias , arbitrariness , cronyism and dirty tricks .
This of course is based on the assumption that all have access in their own language to the full published proceedings by ensuring that the same words do indeed express the same notions for everyone .
Who among the peoples of Europe would be capable of recounting and understanding a debate when faced with a hotchpotch version of it in twenty languages ?
It would probably be the same as someone trying to understand the so-called ' simplified ' treaty and attempting to replace the 400 new clauses contained in the existing treaties , since here too , apparently , no consolidation version has been made available during the ratification process .
Faced with increasing reticence from the inhabitants of its Member States , the European Union seems to be capable of displaying nothing but obfuscation , falsification and concealment .
in writing . - ( NL ) The decision of the Secretariat of Parliament to no longer report the debates in plenary in every language went unnoticed in 2006 .
Parliament has now reversed this decision .
I agree that too much time and money is spent on translating debates and documents into the 23 official languages of our Union .
It is a pity that no compromise solution was put to us , in which the debates could be translated into English and French , so that the proceedings would still be available in written form in addition to the audiovisual data .
in writing . - ( PT ) Multilingualism is much more than an expression of the cultural diversity of the European Union .
In an organisation of sovereign and independent states which have joined together as a means of ensuring , through cooperation , the best advantages for their citizens without having at any stage waived their status as free and sovereign states , multilingualism is the recognition of the relationship of equality between all the members .
This reason alone would suffice for us to defend the continuation of this multilingualism in the functioning of the Community institutions .
However , other arguments may be added to this .
Giving up multilingual internal communication potentially means reducing the possibility for political action by Members of the European Parliament who are fully entitled to express themselves in their mother tongue .
Furthermore , if we minimise multilingualism in our external communications , we may end up distancing an institution which expends a great deal of energy trying to bring the EU closer to its citizens .
Finally , there is a counter economic argument to the economic argument made : the linguistic diversity of the European people and the mastery of numerous languages has to be a competitive advantage , not a cost .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the Corbett report on the amendment of Rule 173 relating to the verbatim report of proceedings , even though I regret the adoption of a whole series of amendments recommending the verbatim translation of the reports into all the official languages .
To those hard-line advocates of multilingualism I would say , somewhat euphemistically , that it is a fiction to claim that , without this extension to the translation process , the European Parliament would be the only parliamentary assembly in the world not to have all its proceedings and debates translated in hardcopy into all the relevant languages .
This is a fiction to the extent that it has been agreed that not only will the multilingual version be retained but the simultaneous translation into all the official languages should also be made available , on request , to all the Members of the House as well as to the public at large .
This is the really essential part , it seems to me .
Finally , I regret that Parliament has been unwilling to adopt a more contemporary approach as far as access to the documents is concerned : I say yes , a thousand times yes to multilingualism .
However , I shall continue to oppose the so-called defence of linguistic diversity when this is used as an excuse by those who support the status quo and openly oppose change .
in writing . - ( NL ) I voted against the proposal in the Corbett report and I did so for the same reasons that I have previously opposed the scrapping of the budget for translating the verbatim report of our sessions in this House .
In a parliament , the spoken word is sacrosanct .
What we say is not just an item on the day 's news if we are lucky , it is part of the democratic legislative process .
Making this accessible in the official European languages is not a luxury .
Translation is politically necessary for a proper archiving system which after all serves to allow open access to information .
We have to bear the consequences of our fundamental decision to choose multilingualism and not let it surreptitiously crumble away .
A parliament that has self-respect does not ditch its traditional archiving system .
If we need to economise , we would do better to choose different areas of the budget .
Anyway , I stick to my view that our insistence on multilingualism is a necessary form of respect for the diverse cultures and languages in the EU and a blessing for democracy .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which advocates the establishment of a European Statistical Governance Advisory Board in response to a Commission proposal to improve the production of EU-wide statistics .
in writing . - I voted for this uncontroversial report , proposing the establishment of a European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy .
The amendments Parliament also adopted will ensure the Committee 's efficiency , and affect its name and composition .
( RO ) Today 's vote on Mr. Mantovani 's report is important due to the stimulus it gives to the European policy in the field of lifelong education .
Examining the current situation in this field and its correlation with the labour market , the Mantovani report proves to us , one more time , the existence of a reality we have lived for many years , but which has not been followed by a firm and coherent policy that could cope with its challenges .
Therefore , I believe it is important to implement the new proposals as soon as possible .
In fact , I would like to point out the importance of recognizing and promoting education for tolerance on the entire European Union territory .
This is the only way in which mobility on the labour market will not generate socially excluded groups , whose behaviour becomes deviant sooner or later .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Castex voted for the Mantovani report on the establishment of a European Qualifications Framework .
This French Member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament welcomes the future introduction of the European Qualifications Framework , which will facilitate transnational mobility for workers and learners , while at the same time meeting the requirements of the labour market by way of a common reference point for the transposition of qualification levels .
According to the proposal all qualifications , from the end of compulsory education to the highest levels of university teaching and professional training ( the Commission 's initial document only concerned general educational qualifications ) , should be classified according to one of eight reference levels based on knowledge , ability and acquired skills .
Mrs Castex believes that the EQF , as a tool for comparing , translating and converting the qualifications of one Member State to those of another , will respect the diversity of the certification systems and the richness of the qualifications that exist in the European Union .
It is a tool that will also facilitate greater mobility for the citizens of Europe .
It is now up to the Member States to set about the massive task of classifying the reference levels required for the EQF , otherwise the European Qualifications Framework will be destined to remain an empty shell .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report contains several contradictions and we are critical of the compromise accepted by the majority of the European Parliament on the establishment of a European Qualifications Framework .
However , there are positive aspects to the recognition of qualifications among the various Member States which should be supported .
However , the final text adopted accentuates the federalist nature of the European Parliament 's proposal by setting specific dates for the adaptation and correlation of the various education and training systems used in the Member States , despite specifying its non-binding nature for the next few years .
We would stress that education policy is the sole responsibility of Member States which is why we feel that the ' adaptation ' proposed infringes this principle .
We regard as negative the link with the Bologna Process and the trend towards the commercialisation of education , with emphasis being placed on ' employability ' and on the prospects of the labour market being linked to the Lisbon Agenda .
This report deals with the certification at Community level of lifelong learning qualifications .
This is a completely desirable measure and one that should be encouraged .
However , I reject the internationalist justification used in the document , especially as I recall the total defeat suffered by the Lisbon Strategy .
There is an element of Europeanist ideology in this text .
It is written that the sacrosanct objective of globalisation constitutes our one and only hope of salvation and that globalisation is beneficial both economically and socially .
In my opinion ultra-liberal globalisation is a machine for destroying the economic , social and cultural fabric of nations .
Moreover , the report only refers to potential progress , something for the future .
Should we not be looking at the present as we attempt to analyse the failures and damage that has already been done to our society by globalisation ?
In the face of such blindness , irresponsibility and inadequacy I intend to vote against the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , I voted in favour of adopting the report on the recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment of the European Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning .
The future development of European society will be increasingly dependent on education , scientific research , innovation and technology .
That is why it is so important to provide support for the promotion of mobility across the European labour market .
I am convinced that setting up the European Qualifications Framework will facilitate access to the European labour market .
The rapporteur , Mr Mantovani , has rightly pointed out in his report that as of 2012 all qualifications certificates , diplomas and Europass documents should relate to the relevant EQF level .
The European Qualifications Framework should be used to facilitate comparison of levels of qualification .
It is very important for the Member States to garner support for the implementation of the European Qualifications Framework , notably by the exchange of best practice .
The European Qualifications Framework Advisory Group mentioned in the report is in a position to ensure the cohesion of the cooperation process and monitor the latter .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which seeks the establishment of a European Qualifications Framework to help with the EU-wide recognition of the qualifications that people receive .
It should lead to an improvement in mobility for people who wish to work in other Member States by providing a neutral and credible reference point for the comparison of various qualifications .
in writing . - ( DE ) In theory , it should be possible for a professional 's qualifications to be recognised in any other Member State and for the same conditions to apply as for the domestic workforce .
In practice , there are still some problems which need to be addressed .
For example , if an experienced teacher from Austria were required to complete a two-year period of practical training in order to do the same job in Germany , there would obviously be something wrong .
In some Member States , work placements are not only being misused as a way of employing well-qualified staff with academic degrees as cheaply as possible , they are also being used to create barriers to certain professions .
Precarious working conditions , which initially only affected the low-wage sector , have long since spilled over to skilled workers as well .
The EU must not give further impetus to this trend with the ' Blue Card ' scheme .
We have enough qualified workers , if only we were prepared to pay them properly .
in writing . - ( EL ) The adoption of the European Qualifications Framework reinforces EU intervention in the Member States ' education systems , homogenisation , and adaptation to predetermined quality and performance indicators .
It is yet another way of replacing education with flexible ' learning ' , outside the socially instituted process of education .
Knowledge is replaced with ephemeral , superficial ongoing training that will equip workers with whatever skills are needed by capital at the time .
These qualifications will be recognised on the basis not of certificates awarded by the formal education system of each country , but of certification examinations set by organisations that are controlled by employers .
This further promotes the separation between degree certificates and the possibility of pursuing a career .
Linking different levels of education and forms of learning , which aims to put learning by experience on a par with systematic education , is an attempt at levelling down workers ' rights and driving down the wages of all workers to the lowest possible level .
Through a system of lifelong learning and certification of professional qualifications , the EU 's wider aim is to subordinate all education to the priorities of the market and strengthen the profitability of capital .
This is at complete variance with the educational needs of workers and young people .
For these reasons , we are voting against the report and the Commission 's proposal .
in writing . - ( SK ) Transnational labour mobility in the EU has become inevitable : it is an everyday reality within the EU-27 after enlargement .
These changes are accompanied by demands for more innovative and flexible education that will prepare Europeans for their integration into the modern labour market where education is the basic precondition for all age groups and all strata of society .
I voted in favour of the report by Mr Mario Mantovani on the proposal for a recommendation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment of the European Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning because I am convinced that this is the only way to fulfil the goals of the Lisbon Strategy .
The structure of the European Qualifications Framework is based on eight vertical levels , termed ' reference levels ' , defined in terms of three horizontal criteria - knowledge , skills and competence - thus enabling individuals to better integrate in the labour market on completion of a learning process .
In order for the European Qualifications Framework to be successful , it is absolutely essential for the Member States and social partners to base their cooperation , during the implementation phase , on mutual trust .
The labour market structure in Europe is changing and we see an emerging need for a flexible approach to education .
The Member States should therefore make use of the European Qualifications Framework to improve the lifelong learning programmes .
There is also the need for both employers and European citizens to understand the practical importance of qualifications .
This will lead to greater , and most importantly barrier-free , labour mobility across the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) The globalisation of the economy is a question for which Europe has not yet found a clear and convincing answer .
A more globalised economy implies a readiness for change which means greater mobility .
The creation of a common reference framework for the recognition , comparability and transfer of qualifications originating from different systems is fundamental to the development of a decisive component of the European project , in other words the mobility of workers facilitated in this case by the portability of their qualifications .
Better training of our workers combined with a harmonised system for the recognition of their knowledge , skills and abilities will enhance their mobility and the development of the internal market .
More and better skills among European workers could help to ensure better organisation , more innovation and improved competitiveness among our undertakings .
( LT ) It is a shame that the launch of SIS II keeps being postponed .
Today we have adopted a resolution on this important issue .
We are so far behind schedule that it is essential to find a way out of the situation that would enable us to use the SIS 1 + network after 13 November 2008 .
It is now clear that the human and financial resources allocated for the implementation of SIS II will have to be shared between three projects being developed simultaneously : SIS II , SISone4all and the installation , operation and management of a communication infrastructure .
This is why , in my opinion , the correct distribution of EU and Member States ' resources will be of great significance .
However , in view of the project 's importance as regards the security of the EU , it is obvious that SIS II is the greatest priority .
We must allocate funds for EU security and the development of communications infrastructure .
in writing . - ( PT ) To ' fill a gap ' during the extension of the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) , which includes the Visa Information System ( VIS ) , the current proposal aims to provide a temporary solution to prevent any hiatuses and potential interruptions caused by the delay in installing the ' infrastructures ' of the ' new ' system .
The costs will be distributed between the Community budget and Member States .
We would point out that this involves expanding the features of the SIS by developing them , extending access to new authorities and interlinking them , with the addition of new categories of data ( such as the data capture mandate and biometric data ) .
This extension of the previous system significantly threatens the rights , freedoms and guarantees of citizens by adding new elements to a database which is , in addition , shared by numerous bodies .
The confidentiality of this data cannot be fully guaranteed as records may be kept ' for a longer period ' and be shared with third countries .
At the root is an attempt to bring the SIS into line with the dangerous and unacceptable objectives of the current security offensive and with the expansion and growing communitarisation of internal affairs in the EU , which we clearly reject .
in writing . - We do not oppose the suggested temporary solution in order to guarantee the existence of a network for SIS 1 + for the period from 13 November to 17 December 2008 .
However , we cannot support the use of the passerelle in Article 67 ( 2 ) , indent 2 , of the EC Treaty as suggested by Mr Coelho .
That is why we have chosen to vote against the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) We already have a major problem with organised criminal gangs and illegal immigrants who tend to congregate in border areas where they are also easier to apprehend than in cities .
Both groups are already on the starting blocks and are intent on crossing into other countries as soon as the borders open , where they will vanish without trace .
We must respond to this situation with increased cross-border cooperation and intensive checks in border regions .
The expansion of Schengen is , after all , a major responsibility for all the countries involved .
Accession to Schengen should therefore not be made solely dependent on the functionality of the Schengen Information System , which is something Poland , for example , does not yet appear to have achieved .
Instead , we must ensure that future members of Schengen are able to assert effective control of the EU 's external borders , that there is no softening of the transition periods for the protection of labour markets , and that begging does not increase any further .
Until this is guaranteed , over-hasty and ill-considered expansion must not be allowed to occur .
According to the FRONTEX Annual Report for 2006 , the apprehension figures at Schengen 's current external borders ( mainly Austria and Germany ) are still far higher than those at the EU 's external borders , so it is highly doubtful whether the expansion should be approved .
Indeed , the question is whether Schengen should not be abolished in part , especially since the Austrian Interior Ministry 's report on human trafficking indicates that almost 50 % of illegals in Austria have entered the country across the Schengen border with Italy .
in writing . - I do not oppose the suggested temporary solution to guarantee the existence of a network for SIS 1 + for the period from 13 November to 17 December 2008 .
However , I cannot support the use of the passerelle in Article 67 ( 2 ) , indent 2 , of the EC Treaty as suggested by Mr Coelho .
That is why I have chosen to vote against the report .
( SK ) I am in favour of a reasonable compromise that would achieve a balance between health and environmental protection on the one hand and agricultural production on the other hand .
This is why I voted for the report prepared by my Slovak colleague , Mrs Irena Belohorská , who is a recognised expert in the field of prevention and treatment of cancer diseases .
I congratulate her on the report which is based on her vast experience as a medical practitioner and which introduces a balanced strategy on the sustainable use of pesticides .
I believe that this report will contribute to the adoption of more effective measures for better information of the general public and lead to the setting up of correct application methods and a gradual reduction in the use of pesticides in agriculture .
A possible solution is to support farmers in ways that would encourage them to reduce the use of artificial fertilisers in their fight against diseases , pests and weeds on their farms , and in doing so help achieve a gradual changeover to bioproducts .
The report can inspire consumers not to choose , at a market or in a supermarket , only the best-looking produce but to give priority , for the sake of their health , to less visually appealing but healthier bioproducts .
( CS ) All of us wish to breathe clean air and halt the melting of the glaciers .
At the same time , in spite of energy saving programmes , our need for energy is growing exponentially .
At stake is also Europe 's dependency on gas and oil imports .
We must therefore invest in the development of renewable sources and tackle issues of nuclear power plants safety , in particular the question of final disposal of radioactive waste .
In this way we could obtain up to 14 % of our energy from clean sources .
We cannot ignore , however , the fact that 32 % of our energy comes from fossil fuels , employing 300 000 people and substantially polluting the environment .
This is why I welcome and have supported the report by Mr Reul on conventional sources .
I agree with the rapporteur that we should review investments and also develop those technologies capable of increasing the efficiency of fossil fuel energy production and reducing emissions .
We have much to work on .
( LT ) Today we have reached an important decision on the strategy on the use of pesticides .
I voted in favour of the resolution .
We are well aware of the fact that the air we breath is polluted and therefore poses health risks and that the food we consume has been processed using chemicals that are dangerous to human health .
Our children , the future generation , are growing up in these conditions .
I am absolutely certain that the hazards that pesticides pose to human health must be reduced .
Therefore , we should take decisive measures and do our best to find the necessary funds .
I welcome the plans to require the Member States to draw up action plans highlighting the areas in which pesticides would be entirely banned and making substantial reductions in the use of pesticides within the next 10 years .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is well-known that , in July 2006 , the Commission presented a Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides , together with a proposal for a directive establishing a framework for Community Action to achieve a sustainable use of pesticides and a proposal for a regulation concerning the placing of plant protection products on the market , with the aim of reducing the general risks and negative impacts of pesticide use on human health and the environment .
The risks associated with pesticide use have already been reduced , but , in some areas , particularly in countries which have for a long time used intensive agriculture , these can still be found in the soil and water in undesirable quantities .
This also means that countries such as Portugal , with more traditional agriculture , should receive more support in order to maintain less intensive agricultural production .
However , we do not feel that the solution lies in substituting GMOs for pesticides .
While the undesirable effects of chemical pesticides on human health are well-known , the precautionary principle should be applied with regard to the effects of GMOs on human health as these have not yet been studied .
This Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides only relates to plant protection products , in other words to one area of pesticides .
in writing . - ( PL ) I welcome the fact that the European Parliament has adopted a new directive on the production and use of pesticides .
The directive tightens up the conditions under which trade in the chemical substances used in the manufacture of plant protection products may be permitted .
The outcome will be beneficial to the citizens of the European Union , especially as regards their life and health .
In addition , the directive details the cases in which spraying from the air may take place . It also recommends lowering the amount of pesticides used and prioritising non-chemical alternatives .
The report by Mrs Belohorská is worthy of support , if only because of the very wide but also up-to-date scope of the provisions .
There can be no doubt that European Union citizens no longer wish to have daily contact with toxins , and do not wish to consume contaminated products . Our citizens do not wish either to be affected by carcinogenic or toxic substances , or by substances with endocrine-disrupting properties .
In response to these clear expectations expressed by European society , it was appropriate also to support a ban on the use of pesticides in rural and urban public areas .
The use of pesticides in areas surrounding hospices , sanatoria , rehabilitation centres , clinics and hospitals should be banned . Such a ban should also extend to parks , public gardens , sports and leisure areas , school grounds , children 's playgrounds and similar locations .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides is an important addition to the proposal for a regulation and a directive which has been voted on at first reading today .
The Thematic Strategy is needed because the use of pesticides in the European Union has not decreased , despite the successful measures adopted voluntarily by some Member States between 1992 and 2003 , and remains at a high level .
The Belohorská report underlines , once again , the need to apply the precautionary principle in the use of pesticides .
( LT ) I consider the report on conventional energy sources and energy technology to be of the utmost importance .
The realities of life are forcing the EU Member States to change their attitude towards energy within both the EU and the world markets - resources , the energy mix and security of supply .
I would like to emphasise the importance of nuclear energy , as it is a secure , reliable and environmentally friendly resource .
The fact that Germany , which has 17 nuclear power plants , produces six times more CO2 pollution than France , with its 59 nuclear power stations , is very persuasive .
Nuclear energy is particularly important for countries that are not rich in renewable energy resources such as wind , solar energy , water and biomass , the use of the latter being particularly expensive .
Electricity is of the utmost importance and should be accessible to everyone .
I voted in favour of the report and would like to stress the importance of EU assistance for the construction of nuclear or other environmentally friendly power plants .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I just feel a need to clarify a few points about the new generation of nuclear technology .
It is worth remembering that Italy 's nuclear power stations were shut down following a rescinding referendum in 1987 , perhaps rightly so , although that has gradually placed us in a situation of dependence on foreign sources of energy .
However , the new generation of nuclear technology , which is clean and safe and environmentally friendly , is undoubtedly necessary to confront the problem of energy supply and climate change .
The energy mix must hence be updated and , along with renewables , clean coal and gas , nuclear will enable Europe to limit its dependence in future .
For this reason I voted in favour of the building of fourth-generation nuclear power stations , which will enable energy to be generated in a safer and more environmentally friendly manner .
I do , however , still have doubts , serious doubts and concerns , about the storage of nuclear waste .
The report may consider the problem of waste storage solved , but quite frankly I disagree : the waste problem is crucial and , if it is to be solved in the near future , requires a huge amount of investment in research .
To conclude , I believe that the choice of energy mix - just three more seconds please - to ensure security of energy supply for the Union in coming years must be altered as research progresses and in particular as new technologies develop .
( DE ) Madam President , my colleagues from my delegation and I myself voted against the Reul report because we do not believe that nuclear energy is either safe or clean , and nor do we believe in the new generation of nuclear power plants and the new generation of nuclear energy .
If it really is the case - and there are reports and statistics about this - that nuclear energy is to have a massive impact in terms of reducing our CO2 emissions , then we will have to have a substantial increase in the number of our nuclear power stations .
That is neither realistic nor practicable .
For that reason - and I will speak more on this subject when the next report comes round - effective measures to improve energy efficiency and also to cut CO2 emissions from cars would be a better way of making Europe a healthier place and convincing other countries and continents to follow suit .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against the report as we do not consider it to be balanced and , among other things , it fails to address important problems in relation to nuclear energy .
Nor do we believe that the Union 's energy research funds should be used to develop new generations of reactors for nuclear fission .
We question the value to the environment of synthetic fuels produced from fossil sources , or hydrogen gas extracted with energy from the same origin , or nuclear energy , as none of these energy sources is sustainable in the long term from an environmental or supply point of view .
We also believe that fossil fuels must be actively phased out in the long term , which is not mentioned in the report .
We think that CO2 capture can be an important part of reducing CO2 emissions , but other energy-saving , efficiency-boosting measures and the development of renewable energy are more sustainable in the long term and should be the final goal .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report contains various positive aspects , including the recognition of the role of conventional energy sources and the need to use these in order to produce energy , opening up prospects for the relaunch of nuclear fission energy and calling for the lifting of restrictions on new coal-fired power stations .
It also opens up prospects for the relaunch and mining of coal and calls for international cooperation , including with countries outside the EU , such as China and India .
In addition , it emphasises the value of endogenous resources and places the contribution of renewable energies on a more realistic plane .
It contains certain criticisms of the production and use of liquid biofuels and points to the need for countries to encourage more R & D in the area of energy , particularly as a way of overcoming environmental and nuclear safety problems .
However , it also contains various negative aspects , including the association of the growing problems in the oil market solely with contextual and episodic issues , while disregarding the strategic issue of depletion of resources and continuing to ignore the enormous potential of biomethane produced from waste , an approach which is already being implemented in various European countries .
This is the reason for our abstention .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this own-initiative report on energy issues which canvasses many areas of energy efficiency , supply and conservation .
I did not support amendments endorsing nuclear power : my view is that sustainable , renewable energy resources should be developed and that research & development efforts should focus on these areas first .
in writing . - ( DE ) In principle , we all agree that we need better energy efficiency and more rational energy transmission and that the expansion of renewables is important .
Nonetheless , the promotion of renewables must not be used as a pretext to curtail even more of the Member States ' sovereign rights by the back door as part of the EU 's Constitution .
As this point is not made sufficiently clear in the present report , the report must be rejected .
Despite the ongoing expansion of renewable energy sources , we will remain dependent on conventional energy generation for many decades to come , and we must therefore ensure that it becomes more environmentally friendly .
In the EU , however , there still appears to be a fixation with nuclear power , which is not only reflected in its glowing description as an ' environmentally friendly source of energy ' , which itself is a mockery , but also in the generous funding of the nuclear research budget .
I see in this a failure to rethink our approach in any discernible way , which is another reason why I reject the report which is the subject of the vote .
in writing . - ( DE ) The Reul report is an apology for the nuclear industry .
Flying in the face of common sense , nuclear energy is depicted as the technology of the future , with even more EU research funding and budgetary resources to flow into the development of this high-risk dinosaur technology .
Indeed , despite the recent ' incidents ' at Vattenfall 's nuclear plants , the focus is on expanding nuclear energy in Europe .
In light of these incidents , it is extremely cynical to claim that nuclear energy generation is becoming ' ever-safer ' .
Instead of continuing to invest in this troublesome energy form , with a deliberate failure to address the issue of final storage , a social and ecological revolution should finally be the aim .
This means breaking apart the private monopolies which exist in the nuclear industry , providing a massive injection of funding for renewables and localising energy production .
Given that it is the nuclear companies , in particular , which have initiated a new round of massive price increases , there is an urgent need for action .
The report merely serves the profit interests of Europe 's nuclear industry .
The call for new nuclear power plants in Europe is unacceptable .
The legal basis for funding for an indefinite period is to be enshrined in the Reform Treaty .
This is yet another reason to reject the Treaty .
Every additional cent for EU nuclear funding is one too many .
Promoting energy production from renewable resources , solar , wind and hydro power , is the only sustainable energy policy .
in writing . - ( PT ) When it launched the Energy Package at the beginning of this year , the European Commission highlighted the need for a technological action plan for fossil fuels and underlined the fundamental requirement for a pragmatic approach towards nuclear energy .
The reality is stark : there are no alternatives to fossil fuels which are as cheap and as efficient .
This means that these fuels will remain the central and essential component of the EU 's energy policy beyond 2020 .
This is why we must find new solutions to the energy supply issue in the EU , bearing in mind the need for competitiveness , sustainability and security of supply .
As a result , all investments in the development of new energy technologies , firstly to reduce environmental impact and enhance the safety of existing installations and secondly to develop new energy sources and ensure more efficient and cleaner use of fossil fuels , are of particular importance .
As it is essential that Member States and the EU concentrate their efforts on energy research , from more efficient use of energy sources to new technologies and the cleaner use of existing energy sources , I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Reul on conventional energy sources and energy technology .
The report raises a very important current issue that calls for broad debate within the European Union , namely that we need a unified strategy and should develop a common energy policy .
Ensuring Europe 's energy security is a priority issue , and the Commission 's proposal to submit a European Strategic Energy Technology Plan to the 2008 Spring European Council is therefore very welcome .
As a world leader , the European Union must also take the lead in the development of modern energy technologies whilst maintaining all the relevant economic and environmental standards .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have chosen to support the report because the EU has conducted an unusually balanced discussion of the need to include nuclear energy in Europe 's future energy mix .
Among other things , the report states that ' nuclear energy is indispensable if basic energy needs are to be met in Europe in the medium term ' , and that ' nuclear energy is currently the largest low-carbon energy source in Europe and [ it ] stresses its potential role in combating climate change ' .
At present nuclear energy is responsible for one third of the EU 's electricity supply and will always be one of the most important energy sources in many EU Member States .
When the issue of CO2 emissions is raised , it is unfortunate in my view that greater attention is not given to nuclear energy .
If we are to meet future energy demand without greater dependence on fossil fuels and rising CO2 emissions , the development of safe , new nuclear energy will become increasingly important .
Unfortunately , nuclear energy is not included among the measures that are considered to be realistic with a view to achieving the target of between 20 % and 30 % by 2020 .
( CS ) Today we gave the car industry the task of developing engines which will reduce CO2 emissions to less than 120 g / km .
Currently the figure stands at 157 g .
I want to warn , however , those who applauded this proposal that reducing emissions is greatly hindered by the increasing number of drivers in general as well as the high number of drivers driving old vehicles .
Double regulation of advertising will not solve the issue .
It is well-known that the majority of people give priority to cost-efficiency when buying a car , rather than the vehicle 's environmental impact .
Costs , but also emissions are growing also because of the imposition of increased vehicle safety .
Ladies and gentlemen , until vehicles with a lower environmental impact and running costs become more affordable , road transport 's share of emissions will not show any considerable decrease .
This is why I was not among those applauding today 's report .
Neither the committee 's report nor the Commission 's strategy are sufficiently comprehensive .
This is why I supported other proposals , related to fines for exceeding emission limits and especially fiscal measures and car fleet renewal support .
( SK ) The report just adopted on the future CO2 strategy for cars contributes without any doubt to one of the most polarised debates taking place in the European Parliament at present .
At stake are not only the environment , and therefore the health of EU citizens , but also the competitiveness of an important industry .
I voted for the amendment since it represents a compromise between both aspects . It pays attention to environmental protection and at the same time provides suitable and realistic terms for the European car industry .
Car advertising represents up to 20 % of total advertising turnover for publishers of printed media .
Laying down mandatory advertising requirements as stipulated in the original report by Mr Chris Davies would breach the fundamental principle of freedom of expression .
This is why I voted in favour of the amendments that leave out the controversial paragraphs 36 to 41 of the report .
I supported the PPE-DE motion inviting car manufacturers to sign up to a voluntary code of practice on car advertising .
After most amendments were adopted , in the final vote I voted for the report by Mr Chris Davies .
The outcome of the vote is a clear political signal in favour of preparing European legislation dealing with the issue of cutting CO2 emissions .
( DE ) Madam President , we do still have the legislation by means of which Parliament can demonstrate that we take climate protection seriously in Europe , and we need to summon all our efforts so that we can genuinely achieve , through that legislation , everything that we have not voted on today .
I think it is regrettable that we have not committed to a 120 g / km ceiling from 2012 .
More than ten years have passed since our industry promised to achieve this with its proposed self-regulation on the grounds that this approach would be better and more efficient , and I would have liked the House to send out a clear climate policy message today .
We have not done so .
That is why I have also voted against the report , and I hope that in the legislation , we will show more grit and determination and make it clear that we really take climate issues seriously in Europe .
( CS ) I voted against the proposal of the report on the Community Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars , although for reasons different from those mentioned here earlier .
I voted against the proposal because with it we are moving away from an integrated approach , contained in the earlier strategy documents , and placing the whole burden of CO2 emissions reduction on the European car industry instead .
I also disagree with the call for an obligatory allocation of 20 % of advertising space .
It bears a dangerous resemblance to the information campaign on the harmful effects of smoking .
Such an approach overall turns CO2 emissions reduction into a dogma which , when translated into future binding legislation , will result in a reduction in our competitiveness .
( DE ) Madam President , I voted against the Davies report because , in my view , we have taken what is , in essence , an unacceptable and unrealistic decision by envisaging uniform CO2 efficiency categories for cars .
There should have been a sliding scale based on size and weight , primarily to level the playing field for manufacturers in the European Union .
Let me give you an example : it makes a difference whether I heat a house or just one room .
That is why it also makes a difference whether I drive a large car or a small car .
That is why there needs to be segmentation and a sliding scale based on weight .
We have missed that opportunity , which I think is regrettable , and with this decision - which I did not support - we have also missed the opportunity to establish a measure of balance between the interests of the environment and those of industry .
( DE ) Madam President , I voted against the Davies report because , as a result of the amendments adopted , we are still a long way from the optimum situation , which is to protect the environment , on the one hand , but also promote employment in Europe and not burden the consumer unduly with excessively high prices .
In essence , the decisions that we have taken are at the expense of employment and the consumer .
In technical terms , we have moved away from the integrated approach which would have been essential to create a situation in which everyone contributes to cutting CO2 emissions , not only the car manufacturers but also the manufacturers of other vehicle components .
We have abandoned that route .
What is more , we have not included weight and we have not completed weight segmentation , which is important for European competitiveness , because it is the higher-weight vehicles that are at the forefront of innovation , the innovation that Europe needs .
We have set timeframes which are difficult or expensive to achieve and we have taken the absurd step of not heeding the call for CO2-based taxes in the Member States , which means that the old vehicles which pump out CO2 are still on the market and on the road .
That is why I have voted against the report .
Madam President , I have two points to make , the first on the procedure , the second on the voting list .
On the voting list : firstly , there was no mention of paragraph 3 ; secondly , I think we should look again at what happened about Amendments 52 and 51 .
If you look at it , 51 is clearly the nearest to the original text and should have been voted first .
52 is furthest away and should have been voted second .
I would ask that the Presidency look at this because that is clearly what should have happened .
So , on those procedural points , I would like some answers .
Secondly , on the politics of it , this was the first real vote on climate change .
It was not a piece of legislation - that will come - but , by failing to support the 2012 date backed by the European Commission , I think that the ALDE Group and the PPE-DE Group in this House failed the first test on climate change and the people out there will be looking at what happened here today and wondering whether we really are serious about the commitments we made back in March to reduce CO2 .
We talk about Europe being a Europe of the environment .
We have to do it in legislation if it is ever going to happen .
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Castex voted for the Davies report on the reduction of CO2 emissions from passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles .
While France continues to be monopolised by the Grenelle Environment Forum , the European Union has in turn added another valuable building block to the quality of our environment by adopting a strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from private vehicles .
Mrs Castex is very pleased that Parliament has called on the European automotive industry to ensure that new vehicles do not emit more than 120 g / km of CO2 by 2012 .
This French Member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament welcomes the Carbon Allowance Reductions System ( CARS ) , as this mechanism will impose financial penalties on manufacturers who fail to meet their quotas , while at the same time issuing credits to those who have taken the initiative by achieving emissions that are below the limit value curve .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have essentially voted in favour of Mr Davies ' report on a strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from cars .
In order to reduce CO2 emissions , it must be a priority to reduce the proportion that comes from car traffic .
It is important to find more environmentally friendly alternatives to using cars .
However , in our view car manufacturers should be given the opportunity to choose themselves how they wish to meet the environmental targets set by us politicians .
Legislation should not regulate in detail how this should happen .
We also oppose the rapporteur 's rules on advertising , which are unjustified and restrict freedom of expression .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report .
Some 19 % of all CO2 emissions produced in the Community now come from passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles .
The European Union must commit itself to an ambitious and realistic target for reducing average emissions from all vehicles placed on the EU market .
The impact of road transport on air quality must be reduced as the vehicle fleet is gradually renewed .
I welcome the adoption of the deadlines that have been set by Parliament .
If verifiable and measurable actions are to be taken by the automotive industry after 2011 , setting 2015 as the date for achieving a threshold of 125 g / km seems perfectly reasonable to me .
Indeed this corresponds to the entry into force of the Euro VI emission standards .
For legislation to be effective it must above all be realistic and the industry has for a long time been putting environmental issues at the heart of its policies .
When it comes to climate change the priority must be to reduce CO2 emissions in absolute terms .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Davies report deserves support because of the political signal it sends .
All sectors will have to do their bit to remedy the climate change problem , including the European car industry .
That is why I warmly support the compromise to achieve a maximum of 125g CO2 / km by 2015 .
For the Netherlands , the Davies report has another extra dimension that is undeniable .
Because of the problem of particulate matter in the air in the Netherlands , it is necessary that measures be taken at European level to tackle this at source .
If this does not happen , then for transport-intensive areas like the port of Rotterdam and Schiphol airport , it will be impossible for us to meet the present and / or stricter norms for particulate matter .
I am in favour of better information to consumers about the environmental friendliness of particular cars , like what we have now for fridges and washing machines for instance , but I voted against the proposal for cigarette-type warnings to be made compulsory in all advertising and marketing statements from the car industry .
In the area of advertising and marketing , I have more faith in self-regulation than all kinds of European legal obligations .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against Mr Davies ' report on the Community Strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles .
Having initially voted in favour of the report in the direct voting in plenary , I then withdrew my vote in writing , as noted in the parliamentary records of 25 October 2007 .
In my view , the report is extremely arbitrary and fails to take appropriate account of the needs of Germany 's automobile industry or environmental concerns .
For example , the report does not differentiate between the various weight classes of vehicles and therefore makes unrealistic demands of car manufacturers .
As regards advertising , an increasing comparison is made between labelling needs for tobacco products and vehicles .
The rapporteur ( Mr Davies , an English Green Liberal ) was only prepared to compromise on one point at the very end of the process during the deliberations on his report .
This was much too late to formulate a sensible recommendation from Parliament which could have secured the support of all the groups .
in writing . - I voted for the original version of this report , which proposed tough limits on emissions of 120g carbon dioxide / kilometre by 2012 .
Unfortunately , the proposal was weakened by Tory and Liberal MEPs to allow for a higher emissions limit and a longer phase-in period .
The overall strategy is good , but it is a pity it has been weakened unnecessarily .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has approved the Community Strategy for reducing CO2 emissions from passenger cars and I welcome this very much .
This initiative will enable us to reduce carbon-dioxide emissions and at the same time contribute towards achieving the EU 's more general environmental targets and energy security objectives .
Nevertheless , I believe that the message that this vote has sent to the Commission and to the international community at large could have been a more ambitious one .
The 120 g / km threshold for CO2 was first put forward in 1995 as a feasible target for the automotive industry .
Now 12 years later its implementation is still being resisted , even though technological advances have meant that CO2 emissions can now be reduced more than was possible a dozen years ago .
In being satisfied with a maximum mandatory limit of 125 g / km of CO2 Parliament does not go far enough .
For this reason I voted against Amendments 42 and 52 because their objectives , under the pretence of being prudent and realistic , are in fact simply too moderate .
At a time when the consumer is becoming increasingly sensitive to pollution from motor vehicles , any measure aimed at reducing CO2 emissions from this source will benefit the car industry , the consumer and , of course , the planet itself .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of the proposals to introduce a binding average emissions ceiling , albeit with some concern .
In my view , a sliding scale based on the size and weight of the vehicle would have been preferable .
Although I otherwise tend to be in favour of voluntary commitments from industry , I believe that binding legal requirements are essential for the automobile industry : experience has shown that voluntary commitments here would be bound to fail .
As we know , a reduction of around 5 % in greenhouse gas emissions from the EU-25 was achieved between 1990 and 2004 . Not for road traffic , however : in stark contrast , this sector saw a rise of 26 % .
There is clearly an urgent need for action here , and the car industry must make its contribution to cutting emissions .
The year 2012 for the introduction of the ceiling has been criticised on the grounds that it does not allow a long enough phase-in period .
However , this date has been in discussion for years , and the industry has known what to expect for a very long time .
The issue which we must always consider , however , is balancing environmental interests and the interests of the car industry , as this is also in the interests of jobs and competitiveness in the European Union .
This is a buoyant industry and it is important for the EU .
Without robust industries , we would have no money for environmental programmes !
( LT ) So far the Member States have only succeeded in reaching an agreement on the consolidation of indirect taxation - excise duty and VAT , determination of the minimum rate , the application of numerous VAT exemptions .
I doubt that a minimum excise duty rate - for fuel , for example - would increase economic competitiveness .
It is more likely to result in increased prices and reduced consumption , particularly in view of the global increase in prices .
The proposed coordination of excise duties would constitute an unbearable burden to new Member States .
The proposed consolidation of tax bases at EU level would have been more appropriate for the economies of the 15 old Member States , as they have similar development levels .
This proposal is a step towards the consolidation of tax on profits .
The greatest burden would fall on the weaker economies of the new Member States .
This would lead to a loss of opportunity for them to benefit from tax competition as well as accelerate their economic growth .
It would deprive them of the chance to raise their standard of living to match that of the old Member States .
I voted against the report , as it was ill-timed , in spite of the amendments .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats believe first and foremost that taxation policy should be a national matter .
The report also stresses the fiscal sovereignty of the Member States .
We chose to vote in favour of the report as in many ways it stresses the role of taxation policy in the Member States as regards employment , welfare and the environment , as well as a well-functioning internal market .
in writing . - ( FR ) I supported Amendment 20 , as tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , which seeks to delete paragraph 17 of the Wagenknecht report concerning the contribution of taxation to the Lisbon strategy .
In order to ensure the smooth functioning of the internal market I am in fact in favour of any measure that contributes towards fiscal harmonisation within the EU .
While taxation is still essentially a matter of national sovereignty , it has very quickly become apparent that we need to ensure a minimum degree of fiscal coordination between the Member States .
This is why , in matters relating to indirect taxation , the Commission has gradually established a minimum rate for excise duty , in order to reduce distortion of competition .
Yet in the report that is being voted on today , paragraph 17 now seeks to re-examine this very system and proposes to replace it with a code of conduct .
I do not believe that it is sufficient merely to ' encourage ' Member States when it comes to coordinating indirect taxation .
What is more , I believe even less in the effectiveness of a code of conduct on excise duty matters : this is likely to provide even greater temptation to unpick the EU 's rules and practices , which would in turn create the sorry situation of unfair competition in this area .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against the final text because , among other issues , it assumed a position of defence of economic and financial groups , as highlighted by the rapporteur who removed her name from the report before the final vote and called for it to be rejected .
The resolution aims to ease the rules and procedures so that large undertakings can easily enter the various markets and reap the largest profits with the least number of obstacles in any Member State .
Furthermore , we consider that the fiscal sovereignty of Member States in terms of defining their own fiscal policy must be respected in all discussions on this issue .
This is not what has happened here .
A supposedly common European fiscal policy which promotes ' tax competition ' would only serve the interests of major European and international capital .
Available data show that , in the last 10 years , there has been a significant drop in the average rate of taxation of corporate profits , whilst income tax has remained virtually unchanged .
We regret that the proposals made by the rapporteur , which highlighted the redistribution potential of taxation and pointed out the transfer of the tax burden from high incomes to lower incomes , have not been included in this final text .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List is firmly opposed to this report , which seeks to move towards a common taxation and customs policy for the EU .
It is amazing that today the European Parliament is taking decisions on matters for which there is no common policy .
It is not for the EU to decide on taxation matters and promptly to call on the Member States to harmonise their national taxes .
In addition , it is entirely unreasonable to try to move towards the imposition of a Community tax .
In the report it is also possible to see how the Lisbon Strategy opens the door for the EU to tackle new policy areas , with supranationalism , new projects and increased costs in their wake .
The June List is voting against this report , as taxation must be decided nationally and sovereignly by the Member States .
in writing . - ( FR ) The report on the contribution of taxation and customs policies to the Lisbon Strategy , as voted on by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , constitutes an acceptable compromise between the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , on the one hand , and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , on the other , and I support it .
I am also glad to see that we have succeeded in maintaining this balance during the vote in plenary .
For me the key point in the report is paragraph 4 , which underlines the benefits of healthy tax competition in the European Union .
If indeed we wish to achieve the objectives of economic growth and employment , as set out in the Lisbon Strategy , we must ensure that we do not impose too great a tax burden on undertakings , for it is they who create the jobs .
What is more , we should never overtax employees and consumers , either directly or indirectly , for they make a considerable contribution to growth .
Tax competition forces Member States within the Union to moderate their fiscal demands and to be more efficient in the management of public spending , and this can only be of benefit to the taxpayer .
The common consolidated corporate tax base , which is another controversial theme in the report , would in my view bring an element of coordination to fiscal policy that will render European corporate taxation less bureaucratic and more efficient .
in writing . - ( EL ) Tax policy is used to redistribute income for the benefit of capital .
It is used by all centre-right and centre-left governments , and governs capital in the EU .
There is no common tax policy because of intra-imperialist conflicts .
Even if such a policy existed , however , capital would be furthering its own profitability at the expense of ordinary people 's income and needs .
Amid unrelenting competition , capital now moves easily and rapidly from high-tax countries to countries with lower taxation .
Indeed , in all the Member States , the corporate income tax rate is decreasing at the expense of personal income .
However , this is not true of tax on labour income , which remains constant , while indirect taxes and VAT have risen , increasing inequality and the gap between rich and poor .
This is also reflected in OECD figures , which show that indirect tax in the form of VAT rose to 6.9 % of GDP in 2006 .
Thus capital is systematically being exempted from tax and the levy on workers is being increased through indirect taxation .
This is happening in Greece as well : corporation tax has been reduced by 10 % and VAT has increased by 1 % , with a further increase of 2 % on the way .
This is the barbarity of capitalism , which creates inequality and poverty for the majority of people , and we must reverse this .
in writing . - While the report contains a number of positive elements concerning greater fairness in the distribution of the tax burden , I cannot support any increased role for the European Union in relation to taxation , which would further undermine the economic sovereignty of Member States .
in writing . - The Fine Gael delegation in the European Parliament decided to oppose the Report on the final vote because of the proliferation of references to the CCCTB and related matters .
We support the Lisbon Agenda and are in favour of the Report , such as recognising the positive aspects of lower taxation and the benefits of tax competition , but do not accept the right of EU Institutions to interfere with the rights of Member States , such as Ireland , who are also in the Eurozone .
Interest rates are set by the ECB and the Growth and Stability Pact sets borrowing and inflation requirements .
Tax policy is therefore one of the instruments left to those Member States under the Treaty and should be safeguarded .
in writing . - There are many ways in which fiscal attitudes across the EU could be helpful in generating a series of better conclusions for the Lisbon Strategy .
Simply put , the incentivisation of growth of small businesses and job creation , as well as environmental issues , is seen as a positive .
This is for Member States to undertake and follow through - such is their competence .
Consolidating tax bases at an EU level would not make the difference suggested by the rapporteur .
The EPLP maintains that many good things towards the Lisbon Strategy can be reached by Member State action rather than EU action .
in writing . - ( DE ) In its vote today , the European Parliament has shown that a majority of its Members support a taxation policy which serves the interests of the top ten thousand and is to the detriment of the large majority of people living in the European Union .
Although some of my proposals were accepted - after all , no one is keen to openly champion the cause of increased rates of VAT , higher taxes on earned income or better opportunities for EU-wide tax dumping - the proposals we made on increasing taxes on wealth and financial transactions and limiting tax dumping through the introduction of a uniform consolidated corporate tax base were rejected by the majority of Members .
As the final report after the individual votes was almost unrecognisable as my original draft , with certain aspects of its content deteriorating further in the version of the report agreed in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , I felt compelled to remove my name from the report and call for Members to vote against it in the final vote .
I welcome the fact that relevant sections of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament also felt unable to endorse the final version of the report , as the outcome of the voting shows .
Today , the House has passed up the opportunity to heed calls for a more equitable and socially compatible taxation policy and adopt this as the clear position of the European Parliament .
Instead , the EU 's misdirected policies have yet again been confirmed unquestioningly by the majority in the European Parliament .
in writing . - ( SV ) Today I chose to support the report on the contribution of taxation policy to the Lisbon process .
I advocate healthy tax competition and a common consolidated corporate tax base for international companies , without harmonisation of tax levels and with an option for each Member State to remain outside it , if it so wishes .
It is also important to lay down the Member States ' sovereignty in the field of taxation .
I also take exception to any attempt to move towards an EU tax .
( SK ) I admire and respect the determination with which some countries have introduced a smoking ban not only in offices and in all workplaces but also in restaurants , pubs , bars and clubs .
We have economic impact studies that have not confirmed worries of restaurant owners about an income loss .
We also know that the treatment of respiratory cancer diseases and other illnesses costs us up to EUR 50 million .
In Scotland , the number of people admitted to hospital with myocarditis has decreased by almost 20 % since the introduction of the smoking ban .
Children born to women smokers as well as to women exposed to passive smoking during pregnancy are born prematurely and have lower than normal birth weight .
I appeal to the Member States of the European Union , including my own Member State , to introduce without delay effective laws that would result in a smoking ban in workplaces and restaurants , and in effective measures for reducing the overall use of tobacco .
( RO ) At the same time with voting on this report , I would like to emphasize its importance for the future of the European citizens and of the entire European Union .
I welcome the strategic approach of the smoking issue , including passive smoking , as well as the proposal of concrete and exigent actions to fight against it and its negative consequences at a European level .
Also , I am convinced that a strategic approach of this issue should include the smoking prevention policy , as an essential element , by developing a true system of education in this respect .
Today 's reality is obvious ; there is a clear and increasing need for awareness as regards the consequences of smoking among the entire European society .
It is not less important to focus these efforts of prevention on educating children and youth , as well as their parents , in advance , in order to ensure a smoke-free Europe for future generations .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to explain my vote on the report by Mr Florenz on combating the worrying phenomenon of nicotine addiction .
I wish to emphasise that I voted in favour of this report , despite being an advocate of freedom for smokers and despite obviously being a defender of pluralism .
Nonetheless , the problem of the harmful effects of so-called passive smoking , that is to say the effect on non-smokers of being surrounded by smokers , is very alarming indeed .
Suffice it to remind the House that the deaths of 650 000 people a year are smoking related . This figure includes 80 000 passive smokers , some of whom are children .
That is the reason why we should impose limitations on the freedom of certain individuals in order to prevent deaths .
( FI ) Madam President , firstly I wish to express my satisfaction with this report .
It is excellent that we are adopting a clear position against passive smoking .
I voted for this report because it is high time we acted at European Union level to prevent people from actually being exposed to the dangers of tobacco smoke .
As we heard earlier , 650 000 people die each year from the effects of smoking .
It is time to take action .
Despite my support for the proposal , I know that it will be difficult to put into practice and implement everywhere .
Article 11 incorporates the notion that smoking should be banned in private cars everywhere in the EU if underage children are present .
This is a good aim , but we have to consider how it might be monitored .
A smoke-free environment is a goal we should strive for , but in future we will need to pay more attention to ensuring that the action we take is reasonable and that compliance with the law can be monitored .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , of course we all know that smoking is bad for our health .
Nevertheless , I voted against the report on a smoke-free Europe as a matter of principle , for it is true to say that nowhere else has the state asserted itself quite so successfully as in the fight against smoking in public .
Countries in the EU - and that includes us - are intervening on an unprecedented scale , with their smoking bans , in citizens ' private habits .
We are experiencing a state-sponsored prohibition policy across the board , designed to train people to change their behaviour .
The report itself makes this clear .
Unanimity - or , as we have it today - virtual unanimity is no guarantee of freedom .
The opposite is true .
In essence - and this is something we should recognise - freedom thrives on the opportunity to deviate from the norm .
Concerned citizens are on the march , we have the nanny state , and all those who have anything to do with this and support it think that it has nothing to do with liberty .
They are quite wrong !
( DE ) Madam President , yes , I also voted against the report on a smoke-free Europe , although by doing so , I am subjecting myself to what is tantamount to a witch-hunt , even in the House by the way .
That is the reason why so many of our fellow Members simply did not have the courage to vote against the report , even though they do not want this nannying policy either .
Of course I am in favour of protecting non-smokers , children and young people , but a matter of principle is at stake .
Firstly , we have no health policy competence .
That lies with the Member States .
Anything else is a violation of subsidiarity and is a constructed competence at EU level .
Secondly , and more particularly , we have had enough !
We have had enough , ladies and gentlemen !
For years , the EU has waged war on smokers , alcohol and the obese in Europe , apparently on the assumption that our citizens are stupid and need nannying through legislation .
That is precisely what I am opposed to .
The citizens who I represent are not stupid .
A prohibition policy is always counterproductive and my job is to represent people , not nanny them .
Madam President , if ever there was an issue that cried out for subsidiarity , it is surely that of smoking .
Pass over the hypocrisy of subsidising the growing of tobacco in the European Union while penalising its consumption .
Disregard the double standard of discouraging smoking within the EU but encouraging it outside .
Focus instead on the more basic question of what any of this has to do with Brussels .
Surely the legal and fiscal status of tobacco is a national prerogative , and the question of where and when we may consume it should be decided more locally still : in a privately-owned space by the proprietor of that space , and in a public space by the municipal authorities .
It ought to have nothing to do with national governments and certainly nothing to do with the European Union .
Subsidiarity , colleagues - remember that ?
( PL ) Madam President , during this sitting we have debated the report by Mr Florenz on limiting the right to smoke cigarettes .
I voted against this report because I believe that restrictions should only be imposed in cases where smoking will harm other people .
We cannot , however , ban people who wish to harm themselves from doing so .
That amounts to an intrusion into the rights of the individual that goes beyond the rights of any employer .
The issue of treatment-related costs is of course relevant , but that is simply a matter for those responsible for insuring others .
If it were deemed appropriate , the rates for smokers could be increased to cover treatment costs .
There is another issue worthy of mention too , namely subsidiarity .
Previous speakers have already referred to it and of course I entirely agree that this issue , which is in any case essentially flawed , must come under the competence of national authorities , not that of the European Union .
in writing . - ( DE ) I welcome all measures in the Member States to inform citizens about the risks of smoking .
In my view , all these measures fall within the purview of the Member States , not the European Union .
I have therefore rejected the Florenz report in the final vote .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Mr Florenz 's report on the ' Green Paper : Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke : policy options at EU level ' as I consider it essential that appropriate steps are taken to reduce the number of deaths and serious illnesses caused by tobacco smoke .
In that regard , I support the call for the Commission to amend Directive 2001 / 37 / EC on tobacco products in order , in light of new scientific advances , to revise the rules on the use of additives and other substances in these products , particularly in relation to carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic additives .
in writing . - ( FR ) Strasbourg is not Qom and the European Parliament is not the ' supreme leader ' who has been sent down to dispense propriety and righteousness across the Union .
Everybody now knows that smoking is bad for your health .
But life itself is dangerous , for it always ends in death .
I personally have never smoked in my life .

While it does not shock me that some adults are prepared to take the risk , I never cease to be amazed at the proselytising of the ayatollahs on the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety who , by issuing own-initiative report after report , are attempting to ' save the planet ' to the detriment of human beings and their weaknesses .
I say ' no ' to these zealots .
in writing . - ( PL ) As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and also as a non-smoker aware of the many negative consequences of cigarette smoking in one 's immediate surroundings , I welcome the report by Mr Florenz entitled : ' Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke ' .
I believe it is entirely appropriate for the European Parliament itself to send out a firm and unequivocal message to all EU citizens and Member States making it clear that we do not wish to see people smoking in public places , notably in restaurants , in bars and on public transport .
We particularly do not wish to see people smoking in the workplace .
We are also calling for stricter measures against the sale of cigarettes to minors .
In addition , I think the introduction of restrictions should be accompanied by a wide-ranging information campaign that should cover more than the harmful effects of smoking .
The latter are generally well-known , but it also needs to be made clear that non-smokers ' rights to live in a smoke-free environment cannot be dependent on or restricted by smokers wishing to exercise their right to smoke at the expense of non-smokers .
If our appeal for a Europe free from tobacco smoke is to bear fruit , we Members of the European Parliament should set an example and give up smoking at our workplace . That means no more smoking in any Parliament premises .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for this report which seeks not only to support Member States in the strict measures they have adopted to combat tobacco addiction , but also to promote better public health .
Not only is tobacco smoke a major source of air pollution , the chemicals contained in cigarettes expose smokers and non-smokers alike to serious risk . This is particularly true in enclosed spaces , such as workplaces , bars and restaurants .
It therefore seems essential to me that we should clearly and unilaterally ban smoking in such places .
Imposing strict legislation designed to provide maximum protection for the health of our citizens cannot effectively be achieved without a real effort at alerting and informing the public as to the risks associated with tobacco use .
I also welcome the willingness that has been expressed to direct information campaigns at certain target groups , especially the young , pregnant women and parents .
Finally , I regret that an amendment has been adopted calling on the Commission to investigate the health risks associated with chewing tobacco and the impact this has on cigarette consumption .
I believe that this request does not belong in a report such as this , for the health risks presented by chewing tobacco , namely cancer of the tongue and so on , are generally recognised .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which sets out the options for reducing the harm caused by tobacco smoke across the European Union .
It does not call for EU legislation , but calls on Member States to institute comprehensive smoking bans within two years .
The UK already has such a ban , but given the harm tobacco causes I support this sensible approach being extended across the EU .
in writing . - ( DE ) Smoking bans are , of course , in the interests of public health and , for public buildings , are therefore to be welcomed .
It is also sensible to protect children and young people .
However , with these particular groups , it would be more helpful if people set a good example and maintained existing anti-smoking campaigns .
It is hypocritical , however , for the European Union to attempt to prescribe smoking bans wholesale for all Member States when it has shown itself to be incapable of even reaching an agreement on facilities here in the House .
Our democratic system and modern attitudes to life are based on freedom of choice and , logically , this should apply to smoking as well .
If a majority of the population is in favour of a smoking ban in restaurants , then this will come into effect over the short or the long term .
There is already a trend for people to become non-smokers and , in line with the principle of sovereignty , it should remain a matter for each country to decide whether smoking bans should be introduced in restaurants , for example , and what form these bans should take .
in writing . - ( EL ) I have supported the Florenz report on the Green Paper ' Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke ' .
I believe it will contribute to public health protection and help substantially in reducing the harmful effects of smoking , both in young people and in chronic smokers .
It will achieve this by pushing for the immediate prohibition of all additives that strengthen addiction and by promoting preventive measures at European and Member State level .
in writing . - I strongly support smoking bans in public places to protect public health and to avert the dangers of passive smoking .
A Scottish ban on smoking in public places has now been in place for 19 months , and figures show that since the smoking ban was introduced there has been a 20 % reduction in heart attack admissions to hospital .
The smoking ban has therefore saved lives and has been effective in promoting better health for Scots .
I look forward to seeing this approach applied across the rest of Europe .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Florenz entitled : ' Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke ' .
Tobacco smoke is a very harmful substance . It contains thousands of chemical substances , including over 250 carcinogenic and toxic components .
Even the slightest exposure to these substances can contribute to the development of tumours .
Tobacco smoke particles are deposited permanently in enclosed areas causing air pollution that even the best ventilation systems cannot deal with effectively .
Thousands of people die each year in the European Union as a result of passive smoking . These deaths could be prevented .
It has to be possible for every European Union citizen to live and work in surroundings that are free from tobacco smoke . This must be emphasised particularly in connection with public institutions and premises .
Seventy per cent of the population of the European Union is non-smoking . We must bear this in mind and ensure that these people are able to live in a clean and safe environment .
( SK ) I voted against the report because it does not clearly reflect the European Union position on Turkey .
It is necessary to freeze accession talks with Turkey completely . There are numerous reasons for doing so .
At present Turkey is an untrustworthy partner .
By refusing Turkey 's EU entry , in other words by telling the Turks the truth about their future EU membership , we would help the country democratise their society at last .
Turkey continues to occupy a Member State of the European Union : 40 % of Cypriot territory is under Turkish military occupation .
There is no freedom of religion in Turkey .
Non-Muslims , Christians , members of the Orthodox Catholic Church and Protestants all suffer from persecution because they are not allowed to build churches .
Five hundred Orthodox churches have been destroyed while everywhere in the European Union Muslims are building mosques .
There is no freedom of speech in Turkey .
Turkey denies the massacre of one-third of the Armenian population in the past .
It is getting ready for another military intervention in Iraq .
It is not solving the issues of the Kurdish minority on its territory .
Turkey is not in Europe and does not belong in the EU .
A privileged partnership with Turkey , instead of full membership , will be quite enough .
( DE ) Madam President , I did not vote for the resolution on Turkey because I am greatly concerned that the Turkish Parliament has agreed a military strike against Iraq .
This could not be taken into account in the report , but is a very topical issue .
Taking measures against a terrorist group is rather different from voting to invade a neighbouring country .
It is not in the EU 's interests to see any destabilisation of Iraq .
We should be reminding Turkey that , as a candidate country , it should be considering EU interests within the framework of common interests .
This shows that full membership for Turkey - which I do not support , incidentally - with its shared borders with Iran and Iraq would mean a complete redrawing of the political map within the EU .
In my view , we should spare ourselves the associated risks .
( NL ) Madam President , I voted against the Oomen-Ruijten resolution because I think that Parliament should play a more active and a more ambitious role in monitoring the negotiation process with Turkey .
Now it seems that we have to make sure that we do not hurt the sensitive feelings of Mr Erdoğan and Mr Gül .
It is becoming increasingly clear that Turkey is a candidate country unlike any other .
Turkey evidently does not need to adhere to the Copenhagen criteria so strictly , despite all the promises from the Council , the Commission and Parliament that it would have to .
The way things are going we should not be at all surprised that more and more citizens in the European Union are turning their backs on the Union .
( NL ) Madam President , this new vote on Turkish accession is a clear illustration of the fact that not only for most of our citizens is Europe far away and of no great concern to them , but that the European institutions themselves are increasingly alienating themselves from the citizens of Europe .
To the Eurocrats , Europe is not really Europe any more , as we blithely proceed to prepare for the accession of a country that is not European at all , not European in historical , cultural or religious terms , not in the euro , and not even European in geographical terms .
What is more , this whole business has been pushed down our throats in a fundamentally undemocratic way , because the vast majority of European citizens really are against the accession of Turkey , but they are not allowed to have their say .
The citizens are not allowed to have their say on Turkey , just as they are not allowed to have their say on the new Constitution that we are not allowed to call a constitution .
Are the Eurocrats actually afraid of democracy , afraid of consulting the people ?
This Europe is operating in an increasingly undemocratic and antidemocratic way , and it will all end very badly .
( FI ) Madam President , two weeks ago Hrant Dink 's son Arat Dink and the publisher Serkis Seropyan were sentenced to prison for a year under Article 301 , that is to say for insulting Turkishness .
What was their crime ?
Over a year ago , thus prior to the murder of Hrant Dink , their newspaper Argos published a story stating that Hrant Dink , in an interview with Reuters , had said he thought the killings which took place in 1915 were genocide .
The newspaper was therefore only reporting this , and that is all .
I therefore think it is vitally important to vote in favour of our resolution calling on Turkey to acknowledge the Armenian genocide .
I say this as a friend of Turkey .
It would be good if Turkey understood that this is not meant as an anti-Turkish stance .
It is more about the custom the EU has of trying to create a better society in which the horrors of history can be avoided .
A mindset where national identity protects itself with a penal code in which Article 301 is a continual frame of reference , and in which the mistakes of a nation are denied , is in serious conflict with this custom .
One of the bases of the European identity is that history is looked straight in the eye and held to account .
The Armenian genocide is a historical truth .
Parliament will be demanding that Turkey acknowledge it in the resolution on the start of negotiations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I wish to support the amendments made to the text that has been submitted for today 's vote on relations between the European Union and Turkey and in doing so would recall the conclusions reached at the European Council held in Brussels in December 2006 .
These set out the principle whereby , as far as enlargement was concerned , the European Union would require each candidate country to comply fully with all the Copenhagen criteria , but that any enlargement would still be subject to the Union 's capacity for further integration .
Quite a few of you will have been aware for some time of the doubts , or rather the concerns , that I have had about the European Union 's ability to continue to function properly if Turkey were to become one of its Member States .
Of course Turkey is a ' friendly ' country and in geo-strategic terms is a very important partner for the European Union .
I am therefore completely in favour of the EU maintaining a privileged partnership with Turkey .
However , I am fiercely opposed to that particular country becoming part the Community .
Moreover , I believe that the problems of integrating Turkey as a potential Member State will become increasingly clear as the accession negotiations progress .
in writing . - ( FR ) I congratulate the rapporteur on having tabled the resolution on relations between the European Union and Turkey .
The motion for a resolution by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is a consensual and balanced document and in it she has sought to cover all the issues relating to this particular problem .
On the one hand the resolution congratulates Turkey on having recently held free and fair elections , calls on the Turkish Government to accelerate the process of reform and welcomes its intention to adopt a new civilian constitution .
The motion for a resolution further calls for a new political initiative to be launched for a lasting settlement to the Kurdish issue .
It also refers to attempts at reaching a settlement to the Cyprus question within the UN framework .
On the other hand , and this is in accordance with the position being supported by France , I welcome the fact that the resolution recalls that Turkey 's accession continues to depend on full compliance with the Copenhagen criteria and on the EU 's capacity for further integration .
For all these reasons I have decided to support the adoption of this resolution at the final vote in plenary .
I can only once again express my deep regret that Parliament has not formally called on Turkey to officially recognise the Armenian genocide of 1915 .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we highlighted earlier , many questions are raised by the negotiations on Turkey 's accession to the EU .
This process is being encouraged by the major powers which , despite the contradictions , are aiming to integrate this great country into the EU 's ' single market ' , thereby gaining control of its economy and using its geo-strategic position for their own plans in the Middle East , the Caucasus and Central Asia .
The resolution is therefore illuminating in this respect as it underlines ' the importance of Turkey as a transit hub for the diversification of gas supplies to the EU ' and ' energy projects involving Turkey in the South Caucasus ' , and also ' the geo-strategic position of Turkey in the region ' whose ' role in transportation and logistics will become more important in the coming years ' .
The following are some of the other important aspects that should be underlined :
Turkey has not made any steps towards recognising Cyprus - an EU Member State - and still militarily occupies the north of this island and disregards UN resolutions on this issue ;
the Turkish authorities are still engaged in repression against the Kurdish people and are still denying their legitimate cultural , political , economic and social rights .
in writing . - ( EL ) The report on the progress of Turkey 's course of accession to the EU includes utterly spurious congratulations to the Turkish Government and the new president .
The report is a hypocritical and ineffectual expression of wishful thinking about human rights in vague and general terms , condemning terrorism and mentioning the joint struggle waged against it by the EU and Turkey .
On the other hand , there is no reference whatsoever to the continuing occupation of Northern Cyprus by Turkish military forces .
There is not even a token condemnation of Turkey 's continuing refusal to recognise the Republic of Cyprus , and no pressure brought to bear on this issue .
There is no condemnation of the Turkish regime 's policy of contesting Greek sovereign rights or of its threat to use force against neighbouring countries .
There is no serious condemnation of the barbarous persecution and crimes committed by the Turkish authorities against the Kurdish population .
There is not the slightest allusion to the political persecution , at the hands of the Turkish middle class in all its guises , both pro-burka and secular , of communists and other progressive-minded people .
Despite all this , Turkey is urged not to use disproportionate force in the impending attack on northern Iraq !
In the context of the EU , the report reflects the objectives of powerful imperialist countries in line with their geopolitical interests in the wider area .
It is in the interests of the Turkish people and other peoples in the area to oppose Turkey 's integration into the EU and its imperialist plans .
in writing . - ( FR ) This resolution loses its impact because important amendments relating to the recognition of the Armenian genocide have been rejected by the majority of Members .
I am and will remain in favour of Turkey 's accession to the European Union .
However , this accession process has to recognise some historical facts .
Moreover , I am totally opposed to the contradiction that Parliament has now introduced . In paragraph 5 of the resolution of 28 September 2005 it in fact called on Turkey to recognise the Armenian genocide and regarded this admission as a precondition for accession to the European Union .
The decision to omit the Armenian genocide from the new resolution is a step backwards and one that I cannot support .
in writing . - ( PT ) Regardless of the end result , the current negotiations with Turkey must bring about the reforms which the country so desperately needs and which , in themselves , are the most important aspect of a country 's potential accession to the EU .
In this context , we must regard the AKP 's victory more as a commitment to economic reform than as a vote for Islam .
Given recent developments , the Kurdish issue must be tackled in conjunction with the United States , bearing in mind the issue of Iraq where the Kurdish north is peaceful .
On the other hand , we cannot refrain from criticising the Kurdish terrorist attacks on Turkey or the lack of integration and acceptance of Kurds within Turkey itself .
Finally , we can never highlight enough the geo-strategic importance of Turkey in relation to the security of Europe 's borders , energy supply , particularly as an alternative to dependency on Russian gas , as a partner in dialogue with Islamic countries and on the Iraq issue .
For all these reasons , the EU 's strategy must be to negotiate seriously and firmly .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the resolution that urges Turkey to accelerate the pace of its reforms .
We have to call on Turkey to do more : to ensure civilian control over the military ; to have zero tolerance of torture ; to provide protection for women and minority groups , and to recognise the Armenian genocide .
The handling of the Kurdish issue also has to be used as a criterion for assessing the reform process .
The report that we have voted on urges the Turkish Government to launch a political initiative aimed at finding a lasting settlement to the Kurdish problem . It also deplores the violation of Iraq 's territory , while at the same time , of course , condemning the violence perpetrated by the PKK .
This is not about targeting Turkey as such , it is about recalling that we cannot have double standards , that we cannot sell off cheaply the values that we hold dear .
It would also be disastrous to continue to ignore public opinion , which was again expressed in a poll carried out by Notre Europe before the Lisbon Summit .
The people of Europe are concerned about ill-prepared decisions on any future enlargement and about the EU 's capacity to absorb any more countries after the huge wave of new accessions that took place between 2004 and 2007 .
in writing . - ( DE ) I support the resolution on Turkey .
The Turkish Government must be vigorous in implementing reforms at last .
As for the Armenian genocide , although Turkey 's admission of this genocide is not part of the Copenhagen criteria , a country which aspires to join the EU must surely face up to the dark side of its history .
Overall , Turkey has a very long way to go before it meets the Copenhagen criteria .
Substantial deficits in relation to human and minority rights , civil and political rights and the general weakness of Turkey 's democracy vis-à-vis the military still exist .
There is still no progress on the Cyprus issue .
For that reason , we must continue to push , this year , for the ratification of the Ankara Protocol .
Without this , and also without the withdrawal of Turkish troops from the island , there can be no solution .
Turkey apparently refuses to understand that there are 27 Member States of the European Union and that one of these is the Republic of Cyprus !
As regards the conflict in the south-east of Turkey , the plan to launch an incursion into northern Iraq has existed at least since spring 2006 .
At present , it is to be feared that the invasion will indeed take place .
However , a country which - despite international support for the securing of its borders - claims the right to violate international law as it sees fit disqualifies itself from accession to the European Union once and for all .
in writing . - ( PL ) I abstained in the final vote on the report concerning EU-Turkey relations . This was because , despite negotiations lasting several months , the resolution makes no reference to the issue of Turkish responsibility for the massacre of Armenians in 1915 .
Turkey is attempting to impose censorship on the international community regarding this matter .
The most recent proof of this was the pressure brought to bear on the US Congress . The latter nevertheless stood firm and adopted an appropriate stance .
It is a mistake to give in to unjustified pressure from Turkey on this matter .
I should like to add , however , that I very much appreciate the inclusion in the aforementioned resolution of statements concerning the rights of Christian minorities in Turkey , such as the right to train clergy and Church institutions ' right to legal personality .
in writing . - ( FR ) I decided to abstain on the resolution on EU-Turkey relations in order to signal my opposition to the accession negotiations currently under way .
Two recent events should make us aware of the risks associated with this hypothetical accession .
First there is the political crisis that the country went through before the new President of the Republic was sworn in : this illustrated the tensions that exist within Turkish society and also the fragility of that country 's institutions .
I am also thinking of the tensions that have built up at the Iraqi border and the risk that this could destabilise one of the few areas in that country where violence has been contained .
The Turkish Parliament 's decision to authorise the army to make military incursions into Iraq is unacceptable .
Turkey is playing a dangerous role in the region and the EU should not lend any support to these populist and aggressive actions .
All this only reinforces my conviction : if we enlarge the Union to the borders of Iraq , I do not see what we will have left that is European .
I believe that Turkey is still unfit to join the EU .
It is up to us to put forward an alternative option : here the ' Mediterranean Union ' proposed by Nicolas Sarkozy certainly offers an opportunity that should be seized by the EU and by Turkey .
in writing . - ( SK ) I did not vote for the European Parliament resolution on EU-Turkey relations because enlargement of the European Union and Turkey 's entry into the Community are rather serious matters requiring more detailed knowledge and more intensive debate .
In my opinion , in the accession process the same rules should apply to all countries .
The proposed amendments calling for an admission of the Armenian genocide and for an apology to Armenia and the Armenian people were not adopted by the plenary .
Only such an admission and apology can give impetus to the process of reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia .
Furthermore , Turkey continues to hinder progress in the search for a solution to the Cyprus problem .
The cross-border military operation against Kurds who live along the border with Iraq , approved in a declaration issued by the Turkish Parliament , will not lead to a constructive solution to the terrorism problem in the country .
It will simply lead to the destabilisation of the entire region .
There is also no visible progress in the matter of freedom of religion within the territory of the Republic of Turkey .
The safety of Christians living in Turkey and respect for their rights are not guaranteed .
In recent times we have witnessed violent attacks on Christian priests , missionaries , publishers or converts .
Turkey has also not re-opened the Orthodox Church 's seminary without which the very existence of this ancient church is threatened .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 14.00 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
EU-Serbia relations ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Kacin , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on EU-Serbia relations , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on relations between the European Union and Serbia .
Rapporteur . - ( SL ) Today I am speaking as a rapporteur , but at the same time as a Liberal Democrat , as a Slovene , as a former Yugoslav and as a European .
Just 15 years ago the country in which I was born disintegrated in a number of bloody wars which lasted for almost an entire decade .
Today many countries of that region , including Serbia , are still faced with the destructive effects of the conflict .
To these fragile and young democracies membership of the European Union is a powerful incentive for further democratisation .
The European Union , which these countries wish to join as soon as possible , is based on common values and standards , one of the most important of which is the rule of law .
However , in the case of the Balkan countries the issue is not only reform of the judicial system but also full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague .
Serbia has so far failed to honour its domestic and international duty to arrest four remaining fugitive war crime indictees , including Mladić and Karadžić , who stand accused of orchestrating the slaughter of nearly 8 000 civilians in Srebrenica .
Anybody who kills a single human being commits a crime , but those who commit genocide represent an international and political challenge .
I visited Srebrenica before preparing this report .
I believe in Serbian self-respect .
That is why I insist that the Serbian state has to prove it is cooperating with the ICTY .
In May , a new pro-European government took office , with ICTY cooperation as one of its key objectives .
That is a development which I warmly welcome .
I also welcome the fact that the Government moved against , arrested and delivered two of the six most wanted fugitives , Tolimir and Djordjevic .
Those arrests demonstrate that Serbia is able to locate and arrest the remaining war fugitives .
As Chief Prosecutor Del Ponte has stated , the principal obstacle is not ability , but rather translating ability into tangible results .
This is why the EU cannot afford to waive its conditionality at this crucial juncture .
As the tensions surrounding Kosovo 's future status mount , it would be wrong to think that caving in on EU conditionality and bending over backwards to make concessions to Belgrade will serve either the EU or Serbia in the long run .
Turning a blind eye to war criminals may suit modern day Realpolitik , but it will not contribute to long-term peace or regional stability .
It is often repeated that Serbia is the key to stability in the region , but politicians in Belgrade are wrong to assume that this will mean preferential treatment for Serbia .
Serbia would do well to use its abundant talents and potential to act as an example to its neighbours in the region , rather than leaving them to languish because of Serbian recalcitrance .
It is true that the EU will not be complete until the Balkans form part of the Union , but this cannot be at any price , and certainly not at the price of undermining international law and ignoring fundamental European values .
The citizens of Serbia are entitled to know the truth about the recent policies of war committed in their name .
It is also for this reason that I support the recent initiative by the Special Prosecutor to uncover the political motives behind the assassination of Prime Minister Djindjić .
It is for that reason too that I regret the leniency of the sentences delivered by the Serbian war crimes court to four members of the Scorpions for the execution of six Muslims from Srebrenica .
There is tremendous economic and cultural potential in Serbia , and a vast area of talented individuals in all spheres of life .
The new Government has proved itself to have a number of dynamic and ambitious ministers .
There is no doubt that Serbia possesses the administrative and institutional capacity to deal professionally with further EU membership negotiations .
Progress has been made in a number of areas in recent months , for instance in the conclusion of the technical talks on the SAA negotiations , ratification of the Kyoto Protocol , CEFTA and the election of an Ombudsman , a Governor of the Bank of Serbia , a Commissioner for Public Information and the members of the Council of the State Audit Institution .
Disappointingly , however , there has been little tangible progress on the nomination of judges to the Constitutional Court .
In addition , the public denigration of civil society actors who criticise the Government or try to draw attention to sensitive issues , such as war crimes , continues .
In this regard , I condemn the recent events in Novi Sad , where a neo-Nazi organisation attacked a peaceful gathering of individuals who had gathered for an anti-fascist demonstration .
It is imperative that the relevant authorities find the perpetrators and thoroughly investigate the crime .
At the same time , I recognise that the EU 's strict visa regime , which prevents ordinary Serbs from meeting with their counterparts in the European Union , acts as a brake on Serbia 's democratic progress , and contributes to xenophobia and nationalism .
I welcome the agreements which have been negotiated .
While these mark an important first step , the ultimate goal must be to liberalise travel for all citizens of the region .
Do you know that only one tenth of Serbs possess a passport ?
We have to give something concrete to the rest of the population .
I urge the Council to ensure that the agreements enter into force at the beginning of next year , as well as calling on the Council also to establish a concrete roadmap for visa liberalisation .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my assistants , fellow Members , the Committee on Foreign Affairs secretariat , the political groups , the Commission , the Serbian Mission to the EU and the Serbian Office for European Integration .
In concluding my intervention , I would like to add a short personal note .
As one of the very few MEPs born in the Western Balkans , I am very proud to have worked as rapporteur .
My country , Slovenia , became an EU member not because it was easy , but because it was difficult .
We managed , just like Serbian politicians , intellectuals and business people will also manage , when they decide to do so .
I call on Serbia and the Serbian people to wake up now , to start helping themselves , to help their neighbours , to help the entire region and to join us .
Do it .
You are strong enough .
Together we will manage .
I thank the House for its forbearance as regards the usual time allocation .
I apologise to the House on the rapporteur 's behalf .
Thank you .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Serbia naturally lies within the European space and we all recognise that , in recent years , it has been faced with major challenges ; in fact more than this , with extremely difficult challenges due to its importance to the stability and development of the Western Balkan region .
The European Union has tried to help Serbia overcome these challenges by reinforcing and making more tangible and visible the benefits of the European perspective .
We have therefore tried to prove to the Serbian people and authorities our commitment to bringing Serbia closer to the European Union .
We have tried to show that there is an alternative , by helping the pro-European political and social forces which are favourable to pursuing the necessary reforms to consolidate the country 's democracy and development .
The stabilisation and association agreements represent a fundamental step in bringing the Western Balkan countries closer to the Union .
They also form an essential instrument for clarifying the European perspective .
In that regard , we feel that it is very positive that the Commission has completed the negotiations with Serbia on the conclusion of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
We sincerely hope that the conditions for the Commission to sign the agreement will shortly be met .
There is firm political support in the Council for the Stabilisation and Association Agreement to be signed as soon as the necessary conditions are met .
However , before the Council can implement the agreement , Serbia must fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court .
The ability for people in Serbia to travel more easily to the European Union would also reinforce the ties between us and undoubtedly contribute to the democratisation process and to the pro-European Union sentiment in Serbian society .
The visa facilitation and readmission agreements which were signed in September and which will enter into force in January 2008 are , in our opinion , vitally important .
The Commission has agreed with Serbia to begin dialogue on the liberalisation of visas after the entry into force of these agreements .
The EU has also made it clear to Serbia that its integration process is not linked to the issue of determining the future status of Kosovo .
In fact , every country moves towards becoming a member of the European Union on its own merits and in accordance with the conditions of the stabilisation and association process and the Copenhagen criteria .
To conclude , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must once again reiterate the significance that the Presidency of the European Union attributes to the opportunity of discussing with the European Parliament the importance , for both Serbia itself and the region , of securing a European future for Serbia .
There can be no doubt that the Western Balkans remain one of the European Union 's priorities and that our ultimate goal is to create a situation of peace , stability , democracy and prosperity in the region .
This is why we have a vision of the integration of these countries within the Union , with the stabilisation and association process remaining the framework for preparing for this potential accession .
Serbia is a country of high geo-strategic importance to the stability of the whole region , which is why progress in this process is essential to achieve the EU 's ultimate goal with regard to the Western Balkans : to see this become a region of stability , peace and progress .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Kacin for his solid report , which captures the essential aspects of the current state of EU-Serbia relations .
I have asked my services to follow up on the recommendations of the report , which has already been useful in the preparation of the Commission 's annual progress report , due to be adopted on 6 November .
Your report highlights a number of areas where both the European Union and Serbia need to intensify efforts , which I fully support .
I particularly agree with the importance granted to visa facilitation and with the call for progress now to be made on visa liberalisation .
Precisely for that reason , the Commission has indicated its intention to start a dialogue early next year , with each of the countries of the Western Balkans , on a roadmap for visa liberalisation , by defining its requirements and conditions .
This issue is of immense importance , not least in terms of giving concrete evidence to the young generation of the region of what Europe really means .
We are at a very critical juncture in our relations with Serbia .
Over the past fortnight I have had intense discussions with the Council Presidency , with Member States and with the Serbian authorities on the state of affairs .
It will come as no surprise that the Kosovo status process and the stabilisation and association agreement , including ICTY conditionality , were the main items .
The deadline of 10 December for Kosovo talks is fast approaching , and the work of the international troika is entering a crucial phase .
We fully support the work of the EU 's representative , Ambassador Wolfgang Ischinger , and we will leave no stone unturned in seeking a negotiated solution .
It is now essential that the two parties - Belgrade and Priština - assume their responsibilities and engage seriously in constructive and creative proposals that can lead to a negotiated , sustainable solution .
I have also had intensive discussions with Member States and with the Serbian authorities on the stabilisation and association agreement .
That agreement will constitute a political milestone in our relations with Serbia .
It will be the gateway towards candidate status for membership of the European Union .
The Commission has first negotiated and then finalised the technical work on the draft text of this agreement , which is currently being assessed by Member States in the Council working group .
It is working intensively with the Presidency and Member States to complete a legal-linguistic review of the text so that we , as the European Union , are technically ready to sign the agreement soon , provided that the political conditions are in place - namely full cooperation with the ICTY - which should lead to the arrest of the remaining indictees .
This is , to my understanding , in line with the recommendation in your report , addressed to the Council .
Concerning the ICTY , as I have said before , for the moment I see Serbia 's part of the glass as being half full rather than half empty .
I have made it clear to the Serbian Government that signature of the SAA is within reach .
It is now a question of political will and translating ability into results .
We are ready , once Serbia is ready by meeting the conditions .
The ball is now clearly in Serbia 's court .
At the same time we should also appreciate the efforts Serbia has made up to now .
Too often , these tend to be forgotten in our debates .
Since 2004 , Serbia has cooperated in locating and handing over 20 of the 24 ICTY indictees .
That shows that our policy of conditionality works .
However , ICTY cooperation cannot be a stop-start process , and more needs to be done to achieve full cooperation , especially concerning intensified search operations and access to archives and documents .
The Chief Prosecutor will return to Belgrade tomorrow for two days , and the Commission will take her findings strongly into account when making our assessment on the initialling of the SAA agreement .
Signature will then depend on full cooperation with the ICTY , and we will assess that together with the Council .
This requires Serbia to do everything in its powers to locate and arrest the fugitives and to provide the ICTY with all the necessary information leading to their arrest and transfer to tribunal in The Hague .
To conclude , Serbia indeed has tremendous economic , cultural and intellectual potential that is just waiting to be released in the pursuit of the country 's European future .
The Commission is fully committed to Serbia 's European perspective .
I am convinced that the country can make relatively rapid progress on its European road once it meets the essential conditions .
That is crucial , not just for Serbia 's European aspirations , but for the stability and progress of the whole Western Balkans .
It is , therefore , high time for Serbia to turn the page on its painful past , and to fully approach its European future .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , all in this House would agree that Serbia has a European future and that this European future is highly desirable , both for Serbia and for Europe .
The question then is how to get there from here .
The heart of the problem is that , whilst Serbia certainly has some of the characteristics of a democracy , it is still some way from having a stable , democratic infrastructure .
The legacy of communism and of the wars following the disintegration of Yugoslavia has left deep marks on Serbian society , hence the operation of trustworthy , neutral institutions is that much more difficult to sustain .
The weakness of the rule of law , the corruption and nepotism , and the worryingly high level of casual violence are all indicators of a society that has to undergo a significant shift before democracy can be regarded as complying with the Copenhagen criteria .
Perhaps the most toxic part of the legacy is the way in which nationalism retains its attractiveness for a politically important part of society , a part of the elite included .
For the protagonists of Serbian ethnic nationalism , Serbian citizenship is understood as coextensive with the Serbian nation .
This bears very hard on the non-Serb part of Serbian society .
In this area , the country 's political elite has a great deal of work to do .
Only Serbia - the country 's political elites and Serbian society - can make the necessary shift towards democracy , human rights and citizenship .
The conclusions of this thoughtful report , on the other hand , offer cogent indications as to how that transformation can be made and how Serbia can once again take its place in Europe .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , with winter just around the corner , the political atmosphere in Serbia is heating up .
That is why , by participating in the preparation of this report , the PSE Group is trying especially to grasp the situation of a nation that lost a privileged position in the former Yugoslav Federation , a nation where nationalist outbreaks have damaged the entire region , wrecked many lives , claimed a number of victims and received bombs and rockets in reply .
In spite of everything , the majority of the country 's population wants nothing else than to follow the European path and , by doing so , to heal its own and its neighbours ' wounds .
This report tries to help , in a friendly and yet demanding fashion , to draw the road signs for this important path .
I would especially like to thank our colleague , Mr Kacin , who put into this report not only a lot of work but also sense and heart .
I would like to emphasise the successful work of the pro-European Serbian Government in this not-so-easy situation .
Its activities have allowed the European Parliament to suggest signing of the stabilisation and association agreement , perhaps even by the end of this year .
Yet whether the country will be able to turn a page in its relations with the EU depends largely on the Serbs themselves .
We , for our part , will keep strongly to our opinion that the agreement will be signed only when Serbia shows results in capturing the remaining war criminals .
The PSE Group has proposed a few amendments to the report which seek to soften the formulation of sensitive issues for Serbs .
These suggest , inter alia , changing the formulation of Recital M to underline that inter-ethnic reconciliation is paramount for securing stability in the region .
We are of the position that Kosovo is a separate problem , which is why it remains almost untouched in this report .
The solution to that problem should not divert Serbia from the European path along which , after time , it is forecast to meet with Kosovo and former Yugoslav republics , and indeed with the rest of Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Kacin , on his constructive and balanced report .
In 2003 the European Union committed itself to the integration of Serbia into the EU because of its conviction that Serbia is an important factor in regional stability , and that Serbia 's future lies in Europe .
From this point onwards , the pace of integration depends entirely on Serbia .
Full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague is an important prerequisite .
Progress has been made ; two out of the six most wanted war criminals have been handed over , but the most serious war criminals , Mladić and Karadžić , are still at large .
Further efforts are needed .
The biggest test of strength for both Serbia and Europe is the issue of settling the status of Kosovo .
The current situation is the most serious obstacle both to regional stability and to Serbia 's EU integration .
We expect Serbia to act in a constructive manner in order to resolve this situation as quickly and as satisfactorily as possible .
Progress has been made in the field of minority rights ; the number of violent assaults has fallen , and minorities have been granted new rights under the constitution .
The progress made , however , is far from adequate : regulations relating to National Councils are not yet in place and legislation guaranteeing self-determination for minorities is lacking .
There are also European tasks that Serbia needs to undertake , given that in practice the Constitutional Court is non-functional , the justice system is slow and subject to political influence , and corruption and organised crime permeate all areas of economic and social life .
If Serbia genuinely desires integration , it is vitally important that it steps up its efforts in these areas .
Europe will give Serbia all possible assistance in order for it to carry out these tasks successfully , but it is Serbia that must undertake the tasks .
We must emphasise that the responsibility and the obligation to do everything in their power to ensure the successful integration of Serbia into the EU lie with our Serb friends themselves . Thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , the Commission will soon be taking a decision on the stabilisation and association agreement to be concluded between the EU and Serbia .
I support this agreement .
It will send out a clear message at international level that Serbian membership of the EU is on the current political agenda .
This is the country 's first significant step towards EU membership .
Although many colleagues have spoken about the difficulties which Serbia has faced in the past and the ongoing problems that there are concerning Serbian accession and the stabilisation agreement , we must also give recognition to the tremendous road which has been travelled despite the difficulties which have occurred .
As with all relationships between countries that are in close proximity to each other , there will still be difficulties in the future with regard to how Serbia will deal with the issue of Kosovo , their ongoing cooperation with the International War Crimes Tribunal , and in particular with regard to their relationships with other neighbouring countries that were formally part of Yugoslavia .
However , the clear message being given by the authorities in Serbia is that there is an ongoing desire on their part to see progress being made .
They are willing to hear the best practice models that we can encourage for them .
And look at what the European Union has delivered in the past - over EUR 165 million in the reconstruction effort .
The issue that we must all remember is that the Balkans War continues to be a huge psychological scar on the development , not just of Serbia , but of other countries .
And indeed , if you look into the recent past of any of our own countries , there are similar psychological fractures which took us a while to overcome .
We should give some leeway to allow for Serbia to make that transition and that progress .
Our role and our duty is to ensure that we act as a good neighbour , as a faithful teacher of how best things can happen , but also to reward the good things that have happened .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to extend my warm thanks to the rapporteur for his sound and comprehensive work .
We very much welcome the fact that the European Parliament makes clear and regular contributions to the political debate about the situation in South-East Europe .
Serbia plays , and has played , a prominent role in this region .
That is why it is essential to underline , time and again , that Serbia 's future lies within the EU and that we are good and reliable partners .
However , it takes at least two to build a partnership , and so I appeal to Serbia to continue along the path towards EU integration and to play a constructive role in the resolution of the Kosovo issue .
We expect unlimited cooperation with the Hague Tribunal at last - that point has been made several times - and compliance with the criteria of European standards .
I very much hope that the better opportunities for travel will also make a contribution here and bring about improvements in the future .
What I cannot endorse , however , are the proposals that have occasionally been made to apply different standards to EU accession .
I am pleased that the rapporteur , the Commissioner and the representative of the Council take the same view , especially as we paid dearly for this not long ago .
I have great understanding for the difficult and painful position in which Serbia finds itself , but I repeat , it takes at least two to build a partnership .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , as in any country that has lost a recent war resulting in the loss of territory and influence , nationalistic feelings of superiority also enjoy strong support in Serbia .
Rather than isolating and punishing Serbia because the war criminal Ratko Mladić cannot be found , it should be offered a future in which guarantees are also established for the ethnic minorities in Vojvodina , Sandžak and Preševo .
My Group supports the efforts of the Kacin report towards overtures with a view to Serbian membership of the European Union .
Unfortunately , paragraph 8 added by the Committee on Foreign Affairs pre-empts the decision on Kosovo .
After 10 December , Kosovo will probably be unilaterally recognised as a state by America and a number of Member States of the European Union , and Serbia will unilaterally take back the northern part of Kosovo .
This is why we do not share at all the confidence that the future status of Kosovo can only contribute to stability and integration .
While this groundless optimism in paragraph 8 is maintained , my Group is withdrawing its support for this report .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this report 's opening sentence is : ' ... the future of Serbia lies in the European Union ' .
It goes on to say : ' ... the future of all countries in the region lies in the EU ' .
The countries of the region are of course Croatia , Kosovo , Bosnia-Herzegovina , Macedonia , Montenegro and Albania .
Some of them have historic enmities that have erupted in tragic wars in recent times .
The EU , of course , believes that if they joined everything would resolve itself in sweetness and light .
But follow through one consequence of what would actually happen if they did join .
These states have a combined population of over 24 million people .
Many of these people would take up their right to move to other parts of the EU .
On past experience , many of them would come to Britain .
Britain is already swamped with immigrants and asylum seekers from the EU and beyond .
The British Home Office has an unofficial policy of moving different ethnic and religious groups of asylum-seekers to different parts of the UK for fear of the violence and conflicts that might erupt between them .
If Serbia and other Balkan States were eventually to join the EU , Britain would import yet more of their historic hatreds and blood feuds onto British soil .
The way forward for Serbia and for her neighbours is as democratic , independent nation states , resolving their problems peacefully - not to join the European Union .

on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the European authorities , and in particular the Kacin report , generally seem to treat Serbia not as a sovereign state but as a naughty schoolboy , a ne 'er-do-well , someone the European Union has the right to give good marks and bad marks to .
Serbia gets good marks when it acquires a government that is described as being pro-European . This pro-European reference of course means being liable for and subject to the dogma that pertains in Brussels .
It gets bad marks when the Serbs prove less than enthusiastic about collaborating with the International Criminal Tribunal .
Here it is useful to recall that this Tribunal has scorned two principles that in fact go to the heart of our justice system : the legal sovereignty of states and freedom of expression .
As a result , Vojislav Seselj , the leader of the Serbian Radical Party that represents 28 % of the electorate , has been imprisoned in The Hague since February 2003 and is still awaiting a verdict , even though he turned himself in voluntarily .
This Tribunal is therefore blatantly violating the very principles that have been declared by the European Union , namely respect for fundamental freedoms and human rights .
To tell the truth , Mr Seselj 's only crime is to be a Serbian patriot .
The rulers of the European Union , who wish to break up the nations of Europe , cannot in fact forgive the Serbs for having resisted the destruction of their state , and in particular the secession of Kosovo , the historic heart of Serbia .
The treatment inflicted on the Serbs in Kosovo is a warning to all the peoples of Europe .
If today the Albanians are calling for the establishment of a Kosovar state , it is because immigration from Albania and the falling birth-rate among Serbs have given them a majority in a province where , some fifty years ago , they were in the minority .
The Kosovan example should compel us more than ever to reaffirm the right of the peoples of Europe to be themselves and to make their own decisions , in other words to preserve their identity and sovereignty , and in an enlarged European Europe of nations and homelands there should also clearly be a legitimate place for the people of Serbia .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Kacin has presented a report which has attracted very broad support in the House .
A number of us contributed to that effort .
I therefore do not intend to discuss the finer points of detail , but would simply like to make various comments in a personal capacity .
Serbia 's democratic forces were too late in making the radical break with the Milošević era , much too late .
As a result , cooperation with the Hague Tribunal was not addressed seriously and credibly , which was why cooperation within the Stabilisation and Association Agreement was also delayed , then suspended , then resumed , and now we are waiting again .
In other words , Serbia 's path to the EU is already mapped out and Serbia has the capacity , but it does need to make efforts of its own .
The unresolved Kosovo issue hangs like a dark cloud over Serbian politics and is having a paralysing effect .
Who is suffering as a result ?
That is easy to answer : the young generation .
After the embargo and the NATO bombing - and the Serbs have Mr Milošević to thank for both of them , not the democratic forces which are in government today - young people now face another intractable problem , namely Kosovo .
This is impeding efficient political work as well , which plays straight into the hands of the radicals and their cronies at the top .
Thankfully , visa facilitation will finally create some breathing space , and this is something which we in Parliament have long been campaigning for .
We want to see young Serbs participating very soon in our education and youth programmes which we opened up with effect from 2007 .
I would also like to pay tribute to the very positive work being undertaken by the Vojvodina regional parliament in relation to tolerance and youth cooperation , which is having a major impact .
A great many young people have come together in the Danube region this year , and this is a marvellous example of a commitment to tolerance and peaceful social relations .
There is a great longing for normality in Serbia .
Politicians should be doing more for the present and the future and should leave the past behind .
They should also be doing much more to improve the daily lives of ordinary people , to ensure that they do not lose popular support .
( DE ) Mr President , in the speech made by our esteemed colleague Mr Kacin , there were two things missing , in my view .
The first was the expression of thanks to the generous President , and the second , more importantly , was the balance which is certainly expressed in his report .
We worked well together and I would like to thank him very much for that .
I think that this has developed into a very good draft report .
In saying that , I echo what Commissioner Rehn said .
Some substantial progress has been made , but when assessing a country , both the positives and the negatives should be mentioned .
Substantial progress has also been made in terms of cooperation with the ICTY .
However - and here we are in accord - this progress is not enough .
I hope that an agreement will be reached with Carla del Ponte in the next few days , and I made it clear on behalf of my Group when I spoke to Minister Ljajić that all the issues have to be resolved .
We cannot stop halfway and we cannot stop three-quarters of the way either .
Full cooperation has to be established .
That is the common position of Parliament and the European Union as a whole .
As I see it , the crucial issue in this country is that unfortunately - and here I would echo what Doris Pack has said - the nationalists often still seem to be setting the agenda .
You cannot overtake extremist right-wing nationalists even further to the right , which is what some people are trying to do .
This simply leads to chaos .
The fact that Mr Nikolić held office as the Speaker of Parliament , even if it was only for four days , is scandalous .
Given the difficulties and sensitivities of the situation , how can anyone think of having the leader of the extreme right as the Speaker of Parliament ?
It is scandalous .
This is not the way to conduct politics and take Serbia forward .
That is something which repeatedly confirms that Serbia is actually pursuing a nationalist course .
I hope that all the forces of the centre will reflect for a moment and realise that there has to be a clear dividing line between the nationalists on the one hand and the rest , whether they are now Conservative or Socialist , on the other .
The centre is the only force which can take the country forward , provided that they are not tempted to dally with the nationalists .
Yes , we need to do more about visa-free travel .
A step towards visa facilitation has been taken , and now we should be moving towards visa-free travel so that young people can come to Europe and see what it is all about .
That is what young Serbs need , and that is what Serbia needs as well .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , first I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Kacin , for an excellent , thorough report .
The report mentions the difficult problems which thwart relations between the EU and Serbia , but it also highlights many positive factors which have emerged in Serbia 's development .
I would like to stress the importance of natural relations in the development of EU-Serbian cooperation .
It is important that young Serbian nationals should have more opportunities to travel abroad on student exchange and cultural programmes .
There has been positive experience of this with many countries in the context , for example , of the Erasmus Mundus and Leonardo da Vinci programmes .
Natural relations with Serbia will also be given a boost with the visa agreement that has been concluded .
We must ensure that the agreement takes effect before the end of the year , at the same time as we speed up visa processing and develop support action to increase travel opportunities for young people and professionals in particular .
Finally , I want to say that the European Agency for Reconstruction has also fulfilled its role in Serbia .
Its work is now coming to a close and the Agency 's tasks can be transferred to the Commission units , with the emphasis on support for administrative and judicial development .
In this way , we can encourage Serbia and other countries in the region to enjoy closer relations with the European Union .
( PL ) The report refers to recent changes in Serbia .
Much still remains to be done , however , notably in the area of cooperation between the Government and the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia .
Despite promises made , Radko Mladić has not been arrested and handed over to the Tribunal in The Hague .
The lack of progress in this area of cooperation is cause for concern and impacts negatively on perception of the action taken by the Serb authorities to strengthen the rule of law .
The new constitution and the provisions relating to the protection of human rights and the rights of national minorities , the security services , the judiciary and the army , and also the efforts to eliminate corruption , do represent movement in the right direction .
There are certain shortcomings to the reforms , however , such as the failure to appoint a Constitutional Court which would act as the guardian of democracy .
It is essential for the measures adopted and the commitments entered into by Serbia to be monitored .
Despite the progress made , much still remains to be accomplished in Serbia .
( NL ) Mr President , Parliament , ladies and gentlemen , we are attempting today to underline the positive developments in Serbia , and let there be no misunderstanding about it , there is nothing wrong with that .
It is important for the European Union that Serbia develops towards democracy and it is important that we , the European Union , acknowledge that process and , where possible , support it .
It is the same endeavour being undertaken at present in other EU institutions , in particular in the Council .
We must not overdo it , however , ladies and gentlemen .
Even if Serbia does everything it is asked to do in this report , but at the same time it plays a negative and destructive role in the negotiations on the future of Kosovo , then that will of course have negative consequences for the pace of Serbia 's overtures toward the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is how it should be .
That is why I find it incomprehensible and not good that up to now the link - which I believe is a real link , everyone knows that - between the Serbian position in the negotiations on Kosovo and Serbia 's route in the direction of Europe is not made .
I am therefore appealing to fellow Members to support the amendment in which this link is made .
There is a connection between the Serbian position on Kosovo and the pace and content of the negotiations between Serbia and the European Union .
The refusal to make that link up to now is explained by the argument that we - the European Union - do not want to make things even more difficult for the democrats in Serbia , for President Tadić , and so we have to keep quiet on the difficult issues .
Ladies and gentlemen , I disagree fundamentally with that assessment of the situation .
I agree with the predecessor of the present Commissioner , Chris Patten , who recently wrote that it is a misapprehension if we believe that we are helping the democrats by being soft , by not being candid and honest to Serbia .
By not being open and honest , we are strengthening Kostunica who can then say : if we take a hard line we can force the European Union to make concessions .
That is not the way forward .
Once again I beg you , be positive , but be honest and make things plain too .
The citizens of the EU and Serbia are entitled to that .
( EL ) Mr President , the EU shares responsibility for the unjust and dirty war waged by NATO against Yugoslavia .
It is jointly responsible for the murder of thousands of Yugoslavs ; for the enormous destruction inflicted on the infrastructure , factories and the country as a whole , and for the use of enriched uranium .
Those who should be arrested , tried and sentenced for war crimes are Bill Clinton , Tony Blair , Javier Solana ( the former NATO Secretary General ) and the other leaders of the countries that attacked Yugoslavia .
Unfortunately , nothing of the kind has happened .
Yugoslavia has been dismantled ; you are creating protectorates and you are now trying to annex Serbia .
You are asking for a declaration of repentance from a people who did what is self-explanatory : they defended the independence of their country .
You may receive such a declaration from the government , but the young people will not forget and will not forgive the crimes of ΝΑΤΟ and the EU .
You are now continuing the same policy with the independence of Kosovo and the creation of a new protectorate .
Among other things , the measures proposed in the report are an attempt to redeem slaughter and destruction by using money from the workers of Europe .
The measures aim to present the murderers of the Yugoslav peoples as saviours in a bid to create favourable conditions for linking Serbia to the imperialist chariot , and for European capital to take over the country .
The Communist Party of Greece condemns this report and believes that the interests of the Balkan peoples will be served if we do not forget , but struggle against the EU and the barbarity you are nurturing .
( NL ) Mr President , Mr Kacin 's solid wide-ranging report gives a balanced view of the socio-economic development of Serbia .
The dark and bright sides are both presented : excellent growth figures against high unemployment , for instance ; in concrete terms , 7.2 % against over 20 % for the past three years .
Direct foreign investment is essential for Serbian development and that is exactly what is lacking at the moment .
The causes are obvious .
They can mainly be traced back to Belgrade 's image problem .
What frightens off foreign investors , more than anything , is protracted political insecurity - byword Kosovo - and also the marked slowing down in the pace of market reforms on the part of Belgrade .
That brings me to a crucial question .
Is Serbia standing in its own way ?
The Kacin report opens with the proposition that the future of Serbia lies in the European Union ; the European conditions en route to that are perfectly well-known to Belgrade , as is European commitment to cooperate on that route .
In the end the Serbian authorities should themselves answer the pressing question : is Serbia standing in its own way ?
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Mr Kacin 's report is excellent , a professional piece of work .
One can tell that he was born in the region and knows it well .
My comments are as follows :
1 .
The principle of values .
It is vital that no one should be allowed to enter the European Union with the kind of legacy where not only is there a failure to investigate collective crimes and mass murders , but where it is not even permitted to remember them , to remember the dead .
This has been a minimum human right , the right to human dignity , since Antigone .
In a place where this point has not yet been reached and is not even being called for , we should not be surprised if radical groups are prowling the streets and gaining strength , or neo-fascists are on the march in Vojvodina .
This must be resolved , because if we fail to do so , it is not only Serbia that we should be worried about , but also Europe .
2 .
I think we should at least undertake what we ourselves have set out as regards this report .
In other words , let us not weaken it with amendments , let us not censor the resolutions we have made or the points made in them , but cite them exactly as they are .
The same goes for territorial arrangements , which Mr Kacin has quite rightly brought into his report from the Commission , because no one will understand what we want if we pointlessly water it down .
3 .
We must help Serbia , and not just talk about doing so .
After relaxing visa requirements , we need to abolish them altogether so that ordinary Serbs are able to enter Europe whenever they wish .
Until then , there is no point in harping on about Serbia 's European Union prospects , as we cannot take the third step before we take the first .
The same goes for Serbia 's membership of CEFTA , for implementation of the Association process , and its future within the WTO .
My last remark is that we need a bottom-up society , and one that demands proportionality , both for representation of ethnic minorities in the public administration , which is vital , and for ensuring appropriate forms of autonomy .
Lack of proportionality signifies a lack of trust , and if there is no trust we will not really be able to move forward towards new , long-desired cooperation in the Balkans . Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , the Kacin report deals with Serbia , not Kosovo , and not with what will happen after December .
It is also true to say that it does not link Serbia 's reaction to the Kosovo issue to the promise of accession to the European Union .
Mr Lagendijk is upset about this , while my Group welcomes it and takes the view that here Parliament can deny any political bargaining or double diplomacy .
It is true that there is one question that is constantly raised , namely the International Criminal Tribunal and Serbia 's cooperation with it .
Now Mrs Del Ponte has just sounded the alarm bells , or at least something very like it , in referring to the intransigence being displayed and is using the European Union as a link with everything that affects human rights , in other words conditionality , and I believe she is not wrong .
I do not believe , as Mr Lang does , that this is simply a matter of handing out good marks and bad marks .
I take the view that the issue of nationalism , this culture of impunity , with four wanted criminals - and not small fry either - still running around free in Serbia , is intolerable .
Furthermore , I would say that we know from experience that a country has everything to gain by recognising its past and acknowledging its crimes .
We called on Croatia to make huge efforts and we asked Bosnia to do the same ; and these are the very same efforts that enabled us to rebuild Europe after the Second World War .
All this goes to the very heart of what we value most .
It is not a matter of handing out points , it is the very core of our values and it is the key to reconciliation in the Balkans .
Finally I would add , even though we are not discussing Kosovo , that the Serbian Deputy Prime Minister Bozidar Djelic , who visited the European Parliament several weeks ago , reaffirmed to us that whatever happened about Kosovo his country had no intention of resorting to arms .
I remember these words and , without linking this to the Kacin report , I hope that this appeal has reached the ears of his own people .
( PL ) Mr President , I have noted the negative attitude adopted by certain European countries towards Serbia over the years .
Serbia is perceived as the country that is implementing Russia 's policy for the Balkans .
Another aspect has been largely overlooked , however .
Serbia lies on one of the main routes for the expansion of Islam into Europe .
Personally , I am in favour of maintaining the best possible relations with Turkey and other Muslim states , but it is not in Europe 's interest to allow constant humiliation of a Christian country whilst favouring Muslim ones .
This may have far-reaching consequences for our continent in the future .
What the region concerned needs is stabilisation , not incitement to racial and religious tension .
The ongoing democratisation of political life in Serbia must surely be welcomed by all .
Our relations with Serbia should respect that nation 's pride and national tradition .
Only then will Serbia turn to the Union in preference to other powers , and stabilise the region at the same time .
( DE ) Mr President , the future of the former Yugoslav republic of Serbia lies in Europe .
That applies to all the republics of the former Yugoslavia .
As is the case for every potential candidate , there are conditions that apply to accession to this community of values , and I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur not just for his report but also for making it clear in his speech what these conditions are .
Unlimited cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia is indeed a precondition for the signing of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
I find it hard to stomach that war criminals such as Mladić and Karadžić still have so many sympathisers , not only among the general public but also among the police , the military and many public office-holders in Serbia : in other words , the very people with whom we will soon be negotiating Serbia 's closer relations with the EU .
Dealing with the past is not a formal condition for closer relations with the EU , but it would help the Serbs , their immediate neighbours and the EU as a whole .
The Kosovo issue , too , must be viewed separately in formal terms , but I find this nationalist stonewalling very unhelpful .
I also think it is wrong to purchase a Russian veto in the Security Council with generous sell-offs of key companies to Russian firms .
At the end of the process - according to Belgrade 's calculations - the EU is expected to provide compensation , in the form of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement , for concessions which have not actually been made in the Kosovo issue .
That will become apparent after 10 December .
I therefore fully support Mr Lagendijk 's position .
The level of cooperation on the issue of Kosovo will thus be one of the factors which is either more helpful or more of a hindrance to Serbia 's closer relations with the EU , and Belgrade should take note of that fact .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , last year Serbia went through some significant changes which I am convinced were also successfully negotiated .
The difficult and painful process of dissolution of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro was successfully completed .
Democratic parliamentary elections were held fairly and freely and a new pro-European government was established .
Substantial and much needed economic growth followed .
After a 13-month break , the Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( SAA ) negotiations between the Serbian Government and the EU resumed .
There is a realistic prospect that in the near future the signature of the SAA may take place .
This would be a significant step on the path to Serbia 's EU membership .
As has already been mentioned today several times , the condition for this is Serbia 's cooperation with the ICTY .
I trust that tomorrow and the day after tomorrow , during Carla del Ponte 's visit to Belgrade , at least some of the obstacles will be overcome , such as , for example , full access to archive documents in ministerial departments .
In my short contribution today I will not make any comments on Kosovo as we are discussing the report on Serbia .
What I would like to do , however , is to commend Serbia for its responsible and proactive approach and its collaboration in the context of regional initiatives such as the Stability Pact and CEFTA ( Central European Free Trade Agreement ) .
This collaboration is evidence of Serbia 's clear interest in developing and sustaining good relationships with its regional neighbours .
( PL ) Mr President , Serbia is a European country that has made considerable progress towards integration into the European Union over the last few years .
One could of course mention a number of problems that may not actually be greater in Serbia than they are in Albania or in Bosnia-Herzegovina , although it seems we are prepared to turn a blind eye in the case of the latter two countries .
I believe we should create a system of incentives for Serbia to encourage it to try even harder to meet European standards . Nevertheless , the goal , namely the European Union , should be clearly visible .
There is certainly a point in what Mr Gahler said about relations between Russia and Serbia .
It should be made very clear to Serbia , however , that its place is within the European Union and that it will be easier for us to work with Serbia if it is inside the Union rather than if it remains outside .
That much seems obvious to me .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the Serbian authorities must show greater commitment to cooperating with the Prosecutor , Carla Del Ponte , so as to ensure that the war criminals are caught .
We all agree that this is a precondition for the safety of the entire Balkan area and for the entire European Union , as well as a legal and moral obligation .
We must also see to it that the Serbian Government renews its commitment to a climate of peaceful coexistence among all the ethnic groups living in the land .
The Ministry of the Interior has already been undertaking initiatives to prevent and control inter-ethnic incidents in Vojvodina since 2004 , but the participation of minorities in social life and their proper institutional representation must be promoted .
We are all in favour of an immediate settlement on the status of Kosovo this December . Nevertheless , many problems will remain unresolved , beginning with the need to clamp down on Albanian organised crime which is destabilising the whole geographical area , including the areas bordering on Macedonia and Albania , thus greatly endangering the overall safety of the Balkans as a whole .
Kosovo must not be abandoned to its own devices . We must demand that the safety of the entire Balkan area be secured by means of a continued European Union presence .
From this point of view , accelerated entry into the EU by Serbia would stabilise the area , not least with respect to illegal trafficking in every field possible and imaginable : trafficking is rife throughout the Balkans , beginning with the environmental sector .
We must call on Serbia to act quickly to introduce a proper environmental policy in respect of energy , as well as water treatment and an integrated waste cycle , so as to prevent organised crime from getting its hands on this sector too .
( HU ) Mr President , the report by Mr Kacin marks a turning point in the attitude of the European Parliament .
For a very long time , the European Parliament one-sidedly rewarded the Albanians and punished the Serbs in every statement it made on Kosovo .
Here at last we have a credible , objective picture of Serbia , and the reason why this is crucial is because we must ensure that Serbia is no longer given the role of punchbag or scapegoat .
This does not mean , however , that the Serbs will not some day have to come to terms with the crimes of the Milošević era , just as the Kosovo Albanians , and every people , must come to terms with their historical crimes .
It is good and proper that we are drawing Serbia closer to the European Union , and I agree that visa facilitation is not enough ; we should establish a visa-free regime for Serbia 's citizens , and it is at least as important to speed up the process of granting Serbia candidate status .
Here we have Kosovo , which presents a huge risk ; according to Council of Europe intelligence estimates , around 100 000 refugees , Serb refugees , are expected to leave Kosovo , and it will be largely Vojvodina that has to deal with this situation .
Thanks are due for the fact that Mr Kacin 's proposed amendments give an objective picture of the inter-ethnic processes in Vojvodina , of the atrocities that still persist , and of the need to legislate on the legal status of the National Councils , the need for proportional representation of minorities in the police force and the judicial system , and the need to maintain minority radio broadcasting and funding for it .
All in all , I congratulate Mr Kacin : drawing Serbia closer to the European Union is an important step .
Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) Thank you for the opportunity to speak , Madam President .
Ladies and gentlemen , I welcome this report , and believe that the version adopted by the Commission is a particularly good and balanced one .
Serbia 's prospects for European Union membership are especially important for Hungary .
We have a fundamental interest in seeing our neighbour admitted into this Community as soon as possible .
This represents the only alternative for reconciliation as opposed to inter-ethnic strife , war , and discrimination against people or humiliating them because their mother tongue or customs happen to be different .
Obviously , we are not indifferent to the fate of Serbia 's Hungarian ethnic minority , and indeed we have made an effort to keep the issue of Vojvodina on the European agenda .
Something that is very important , and I am glad to see that it is in the report , is to draw attention to the need to maintain the multi-ethnic character of Vojvodina that has evolved over many centuries .
The basis for this multi-ethnicity is the coexistence of different ethnic groups , the kind of coexistence that is based not on silence and humiliation , but on genuine equality before the law and equal opportunities .
At present , unfortunately , this is not part of day-to-day reality there .
I believe it is particularly important to maintain the region 's ethnic balance and its special characteristics , and , in my opinion , resettling Serb refugees in this region would jeopardise chances of maintaining this precarious balance and could exacerbate inter-ethnic conflict .
We have already seen a good many ugly examples of such conflict in the recent past .
In this connection I would draw your attention , for example , to a case that remains unresolved to this day : the fate of the ethnic Hungarian youths who were given a disproportionately severe sentence in a clear-cut example of ethnic discrimination in Temerin .
All in all , therefore , the Balkans need the European Union , because the spirit , principles and institutional system of the European Union , and the fact that it is consistent - and I lay particular emphasis on the latter - will be able to bring about a life that is liveable . Thank you very much .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have naturally followed this debate with great interest and I have of course taken note of the suggestions and concerns that many Members have voiced .
As it happens , the result of this debate seems clear to me : it points to the fact that only by giving Serbia a truly European perspective can peace , stability and progress be achieved in that country , and also stability in the whole Western Balkans region .
This is absolutely accepted as the Council has repeatedly asserted that the future of Serbia naturally lies in its future membership of the European Union .
We all know that this plan cannot be without conditions .
There must of course be conditions which will and must relate to the internal political process within Serbia itself , to respect for democratic values and to respect for those values specific to the rule of law .
However , these conditions also of course relate to Serbia 's essential cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal .
Much has been done by Serbia in this respect to cooperate with the Tribunal .
We all know that other actions and steps will have to be taken .
However , please allow me to express a note of confidence and encouragement that the Serbian authorities will be able , by the end of this process , to take the necessary steps so that this cooperation becomes full cooperation .
We in the European Union must help Serbia .
We believe it would be a strategic error to leave Serbia and its people in a kind of limbo without any direction , perspective or plan .
This is a strategic error that we must not commit and , to this end , we must do everything we can to prevent it .
I must also of course welcome the progress made in relation to the possibility of the free movement of Serbian nationals within the European space .
We must continue along this road .
Something has been done and this and the other initiatives that we are taking must be duly applauded .
We must also offer future prospects to the youth of Serbia as it is naturally through and with them that a democratic Serbia can be built which fully shares our values and principles and which aspires to be an integral part of the European Union .
Commissioner . - ( FI ) Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank everyone for an objective and responsible debate , as well as the rapporteur for a very factual report .
Judging from the discussion , there is broad consensus in Parliament and the Union as a whole that Serbia 's future is in the European Union and that the European Union 's door will be open to Serbia when the country meets the conditions , and that its government has the means to take Serbia into Europe .
The majority of Serbian citizens support and endorse this development .
The Serbian government is now playing the role very much of a guard : it has the keys in its hands .
I hope that the Serbian government will now use its keys and implement the will of the Serbian people - the will of the Serbs to turn towards the European Union .
You may be sure that we shall take note of the views expressed in the report , and that we will also include them in our own progress report .
( EL ) The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday 25 October 2007 .
EU-Africa relations ( debate )
( EL ) The next item is the report [ 2007 / 2002 ( ΙΝΙ ) ] ( Α6-0375 / 2007 ) by Mrs Martens , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the state of play of EU-Africa relations .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are discussing the report on the state of play of relations between the European Union and Africa .
This sets out a shared vision on the part of Africa and Europe on future cooperation with a view to promoting development in Africa and combating poverty .
The strategy must amount to more than just defending present policy .
It is about a vision , based on shared values and principles , on mutual respect , that is geared to the well-being of people .
Africa and Europe have a long shared history , but relations between them really have changed : it can no longer be one-way traffic .
Now it is about an equal partnership to tackle together problems that are affecting both continents , such as security , trade , migration and climate change .
The European Union produced a European strategy for Africa in 2005 .
I was also the rapporteur on that occasion .
In our view that strategy had two important shortcomings .
It was a strategy that was too much for Africa , but without involving Africa , and Parliament and civil society were not sufficiently involved in the development of this strategy .
I am pleased that we are now talking about a Joint EU-Africa Strategy and that Parliament and civil society will be more involved this time .
This cooperation augurs very well for the future .
Madam President , this strategy should provide us with the structure and direction for joint action in the future .
The fight against poverty and the Millennium Development Goals must continue to occupy centre stage .
Although the most recent MDG figures permit a degree of optimism , in sub-Saharan Africa 41.1 % of people still live on 1 dollar a day .
This situation cannot be improved with development aid alone .
It is also necessary to foster economic growth .
The economic partnership agreements being negotiated at the moment could be a good instrument for this , provided - and I stress this point - they have sustainable development at their core and provided they are more than just European trade agreements .
I would very much like to hear from the Commissioner about the situation regarding the possible postponement of the deadline of 1 January 2008 .
Madam President , African governments are , of course , primarily responsible for development in their own countries .
They have become more independent , both politically and economically .
African development is in full swing , not least through the emergence on the scene of new institutions , such as NEPAD ( New Partnership for Africa 's Development ) and the African Peer Review Mechanism .
It is a long time since Europe was the sole and exclusive partner for financial and political support .
Other countries are beginning to exert their own influence in and on Africa in a very emphatic way : look at China , for example .
We can no longer take our relationship with Africa for granted .
Madam President , the report highlights three priority policy areas : peace and security , good governance , and economic growth and investment in people .
As far as European policy areas are concerned , the report draws attention to the importance of greater coherence between development activities on the one hand and other policy areas on the other hand , such as trade , agriculture and migration .
Only if Europe can make more coherent , better coordinated use of its support and improve its financial accounting can the development policy of the European Union become more effective and more efficient .
Peace and security are a grave problem in Africa .
The report emphasises the importance of an integrated approach to tackling conflict situations .
The top priority in this area should be our responsibility to protect people and to make a contribution to preventing and resolving conflicts , as well as reconstruction .
Obviously good governance , a functioning rule of law and stable democracy are conditions for stability and development .
Capacity building in these areas is vitally important . We support the Commission 's ambitions in this area .
Madam President , the second EU-Africa Summit is to take place in Lisbon in December after a gap of seven years .
The Joint EU-Africa Strategy and the Action Plan will be decided on there .
There is a great deal at stake and it is in all our interests that this summit is a success .
Moreover , although the situation in Zimbabwe is a cause for very grave concern , we should remember that this is an EU-Africa summit and not an EU-Zimbabwe summit , that it is about a people-centred approach and not a president-centred partnership .
It is good that the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament will get the opportunity at the summit to articulate the parliamentary view on the joint strategy .
The delegations from the Pan-African Parliament and our Parliament met last week to prepare a joint declaration .
I hope that our Presidents will be able to present this to the heads of government at the summit .
Madam President , of course there is a great deal more to say on this but my time is up , I see , and so I will leave it at that , but not without first thanking my colleagues and the Commission for a very fruitful cooperation .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteur , Europe , Africa and the world have changed a great deal in the last decade .
Europe is now a block of 27 Member States bringing together at times extremely diverse foreign policy priorities and approaches .
Although it is not fair to say that the African continent has been neglected , given the volume of public development aid that Europe makes available to this continent , we can , however , talk about a strategic vacuum in the relationship between Europe and Africa .
In recent years the negative consequences of this vacuum have become more apparent .
The European Union and Member States now recognise the need to bring relations with Africa onto a new level , with the second EU-Africa Summit being the right moment to clearly vocalise this desire .
There are various reasons justifying this new recognition of the importance of relations between the European Union and Africa : the widespread realisation that all the global challenges such as peace and security or international trade require concerted action on the part of the international community , thus justifying the emergence of new forms of cooperation ; the search for answers to problems affecting both Europe and Africa , particularly the effects of climate change ; the management of energy resources or migration flows ; the desire of Africa to collectively tackle common problems , and the need to adapt to specific geopolitical changes in the international context .
This new relationship between the EU and Africa is set out in the documents that we hope will be adopted during the December summit : the Joint EU-Africa Strategy , its First Action Plan and , we hope , the Lisbon Declaration .
These documents reflect the specific nature of the relationship between Europe and Africa .
They set out an approach which , on the one hand , favours multilateral channels and , on the other , aims to deal with the various aspects of our relationship in a more integrated manner .
This approach constitutes the difference that the EU can point to , particularly in comparison with other international actors .
Africa 's recognition as a strategic world partner is also reflected in the method used to prepare for both the summit and the documents to be adopted .
While the EU-Africa strategy adopted in 2005 is an EU document which is only binding on the Union , the new strategy - for the first time a joint strategy - and the action plan are the result of joint work with our African partners .
From the beginning the summit documents have been prepared by a joint group of experts and we hope that they will be endorsed at the EU-Africa Ministerial Troika Meeting to be held on 31 October , in a process that has also involved non-governmental actors and civil societies , both African and European .
The joint strategy and the first action plan are therefore the result of joint work .
As a result , their current wording reflects and responds to many of the concerns and suggestions contained in the report of Mrs Martens , a report which is clearly very complete and comprehensive .
The partnerships between the European Union and Africa identified both in the joint strategy and in the draft action plan must cover subjects of common interest .
Their fundamental criteria must be to add value to the cooperation and political dialogue that currently exist and , in our view , to ensure a positive impact on the everyday lives of European and African citizens .
The partnerships that we want to build will also seek to ensure a balance between the commitments made by both parties , which will alter the unilateral and assistance-based logic of the relationship between the EU and the ACP ( African , Caribbean and Pacific ) countries .
Experience has also shown that political commitments require implementation and monitoring mechanisms so that they translate into something more than just good intentions .
Between summits , in parallel with the regular meetings between the two Commissions and the Ministerial Troika , the possibility now exists of complementary sectoral ministerial meetings whenever appropriate .
However , a true change in the relationship between the EU and Africa can only come about if the process is also effectively taken on board by various other actors .
In this respect , we want to establish informal joint groups of experts for the implementation of each of the partnerships .
These will be open to participation by a large number of stakeholders : European and African parliaments , local authorities , European and African civil society , African sub-regional organisations , research institutes , specialised international organisations and institutes , and the private sector .
At the same time , cooperation and dialogue between the Pan-African Parliament and this House will be extended and these institutions will also act as channels for the implementation of the joint strategy and action plan .
Although such profound changes cannot occur instantly , we are at a crossroads for change in the relations between the two continents .
The challenge facing us is to take full advantage of this opportunity , by starting to implement this new strategic vision for EU-African dialogue .
It is with this goal in mind that we plan to hold , with confidence and an awareness that what we are doing must be done , the next EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December .

Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to congratulate and thank Mrs Martens for her most excellent report , which raises various issues and offers a number of useful leads , and which certainly provides us with a source of inspiration as Parliament 's contribution to what is in fact an extremely important subject , and one that calls for a new approach in the area of EU-Africa relations .
As you all know , 2007 will be a special year for the future of relations between Europe and Africa .
Five years after the report on the Lisbon Summit of 2003 , and no less than seven years after the first Africa-Europe Summit that was held in Cairo in 2000 , it seems to me that we urgently need to redefine this relationship on a new basis .
Africa has changed profoundly in recent years and has acquired a continental institutional architecture that resembles our own in many respects .
The new institution that is the African Union now needs to be strengthened and consolidated .
This institution has developed ambitious continental policies in key areas such as socio-economic development , peace and security , and indeed good governance too , and all these elements clearly deserve our support and recognition .
Africa has now undeniably taken on an international dimension .
Here I am thinking of the diverse nature of its relations with the international community , as mentioned by Mrs Martens , and I am thinking about the new role that China is playing , for example , and its influence on investment projects in that continent .
I am also thinking , of course , of the global challenges that Africa , like all the other world players , has to face , namely climate change , energy supply , reform of multilateral institutions , the risk of pandemics , emigration and so on , and it is evident that Africa must make itself heard , must bring its influence to bear and , above all , must assert its rights .
For after all , these global challenges that I have just listed are ours too .
All these challenges and issues are common to us both and , what is more , they serve to highlight the interdependence that exists between Europe and Africa .
For we share the same destiny .
A joint strategy of a more political nature may make a difference to Africa and indeed to Europe too , and it has to be said to the rest of the world . The two continents therefore urgently need to establish a new framework and acquire a new set of instruments in order to place the EU-AU dialogue on a much higher level .
The Joint EU-Africa Strategy that we have developed in recent months with our African partners should provide this framework .
However , this does not mean that we turn our backs on the traditional relationship of solidarity . Instead we need to take a qualitative leap that will usher EU-Africa relations into a new era , one that brings together two partners with equal rights and equal responsibilities .
These are the concerns that have been very well documented in the report and I can only support the significant new ideas that Parliament has put forward for monitoring and supporting the implementation of this strategy and the action plans that will follow from it .
In this regard I view the setting up of a joint EP / PAP ( Pan-African Parliament ) delegation as crucial for completing the institutional architecture that will have to be put in place .
To this I would add the regular meetings that will have to be held between the Presidents of these two institutions , together with the joint organisation of hearings and the preparation , also on a joint basis , of political reports detailing the progress that has been achieved .
All this will be essential to maintain the momentum of the process and to give it the political vigour that it will need to succeed .
We are aware that this approach also calls for solid and stable institutions to be set up by the African Union , bodies that will be capable of acting and interacting with our own .
It is clearly with this in mind that we shall continue to support the African Union as it transforms and strengthens its institutions .
As an early confirmation of this commitment I am pleased to be able to announce that the first action plan put forward by the Pan-African Parliament will be funded to the tune of EUR 275 000 from the institutional support programme , which is currently financed by the ninth European Development Fund .
This was one of the particular concerns that was expressed to me by Chairman Borrell .
I hope that this initial funding will allow the Pan-African Parliament to participate fully in the initiative you have taken towards organising a joint parliamentary event in advance of the Lisbon Summit in December , as the results of your work can then be presented to the heads of state at the summit .
Finally , as I have said on a number of occasions , the involvement and commitment of the civilian populations of our two continents and of the elected assemblies that represent them constitute an essential factor in the success of an effective process of dialogue and cooperation between Europe and Africa .
Perhaps we sometimes tend to forget , but we are speaking here about the common destiny of 1.5 billion human beings and it is they who are the most important actors in the partnership that we are now setting up .
Mrs Martens , I am completely in agreement with the need for coordination ; this is why we proposed the code of conduct , which should provide for a better division of labour between the different donors , which means greater harmony .
I believe that we have been consistent in this regard because , as you know , in the tenth European Development Fund we have provided a special financial envelope for governance , which is one of the aspects , and clearly a very important one at that , of the political dialogue that we intend to establish with our African partners .
As far as the EPAs ( Economic Partnership Agreements ) are concerned , I have no doubt that I will have to respond to questions on this subject after your interventions . I shall therefore save my reply for the interventions , so as not to say too much at the moment and therefore take up too much time .
My last reference is to something that the President-in-Office of the Council also highlighted : there is no denying the importance of the EU-Africa Summit .
It is now time to hold such an event because the momentum is there , and it is for a change in objectives .
In some respects it is for a change in the nature of the relations between our two continents .
We need to leave behind the traditional - we might even say banal - relationship , this fairly archaic partnership of beneficiary and donor , or donor and beneficiary , and move on to a much more political association involving two partners with equal rights and responsibilities .
In my view this is clearly much more important .
So that is it for now , and I am sure that I will be returning to some of these points when you have had the opportunity to put questions of a more specific nature to me .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which I represent as draftsman , is in favour of all these efforts .
It is concerned about Africa and it supports everything that has been said . It only wants to know whether we are really bold enough for the task .
What we cannot write , although our report suggests it and indeed I am able to say it , is that when it comes to Africa there is a lot of politically correct and asphyxiating hypocrisy that has to be got rid of before we can really achieve our objectives .
As regards enabling Africa to develop by allowing its products access to our markets , it must be remembered that some forty African countries have nothing whatsoever to export .
This slogan is quite simply dishonest .
Not a single African country is self-sufficient in foodstuffs .
They have to import to eat , while exports from here and from Brazil are killing off the local subsistence agriculture .
We have to help Africa to protect itself . This is the message that we have repeated in the report .
Of course corruption acts as a destructive blight on Africa .
Yet this problem is endemic in extremely poor countries .
We therefore need to start with the big fish and focus on them . This means the usual well-known suspects , even if they are ministers , and those on our own side who engage in bribery .
Small-scale corruption will only disappear with economic development .
Let us not start accusing them of the very same things we were doing a few centuries ago , for our expansion and development too were based on corruption .
Finally , a dictatorship cannot become a democracy even with the help of trade and foreign aid .
However , it can become an enlightened despotism .
Putting an end to torture and abduction , allowing freedom of expression and establishing the independence of the courts and their control over the police all have to take priority over the pluralist elections that are organised simply to please the West , while all the time they are abducting people and murdering journalists and election candidates .
The conditions that we impose should take account of these factors .
There is still much to be said on this subject .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Martens has prepared an excellent report that was unanimously adopted by the Committee on Development .
For the first time ever Africa and Europe are slowly beginning to work in partnership and establish a common approach to the development of democracy , support for development and strengthening peace and security across the African continent .
I share the hope expressed by the representatives of the Council and the Commission that this report will prove a good source of inspiration in the run-up to the Lisbon EU-Africa Summit .
Many of the provisions in the report , and more especially their implementation , will be of crucial importance to the development of relations between Europe and Africa .
It will be difficult to make progress in our mutual relations without improving the consistency of various Union policies , such as the trade , development , environmental protection , agriculture and migration policies .
It is also important to honour the decisions and commitments made in the past .
In 2005 the Council of the European Union determined that at least 50 % more resources for development aid would be allocated to African countries .
In my own country , Poland , development aid has increased significantly in recent years .
The difficulty is that last year barely 1.4 % of all Polish bilateral aid was allocated to sub-Saharan Africa .
The fact that certain Member States have been slow to ratify the revised Cotonou Agreement and the internal agreement regarding the 10th European Development Fund is also cause for concern .
As things stand at present , only half the Member States of the Union have ratified the Partnership Agreement with the ACP ( African , Caribbean and Pacific ) countries due to enter into force on 1 January 2008 .
If full ratification does not take place , it will be very difficult to carry forward the African programmes and the plans for supporting Africa will remain on the drawing board .
I therefore urge Members of this House to put pressure on their national parliaments and governments to ensure the revised Cotonou Agreement is ratified .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has always strongly supported the principle that those people directly affected should have control over development strategies , as this means that their priorities are really taken into account .
In this report we have therefore naturally emphasised that national parliaments and civil society need to be involved in the new EU-Africa strategy .
This involvement has to a large extent been missing from the preparations that are currently being made for this new strategy , which seeks to open up a new form of strategic partnership .
We urgently need to put this right .
In this context we very much welcome the initiative by the Portuguese Presidency to invite delegations from the European and Pan-African Parliaments to attend the December summit in Lisbon .
Let us hope that this is not just a symbolic gesture .
We have also insisted - and Mrs Martens mentioned this just now - that there must be real coherence between the different European policies .
This means that the measures adopted as part of our policies on trade , agriculture , fisheries and immigration , for example , have to take special account of any repercussions there may be for development in the countries of the South and in Africa in particular .
We have also recalled that the European Union promised to do everything possible to achieve the Millennium Development Goals and to take all necessary steps to eradicate poverty .
With this in mind we are insisting that the new EU-Africa strategy should clearly state its commitments and specify the concrete measures needed to ensure that they are honoured as far as Africa is concerned .
As regards the Economic Partnership Agreements our position is quite clear : we are in no way opposed , either ideologically or on any other basis , to the signing of agreements sanctioning the terms of a partnership that would be beneficial to Europeans and to the peoples of the ACP ( African , Caribbean and Pacific ) countries alike .
However , we will resolutely oppose any agreement that , once signed , puts the peoples of Africa , in particular , in a position that is less favourable than the one they know today .
This is the aim of the amendment that we have tabled .
Finally , I would like to point out that , as things stand at present , we still do not know the wording that is to be put forward at the next Lisbon Summit .
You informed us that the document in question was being drafted .
We shall therefore pay very close attention to the manner in which the recommendations we have made in our report are taken into account in the drafting of this document and shall naturally reserve the right to react accordingly as soon as the text is made known to us .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Maria Martens 's report contains a number of interesting recommendations , though I have to admit that my Group has a bit of a problem with the rather negative undertone and the lack of a clear , coherent vision for the future in the report .
Seven years after the first summit in Cairo , the Portuguese Presidency together with the Commission is trying to draw up a new EU-Africa strategy in an - I really do think - honest attempt to divest themselves of the old model of donors and beneficiaries .
The fact that this summit is taking place is extremely important , and not only for negative reasons , not only out of an anxious reaction to the growing influence of China .
On the contrary , the growing realisation on both sides that Europe and Africa are no longer each other 's exclusive preferential partners creates a unique opportunity to develop a totally new , more balanced relationship .
At first sight the water between Europe and Africa does not look all that deep .
It is essential for Africa that each new partnership should get away from the traditional aid dependency and the culture of charity and conditionality .
Calls for more industrialisation , more development of the private sector and more investment in the knowledge economy are getting louder and louder .
Awareness is also growing in Africa , fortunately , that people have to be responsible for solving their own problems in the first instance .
Europe should now make clear how it will support these promising developments , without falling into the trap of paternalism and interference .
Any future partnership between the EU and Africa will inevitably have to be based on the principle of mutual accountability .
In that sense , an unconditional abolition of agricultural subsidies could , more than any other gesture , strengthen the credibility of the EU among its African friends .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office and the Commissioner for their intervention but also in particular our rapporteur , Ms Martens , for her work on this issue , because the reality is that we are dealing with a new partnership , a new arrangement between the European Union and Africa .
I congratulate the Council for coming forward with the EU-Africa Summit in December and I would hope that the summit will not rest on whether or not one single person attends that summit .
There is too much at stake with regard to the relationship between Europe and Africa to be determined by whether or not Robert Mugabe will be there .
We all know and criticise the actions of Robert Mugabe in Zimbabwe .
We all defend the rights of democratic institutions and democratic movements within Zimbabwe and we all call for the protection of those democratic rights , but that should not hinder the proper development and the proper work that must go on between the European Union and Africa as a whole .
The issues with regard to governance , the issues with regard to development aid and , in particular , the issues with regard to free trade are vitally important for future developments of Africa .
When we speak about development , the European Union is the largest donor of aid in the world .
Ireland , my own country , per capita is the sixth largest donor of aid in the world .
But that should not be about giving aid to get something back .
That should be about giving people the freedom to free themselves , to trade out of difficulties , to create education , health and infrastructure to ensure they will no longer rely on or be dependent on aid in the future .
There are issues with regard to China 's involvement because China does not give the same credence to governance , lack of corruption , openness and transparency that Europe does . We should take cognisance of the influence that China has in that developing world .
Thank you very much , Madam President , for your licence .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , in spite of stated intentions we cannot really say that any new elements have been introduced to the debates that have been taking place in recent months on the partnership between the European Union and Africa .
Of course peace and the rule of law must be absolute priorities ; the EU is now playing an increasing role in this respect and this is only to be welcomed .
We also have to ensure that the support provided for the organisation of elections , for example , is subjected to real care and scrutiny so that the communities concerned see the practical benefits that democracy can bring to their everyday lives .
As far as the other measures are concerned I would say that all in all the European Union 's proposals are fairly typical , lying somewhere between promoting good governance and free trade , with the accent on economic development and the provision of health care .
However , while there are burning issues to be dealt with , these EU-Africa strategies , in our opinion , fail to deal with two key problems .
Firstly there is food security , which has to be seen in the context of rising prices for basic foodstuffs , especially cereals , and the upsurge in biofuels , along with the need to protect and develop agriculture , although the next European Development Fund - like most of the governments in Africa - has only allocated a small percentage of its budget to this objective .
Even the World Bank recently stressed that a rethink was needed in this area , and that is saying something .
The question of food provision has now become absolutely crucial , as has the future of small farmers who are all too often neglected by development aid policies .
The second key aspect is that Africa , as you know , is an immense reservoir of natural resources that the African people , unfortunately , are unable to profit from , even though the price of these commodities has risen enormously .
All the major economic powers , along with emerging nations like China , are rushing to get their hands on these resources which are becoming increasingly rare .
This latter-day gold rush , this hunger for materials , is now having extremely brutal social and environmental repercussions and is continuing to fuel wars and corruption .
In the light of all this the European Union is talking in theoretical , even angelic tones , while all the time it too is engaged in exploiting Africa 's natural resources .
How then do we rationalise , manage and share access to these reserves in such a way that the communities concerned really derive benefit from them without seeing their environment vandalised ?
This is a major question and one that the EU-Africa strategy needs to take more seriously , for it will be imposed on us in any case , given the speed of events in this sector .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to Mrs Martens , especially for the way in which we were able to work together in committee , for her attentiveness and also for the divergences that emerged , the differences between us ; but I think the outcome , apart from a few points , is a very significant one .
EU-Africa relations have come a long way since the Cairo Declaration of 2000 .
Much has changed in Africa , a continent that is full of diversity and wracked by war .
Progress has been made with the formation of the African Union , the policy of unity in diversity .
The Pan-African Parliament has adopted the motto ' one Africa , one voice ' . Social movements in Africa are vibrant and calling for what Mr Öger was referring to just now .
They are vibrant and forming themselves into networks , and they had a very high profile at the Nairobi Social Forum .
There has also been real progress in the formulation not of a European policy on Africa but a joint African and European policy of partnership .
The meetings between the Pan-African Parliament and the European Parliament , and their presence at the Lisbon Summit , are putting into practice what we said in the document was lacking , namely the role of this House .
We are not only demanding a role but also to perform it in practice , and I think the assistance from Louis Michel has been extremely important , obviously in addition to that of the Portuguese Presidency .
Nonetheless , our differences of opinion are clear .
The various aspects of the strategy are important , but we must carry them forward with coherent policies , and I am referring here to arms sales and trade .
We must therefore proceed along this road , in the knowledge that the road is strewn with obstacles .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , education is the bridge from misery to hope .
It is a tool for daily life in modern society .
It is the bulwark against poverty and the building block of development .
Thus Kofi Annan described the strategy in the Millennium Goals , which are similar to those in the EU development strategy for Africa .
It places education alongside trade as key to the development of the continent .
Despite this , the EU is set to join wealthy nations like the USA , Australia , Canada and New Zealand in systematically exporting the skilled and educated from Africa and Asia .
Commissioner Frattini announced last month that , to ensure Europe will get ' the migrants its economy needs ' , over the next 20 years the EU would import 20 million skilled workers from these continents through the blue card system , similar to the American Green Card .
Though having a steady supply of skilled workers to fill in the gaps left by our ageing workforce will have benefits for us , this kind of braindraining will be devastating for the poor and underdeveloped countries of Africa .
Europe is also engaged in asset-stripping among Africa 's poor .
Children are our countries ' future , yet EU development funds are routinely tied to population control programmes aiming at eliminating future Africans .
The EU Green Paper on demography clearly states that , without population growth , there will be no economic growth .
Africa is now the only continent in the world with a birth rate above replacement .
If we keep our Millennium Goals and if we keep our promises , Africa will emerge in this century as a world leader .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , no one can deny that this report describes in great detail the many problems of the African continent , and the various challenges for the partnership between the European Union and Africa .
However , although I have the utmost confidence in the rapporteur 's expertise in the field of development policy , I still think that this report fails to put sufficient emphasis on the fundamental cause of Africa 's problems and does not come up with answers to some very basic challenges .
It may not be politically correct to say so but that is the way it is .
Contrary to what this report claims , Africa and the European Union do not currently share the same way of thinking about more democracy , good governance and human rights .
The main cause of the poverty , the hunger , the lack of security and the socio-economic problems plaguing the continent - and which are rightly listed in this report - is in fact the very bad and corrupt regimes which make no effort at all to observe good governance , democracy and human rights .
No one , for instance , disputes any more that Robert Mugabe is a criminal who has brought his country to its knees and who terrorises his own population .
What though do the developing countries of southern Africa have to say ?
That the elections were conducted properly and that western countries should mind their own business .
I really do have my doubts about the promises made by these same leaders on good governance .
This report rightly looks at peace and security .
In Africa , with its innumerable undemocratic regimes , spending on weapons always far outstrips the massive amount of development aid that goes to those countries , according to Oxfam .
All of these problems come back , therefore , to the same cause .
Finally , I have to say that I do not agree with the section on immigration , because anyone who thinks that the concept of circular migration can put a stop to the brain drain from Africa and the pressure of immigration on Europe is , I fear , seriously deluding themselves as far as this is concerned .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to thank our rapporteur for her sound and comprehensive report .
There is a broad consensus on the general principles here in the House .
The EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December cannot come too soon .
I welcome the fact that we will be agreeing a joint strategy .
The European Parliament 's position on the special case of Mr Mugabe has been known for years .
However , this gentleman must not become a stumbling block to a new chapter in European-African relations .
I believe there are enough European heads of government who have a clear and unequivocal message for that gentleman .
That is why he needs to be present and endure the message that will be delivered .
As Chairman of the delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament , may I express some specific parliamentary wishes for the future cooperation which we agreed last week in Midrand .
Africa 's parliaments have tended to be neglected institutions .
They have an important constitutional role on paper but their own governments and , indeed , donors tend not to take them very seriously .
Yet with proper resources and after successful and comprehensive capacity-building for Members and staff in the parliamentary administrations , committees and groups , these parliaments have the potential to perform their true role of exercising proper political scrutiny of the executive .
The irresistible appeal of this scenario is also that we would thus have scrutinising bodies at local level with democratic legitimacy , and when problems arise , their criticisms would be more likely to be accepted than those of foreign donors .
I therefore urge the Commission to incorporate parliamentary capacity-building on a targeted basis into its country programmes , so that in a few years time , we can genuinely see that African politics have become much more responsive , in practice , to the public 's needs , also thanks to the involvement of the national parliaments .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to compliment Mrs Martens on her work and acknowledge the political will of the EU and the African Union to build a joint strategy comprising numerous subjects of interest to both communities : from security to the environment , from migration to development and the promotion of human rights and democracy .
In order for this strategy to be truly effective , the EU must build this partnership as of now , properly involving civil society and local parliaments . The EU must promote tangible , incisive action to safeguard human rights , freedom of expression and association and the principle of democracy , so that economic and social development on the African continent can be truly sustainable and involve all strata of African society .
Furthermore , I would echo other colleagues in calling for the strongest possible commitment from the EU to achieving the Millennium Development Goals , combating AIDS - which is decimating the working population - and elaborating European policies that are genuinely consistent with the spirit of development cooperation , above all in the context of international trade .
( LT ) I would like to congratulate Mrs Martens on her report on the state of play of EU-Africa relations and for the proposed measures for improving these relations .
It is a shame that Africa is still the poorest continent of the world .
Despite the international aid granted by the EU and other countries , the poverty level has not been reduced ; in fact it has increased .
The Millennium Goals still need to be achieved .
This is happening in Africa , the continent of the world richest in natural resources .
The main reason for this is because raw materials are exported at the lowest prices , while high prices are paid for finished products .
The situation could be transformed through the development of the processing industry , small- and medium-sized enterprises , the introduction of new work places and the encouragement of regional cooperation .
There is no doubt , as pointed out in the report and highlighted continuously by the European Parliament , that education remains one of the key factors in the development of Africa 's independent economy .
On the subject of the future of Africa , I would like to mention the military conflicts that continue to plague certain areas , such as Sudan , for years on end .
On the one hand , this situation spells insecurity for both local and foreign investors .
On the other hand , some countries exploit the conflicts for the purpose of increasing the production of raw materials under advantageous conditions .
The EU and the international community should put more effort into resolving the military conflicts in Africa .
This would boost the efficiency of the implementation of the Development Cooperation Programme .
( DE ) Madam President , a very important factor in African development policy is trade , and trade , if it is used properly , can of course help to reduce poverty and it can also help to improve health care in Africa .
It can help improve education and it can help eliminate illiteracy .
However , it cannot do so in the way the Commission sees it .
I am very pleased that - either because common sense has prevailed , or because pressure from the African countries has become so intense - since last Monday , the Commission is taking a different approach to the Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) .
As a result , there are no more nonsensical demands for reciprocity in market liberalisation and no more insistence on the inclusion of the Singapore issues .
There is now an agreement that individual topics will be taken out so that now the talks will only focus on goods , with other issues being discussed at a later date .
If we were to pursue the same approach with the Doha Development Round , then perhaps we might achieve some success there as well , for this is why it has repeatedly failed until now .
That is why the WTO has failed and the Doha Development Round has failed , because the Commission always insists on sending out the same message .
It says , ' you need to understand that we only want the best for you , and if you do not grasp that , then we will not get an agreement ' .
Fortunately , if we look at the report by this Parliament - which in this case was much cleverer than the Commission - that was drafted by my colleague Mr Sturdy back in 2006 , it is clear that Commissioner Mandelson could have conceded much earlier on to the demands that he now has to bow to , and perhaps we would not have let things go this far .
You yourself appeared before us in committee and we asked you quite specifically about it .
What was your response ?
You said that Commissioner Mandelson is doing a wonderful job !
Frankly , the Council also has a responsibility here , given that it will have to endorse the Partnership Agreement at the end of the process .
It could get involved in the negotiations once in a while , rather than simply saying , ' we 'll let the Commissioner get on with it until he finally comes up with something ' .
No , you have a responsibility and in my view , when it comes to the EPAs , you have not fulfilled this responsibility , at least judging by your statements to our committee .
Madam President , I am rather surprised to find myself agreeing with a colleague from the other side of the House so wholeheartedly .
I congratulate Ms Martens on her report .
There have been a lot of excellent words said in this Chamber this afternoon , but we have failed Africa .
We have failed Africa in the past and , as the rapporteur on EPAs , I hope that this European Union will not fail Africa again .
Yesterday the Commission published a communication on EPAs , which at long last acknowledged the impossibility of completing negotiations by the end of 2007 , as was previously planned and reported in my report .
But the Commission continues to insist that Africa , Caribbean and Pacific countries must commit to signing up fully to EPAs in 2008 and that some countries in the region should sign up to EPAs while others do not .
Is that not unbelievably farcical !
Too much is unclear and uncertain in these talks , with so little time left .
The communication is deliberately vague and , while I understand what it is , it worries me : I never sign up to a deal about something that I do not understand , and yet we are asking Africa to do precisely that .
Furthermore , these new proposals to create subregional agreements within regions with African countries which are willing to sign up would create a spaghetti-like mess of different agreements in neighbouring countries .
The idea that other countries and ACP regions should join later would mean them signing up to a deal they had not negotiated .
How is that a good idea ?
Were EPAs not meant to be about regional integration ?
So who is focusing on implementation , monitoring mechanisms and impact assessments while negotiating parties struggle to find an agreement on these smaller packages ?
ACP countries should not have to choose between trade agreements which may damage their local / regional markets or barriers which cripple their export markets .
There is still a choice to be made , and last-minute policy shifts from the Commission do nothing to restore the confidence of the disconnected .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioners , Minister , this debate should move us further along the road to Lisbon and the summit , and we must thank the Portuguese Presidency for having focused its attentions on the relations between Europe and Africa .
We hope that it will help Europeans to understand , finally , that their destiny is inextricably linked to that of Africa , that we can understand that Africa 's development is a condition for our prosperity and that we will not be able to control the migratory flows or have a secure energy supply without a strong partnership with Africa .
We must be clear that it is not to help the poor people , but in our own interest .
We must also be clear that the Africans sometimes listen to our declarations with little confidence and see them as rhetorical because we have not yet got beyond the colonial past to establish this solid partnership between equals that we all desire , that we announce , but that is still far from the reality .
The job of modernising Africa is a huge one .
The Africans have a great responsibility in this respect , but so do we .
Without us - without our help , without our cooperation - they will not get out of the situation described in the Martens report , because they need not just trade but also aid and equal relationships to enable them to move beyond their past , for which , clearly , we are partly responsible .
( SV ) Thank you Madam President .
In December , the first summit for several years will take place between the African Union and the EU .
It is an important meeting for the EU , which has a great responsibility for supporting economic and democratic development in Africa .
The Portuguese Presidency deserves credit for this initiative .
The EU must become more active on the African continent .
What concerns me , unlike Brian Crowley , is that Zimbabwe 's dictator Robert Mugabe will probably be attending the summit .
It is not worthy of the European Union to sit at the same negotiating table as Mugabe .
Mugabe 's misrule and corruption are paralysing the entire country .
The political opposition are harassed and thrown into prison , free speech does not exist , there are food shortages in a country which was once Africa 's granary , and hundreds of thousands of people have no homes .
The economy is falling to pieces , inflation is more than 7 000 % , the average age is the lowest in the world , and 25 % of the population are infected with HIV .
Madam President , Commissioner , Manuel Lobo Antunes , one way to show our disgust at Mugabe 's dictatorial ways is for the EU not to accept his presence at the summit .
Mugabe 's terrible rule must be ended .
Dictatorships need plain speaking , my friends . Thank you .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Martens , for this important report .
On the one hand , it is a clear indication to the Commission that the parliamentary dimension must this time have a role in the drafting of the Joint EU-Africa Strategy .
The fact that the Commission ignored not just its opposite number , but also Parliament , when it was preparing the EU Strategy for Africa in 2005 , has , unfortunately , been a common approach for the Commission .
On the other hand , the report , to its credit , raises a number of important questions of content which need an answer , and the matter of the strategy to adopt .
Firstly , history clearly shows that universal human rights require universal protection if they are to be realised .
For this reason it is vital that the priorities for peace and security in the EU 's Africa strategy incorporate a view which recognises the concept of the responsibility to protect , and promotes it .
We have a responsibility to protect , and that must also be the subject of a debate within the EU .
Secondly , as the report laudably stresses , climate change must be a top priority in the strategy .
Water , its quality and sufficiency , will , with energy , become a serious political problem , and then Africa will be its very first victim .
I would nevertheless like to remind everyone that Africa 's most serious environmental problems are for the present erosion and overgrazing .
Climate change obviously makes things worse .
Adaptation and support measures are needed .
Besides , for the EU Africa is a natural partner in international contexts in the fight against climate change .
Thirdly , I would like to stress the importance of small businesses and local entrepreneurship as a condition of sustainable and real economic development in Africa .
We should ensure that the action we take supports it .
Only the local population itself can get Africa on its feet .
( PT ) I must congratulate Mrs Martens on this important report at a time when the EU is redefining its relationship with Africa , largely due to the emergence of China as a player in that continent .
However , the EU-Africa relationship can only move forward if the dual-aspect approach of development and security is coherent , particularly with regard to human rights , democracy and good governance .
Given the importance of the joint strategy and its associated action plan to be adopted at the EU-Africa Summit , I want to ask the Portuguese Presidency to duly inform the European Parliament about the progress made in the negotiation of these documents and their contents .
This will be useful for ensuring that the measures set out in the joint strategy and action plan subsequently become reality , with the support of the European Parliament and under the control of the various applicable financial instruments .
Here in this House we hope that the joint strategy and action plan will reflect the commitments made by the European Union , with due priority being given to the fight against poverty and to the Millennium Development Goals , particularly access to basic health care and education .
We want joint measures to be included on controlling trafficking in small arms and light weapons , which are the true weapons of mass destruction in Africa , and also measures for the empowerment of women and civil societies in whom lies the force for change , peace and development which Africa so desperately needs .
( CS ) Europe used to have a bad conscience over Africa due to its past colonial policies .
Today we are trying to help the developing countries enter the globalised world .
That is why the spotlight , in relation to these countries , has shifted to global challenges .
Besides disease , starvation and drinking water shortages , these issues also include security , trade , migration , brain-drain and climate change .
Besides charity , our task is to oversee responsible decision-making based on democratic principles on the part of the African institutions .
In this light I regard Commissioner Mandelson 's development strategy as hazardous as it focuses exclusively on trade relationships in the Pacific .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must insist that the Commission step up the capacity-building in the area of the human rights agenda .
Without it democracy in Africa or for that matter in any other place in the world does not stand a chance .
What troubles me is how deeply rooted the former communist block ideology is in Africa .
What is also worrying is the growing influence of the totalitarian Chinese market model , which mines African raw materials and takes work away from the African people .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Martens , on the comprehensive and balanced definition of the new strategy as set out in her excellent report .
We have to , however , also look to its financial framework and learn to read the outcomes from the appropriate indicators .
It also appears to me that the Commission does not sufficiently divulge to European citizens the importance of EU collaboration with its most immediate neighbour of Africa .
I hope that the December summit in Lisbon will adopt , based also on this report , a new vision of relations rooted in the human rights agenda .
I would like to conclude by saying that the summit will be fundamental for a shift in EU-African relations , therefore I do not approve of the fact that the Czech Republic and the UK intend to block this pan-African summit because of the participation of the dictator from Zimbabwe .
That said his presence ought to be categorically challenged and condemned .
( NL ) Madam President , relations between the European Union and the African countries have become unacceptably strained due to the negotiations with the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries about the Economic Partnership Agreements .
If these negotiations fail , then Cotonou will end in a black hole for a number of countries from 1 January because our trade relations will then become the far less favourable Generalised System of Preferences .
It would , however , be a disgrace if poor countries were to be penalised in this way , because they feel that the EU and the ACP countries are not equal partners at this moment .
We must give poor countries the right to protect their markets in sectors that are weak and which would keel over in the buffeting of free trade .
These negotiations stand in sharp contrast to the good principles and aims in Maria Martens 's report and I share those aims .
We , as Socialists , wanted to add that the trade and agriculture policy of the EU should not be allowed to stand in the way of development policy .
We need coherence , and it goes without saying that the policy should still be aimed at emancipation and women 's rights .
It is up to the Commission to develop this into a concrete policy .
After that the Commission will monitor development cooperation closely .
( PL ) Despite the several billion euros allocated to Africa , poverty is getting worse in that continent , as the sound report prepared by Mrs Martens indicates .
I have not consulted with Mr Antunes , the representative of the Portuguese Presidency , or with Mr Van Hecke , but I wish to emphasise that cooperation with local African entities is a sine qua non for financial aid to be effective .
The economy needs assistance regarding the introduction of technology , awakening the spirit of entrepreneurship , encouraging citizens ' commitment and supporting individual initiative .
Missionaries , for example , are engaged in such activities even though they do not have any funds , whereas the Union is not involved despite being able to count on substantial financial resources .
One of the main challenges is education , that is to say , investment in human capital , which brings great benefits . Africa has also entered into certain commitments too , however .
These include halting the import of arms and introducing certain legal provisions , notably regarding the right of property , which is essential for the development of the economy . I should like to conclude by saying that the role of governments must be understood as serving the people , and not benefiting from our aid as symbolised by the luxury cars used by representatives of African authorities .


( FR ) Madam President , the Africa of today has two faces : first there is the one of extreme poverty and human tragedy , as in the case of Darfur and Somalia , and then there is the other face , which is all too often ignored , of a continent that in spite of everything is innovating , that is becoming more democratic , although too slowly , and that little by little is returning to the path of growth .
The new EU-Africa strategy therefore needs to take this dual reality into account and support this still fragile process by means of a genuine political partnership : one that is based on unity , for it is Africa in its entirety , through the voice of the African Union , that has to be our main point of contact ; on equity with an agenda that has been drawn up together and not imposed by the North , and on humility , for Europe is not the one and only partner Africa has .
The EU must also support the process by using the Millennium Development Goals as a roadmap , by keeping to its promises and meeting the financial commitments made by the EU and by the Member States and , finally , by recognising the role played by the African parliaments .
The Martens report is in fact the message that we are sending today to the Commission and the Council , and we shall be in Lisbon in December to see if this message has actually got through .
( PT ) Madam President , as stated in Mrs Martens 's report with which I agree to a large extent , the fact that the current EU strategy for Africa was not established in partnership with the people of Africa is one obvious limitation on its potential .
This was a mistake that must and will be corrected in the next EU strategy which must reinforce the role of the African Union and be based on concepts of partnership and equality .
The issues causing concern that must be covered include peace , the problem of displaced persons and the fight against serious diseases such as AIDS and malaria .
Development must be our goal and trade one of its weapons .
To this end , we need to support small and medium-sized enterprises and promote equitable international trade .
However , we will only be successful in this strategy if we can help to reinforce democracy and human rights across the continent .
In reformulating and renewing the EU strategy for Africa , the new local and global circumstances must be taken into account .
The fact that we are talking today with an African Union is in itself significant .
On the other hand , the generalised increase in consumption of both oil and food implies a need to increase global production capacity and , in that regard , Africa is a continent rich in oil and gas , but also with enormous agricultural potential to be exploited .
Finally there is the issue of the summit .
There is no need to hold a summit in order to determine a strategy for Africa .
However , as the Portuguese Presidency has gone down this route , it would be wrong not to continue to the end , otherwise we will lose an opportunity to positively impact on the life of Africans .
The talks cannot only be about debt cancellation as greater wealth in the world can and must be , Madam President , an opportunity for greater wealth in Africa .
This wealth must benefit its people and not just its elite .
International cooperation cannot continue to be a problem for Africa , as someone else has said .
That is why we must improve this so that education , promotion of health , democratisation and development can be ensured .

( ES ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and say that I agree with Mr Michel about the creation of a new type of partnership and relations between Europe and Africa .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Lobo Antunes on the Portuguese Presidency 's organisation of a Europe-Africa summit .
However , while that new type of relationship is being built , official development assistance continues to be , and will remain for some years , a very useful instrument in Europe 's relations with Africa , and not just Europe as a whole but the Member States too .
We should promote healthy competition between the Member States in terms of improving the quantity and quality of development aid .
My country , Spain , has tripled its aid in this parliamentary term and compared with the previous government has increased its contributions from EUR 200 million in 2004 to an expected EUR 850 million in 2008 .
Spain is now the second largest donor of development aid in the world and it is also the country on the Development Assistance Committee whose contribution has increased most in that time .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I must thank you for your comments , suggestions and even criticisms of what the Presidency is proposing in its plans for EU-Africa relations .
I have of course taken due note of all these suggestions , observations and criticisms .
I should like to make it very clear that what we are proposing in terms of a new relationship with Africa has two aspects that I would say are innovative , or at least we hope they are innovative or may prove to be so .
Firstly , we plan to establish an effective partnership with our African partners ; this partnership must also prove to be effective in terms of ownership .
As I have already mentioned , the strategy that we are developing for Africa is not a unilateral strategy .
It is a joint strategy , in other words a strategy that is being drafted , analysed and debated together so that what results and what is proposed is actually what our African friends are hoping for and expecting from us and what we would also of course like to receive , in a positive sense , from our African partners .
On the other hand , we also want to increase the number of actors involved in this strategy so that it does not just involve governments as usual .
In addition to governments , we want other public institutions , parliaments , as I have already mentioned , and also broad sections of civil society , their representatives and actors to be involved .
The second aspect which in my view is extremely important is that we want to modernise the agenda between the European Union and Africa .
We want this to respond to the new global challenges , to take account of the profound changes that are occurring in the world and , in particular , to genuinely offer Africa the opportunity to become fully integrated within the new world order .
That is why we are going to discuss and debate with Africa such new and modern issues as the energy issue , the climate change issue , and issues linked to migration , mobility and employment , but obviously without forgetting those issues which continue to be fundamental in our traditional partnership , such as peace , security , democratic governance and human rights , and also issues linked to science and the information society .
I believe this agenda is comprehensive , ambitious and , as I have said , thoroughly modern .
We must modernise our agenda with Africa as this must be able to effectively respond to current needs .
I would also say that the Portuguese Presidency and Portugal have never hesitated to name dictators in Africa or in any other part of the world and consequently to denounce them and we will continue to do so whenever necessary .
Finally , I must also say a word of thanks for the work carried out jointly with the Commission in preparing everything for the second EU-Africa Summit .
We have received from the Commission and from the Commissioners with specific responsibility in these areas , namely trade , external action and humanitarian aid , very committed and high-quality support and we are sure that we are all working towards a common goal of making the difference in Africa and for Africa .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the Council for having responded so fully to the interventions , and would add that I endorse the points that have been raised .
I too share many of the concerns that have been expressed .
The Commission is endeavouring to apply greater coherence to its overseas activities and , as a matter of fact , the nature of the dialogue between Europe and Africa should gradually allow us to eliminate some of the contradictions , including those highlighted by Mr Rocard .
It goes without saying that we sometimes pursue contradictory policies : you only have to think of the subsidies paid to agriculture .
This is a contradiction .
Unfortunately , a choice has to be made here between divergent interests and this sometimes just has to be accepted .
I see that Europe is probably the only international actor that continuously self-corrects itself and manifestly tries , at any rate , to go in the right direction .
A second point that has been raised is that of Zimbabwe .
I do not wish to go back over this question .
Mrs Martens has responded better than I ever could .
What we are dealing with is an EU-Africa summit , not an EU-Zimbabwe summit .
This is element number one .
Element number two is that I am well aware of calls for Mr Mugabe to be denounced .
I could do that too , but it would change nothing .
The decision to invite Mr Mugabe does not depend on us .
I am sorry but we cannot stand in for our African partners .
Speaking as the Commissioner for Development and Humanitarian Aid , with special responsibility for the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries and for political relations and dialogue with Africa , I have to tell you - and I am sorry to have to say this - that we do not have the right of coercion that enables us to say to our African partners : ' You can invite anyone apart from him . '
At the risk of being too forward I will also say this : if we are to judge things by the yardstick of dictators , or rather those whom we consider as being fit for this role , we would have problems with more than just Mr Mugabe .
And let me just say something else on the subject : this is the reality .
What is important is that the summit takes place and what is also important is that during this summit we are able to discuss matters and raise the issue of human rights in Zimbabwe .
This is what appears to be useful and important to me , and I do not mind saying so .
The summit therefore has to take place .
We have waited long enough .
There has already been an Africa-China summit .
What is more , an Africa-Japan summit is in preparation and we will be there when it happens , though I do not know exactly when .
I would also like to say that we have enlisted the help of South Africa . If there is one African country that has made considerable efforts to try to resolve this question in everyone 's best interests it is South Africa .
Moreover , that country is now most likely engaged in generating , inspiring and working on a major agreement between the majority and the opposition in Zimbabwe , and this should result in honest and fair elections in March 2008 .
These talks are still ongoing , but in any case the last conversation that I had with President Mbeki seemed to offer real hopes of success .
So let us not criticise South Africa , for it is doing what it can and it is not doing a bad job .
As regards the proportion of funding allocated to agriculture , I would simply point out that , between the ninth and tenth European Development Funds , the figure set aside for this sector increased from EUR 663 million to EUR 1.1 billion .

It is true that , despite the increase in funds between the ninth and tenth EDFs , there was a reduction in absolute percentage terms , but as far as hard cash is concerned the actual increase was not insubstantial .
In addition I should mention that I was delighted to hear the President of the World Bank announce several days ago in Washington , at a meeting that I attended , that there would be a much greater focus on agricultural development , and so I fully share the concerns that were raised just now .
As regards the role of civil society and the parliaments , and the Pan-African Parliament too , I can do no more than wholeheartedly approve of the approach taken in the report .
In a word , and to be brief because the allotted time is very short , I would again like to touch on the question of Economic Partnership Agreements or EPAs , which I promised to do .
You will be aware of my position as regards these agreements .
They are an essential condition for the integration of Africa into the world community .
As experience from Asia has shown , it is not aid that is the most decisive factor for progress but rather economic development and integration into the global marketplace .
I personally believe that EPAs represent an opportunity whereby the ACP countries can integrate gradually into the international trading community by first building up their regional markets .
All the same , I would point out that 1 January 2008 will not herald the start of sudden and dramatic market liberalisation .
So what will it mean ?
In fact it will mean the gradual opening up of markets subject to varying transitional periods depending on the products in question , with the assistance of regional funds that will provide financial support and will also help alleviate the problem of net fiscal loss as a result of liberalisation .
Of course there is no shortage of interesting proposals that could be applied in this area .
What is more , we will also be able to mobilise quite substantial resources in a whole series of areas that could create optimum conditions whereby this process of liberalisation could in fact be made progressive , and this gradual opening up of the markets rendered useful , positive and productive .
I understand only too well the apprehensions that some have expressed . However , as regards the call to extend the date for concluding these Economic Partnership Agreements I must say to you that I do not see any advantage in this .
The WTO will not grant us an exception for the ACP countries - and it is all very well pretending that they might - because our current system is harming other developing countries that are asking to be treated in the same manner as the former colonies .
The only alternative is therefore to use the Generalised System of Preferences .
The least developed countries ( LDCs ) will have access to everything apart from arms , but for the non-LDCs - and I would just like to point out that there are 36 of them - this would represent a reduction in their current level of access .
The EPAs will allow us to continue to guarantee this preferential access to our traditional partners , but more importantly they will help support the process of regional economic integration .
I believe that this is where the real potential lies for trade to be able to contribute towards economic development .
We are of course aware of the problems that this will pose for our partners , we recognise their reluctance and , it has to be admitted , we understand their legitimate fears .
It is precisely for this reason that we have initially proposed concluding staged agreements that in the first place will resolve the trade problem by including market opening on a reciprocal basis that is compatible with WTO rules .
As I have always said , market access offers from our ACP partners will of course be based on the principles of asymmetry .
Remember that we for our part are opening up our markets completely , we intend to be as flexible as possible and shall make use of all the leeway available to us to incorporate the concerns about development , particularly the need to protect the main body of agricultural production and fledgling industries .
We are at the moment continuing to work on this question .
The real challenge is to prevent non-LDCs from slipping into a disastrous trading situation on 1 January . These countries clearly have huge commercial interests at stake .
If by 1 January we have still not solved the question of market access it is obvious that they will be back with the Generalised System of Preferences , which means they will be on the sidelines and then they will be in a truly disastrous position .
We therefore have to get a move on if we are even to have temporary agreements in place .
This essentially is it as far as the EPAs are concerned .
Finally I would like to say that I am in complete agreement with the views that Mr Borrell expressed so clearly .
The forthcoming summit and the EU-Africa strategy will be all about bringing a fundamental change to the nature of relations between Europe and Africa .
Let us therefore try - and here I borrow his expression - to create a strong partnership between two sides that respect each other and have rights and responsibilities towards each other , and let us leave behind what we have at present - I would not call it banal , it is more serious than that - this outmoded , archaic and counterproductive relationship , this often humiliating association , of donor and beneficiary .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The EU-Africa Summit should mark a change in the EU 's policies on respect for the sovereignty and right to development of the African countries and peoples , by promoting a fairer , more peaceful and more human world with a greater level of solidarity .
This requires , for example :
immediate solidarity measures to meet the most basic needs of millions of human beings ;
respect for national sovereignty and independence , non-interference in the internal affairs of each country and a peaceful solution to international conflicts ;
demilitarisation of international relations and a gradual reduction in armaments and military expenditure ;
equitable and fair international economic relations , rejecting the impositions of the International Monetary Fund , World Bank and World Trade Organization and the ' Economic Partnership Agreements ' on liberalisation of trade ;
cancellation of foreign debt , which has already been more than paid ;
proper policies of cooperation and active and mutual support for development ;
guarantee of immigrants ' rights .
This relationship must no longer be based on neo-colonialist ambitions or paternalistic views aimed at recovering the ground lost when the African peoples gained their national independence - after being conquered in the second half of the 20th century - and promoting interference , the military presence of the EU 's major powers , and the control and exploitation of natural resources by transnationals .
in writing . - ( FR ) If we are to highlight the importance of Parliament 's report on relations between the European Union and Africa , given the forthcoming EU-Africa Summit in December , then we must above all welcome its realistic approach .
The report calls for a true partnership between the EU and Africa , a democratic and realistic partnership that is based on effective and coordinated aid , but also on trade .
I would particularly like to express my support for the negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) for , as the report stresses , international trade has to be conceived as an instrument working for development .
Poverty can only be reduced on a permanent basis by means of economic growth that is fair , sustainable and properly supervised , growth that is the result of commercial activity stimulated by market access .
Free trade is not an end in itself , it has to serve the needs of the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries ; this is why the ACP group of nations has to be involved gradually and asymmetrically , so as to take account of local characteristics .
We cannot be satisfied simply by providing aid selectively , otherwise we will not be solving the problems , we will merely be forever postponing them .
Africa is not just a theatre for humanitarian aid , it needs to be an actor in its own development , with the European Union as a partner .
An international treaty prohibiting cluster bombs ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council on an international treaty to ban cluster munitions ; follow-up to the Oslo Declaration , by Josep Borrell Fontelles , on behalf of the Committee on Development - B6-0319 / 2007 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission on an international treaty to ban cluster munitions - follow-up to the Oslo Declaration , by Josep Borrell Fontelles , on behalf of the Committee on Development - B6-0320 / 2007 ) .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , the calls for a ban on cluster bombs are getting louder and louder .
Use of these bombs in summer 2006 in the Lebanon war showed the extent to which they can cause a human disaster .
They are weapons that are a danger to both civilians and military personnel , but in practice 90 % of their victims are civilians . In addition , 10 % of these deadly bombs do not explode : they remain in the ground and have the same effect as landmines .
Therefore , clearing the land contaminated with these munitions is dangerous , both for the populations and for the international peacekeeping forces .
These bombs are not only used for war ; they act as a long-term obstacle to transport and agriculture , and they create trade barriers and obstacles to humanitarian aid .
They are thus one of the main problems affecting the development of poor countries : it is the poorest countries that are most affected by them , and in those countries the main victims are the poorest and least-educated sections of the population .
We can no longer say that bombing one 's opponents from a height of 10 000 metres and showering them with bombs that remain in the ground is an efficient way of maintaining peace or taking military action .
The deployment of peacekeeping forces and humanitarian aid are today essential to stabilise and rebuild the areas affected by conflict and these bombs now lack any justification , including from a military perspective .
Today we are going to talk to the Commission and to the Council precisely about the initiatives that have come about as a result of the widespread change of attitude among the international community towards cluster bombs .
The European Parliament has repeatedly adopted a very clear position : we want to see international regulation of a global nature prohibiting the use , production , transfer , financing and stockpiling of cluster bombs .
Pending this , the EU Member States should implement unilateral actions to prohibit the use and transfer of these bombs , as many states have already done and others are preparing to do .
Commissioner , Minister , the European Parliament wants to thank the Presidency of the Council , the Commission and the Member States for their efforts to negotiate a new protocol to the United Nations Convention on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons , which deals with all the humanitarian problems associated with the use of cluster bombs .
Unfortunately , however , we must recognise that very little progress has been made to date .
We therefore need a solid Oslo Process on the basis of which the states , the NGOs , the Red Cross and the international organisations can draw up and fulfil an ambitious agenda .
For the moment , Oslo has been backed by 80 countries , including many developing countries , but it is far from clear yet whether this process will eventually result in a complete ban on cluster bombs .
What is clear is that we need an integrated , comprehensive approach that has a humanitarian slant and that focuses not just on disarmament , but above all on the protection of civilians , helping them to cope with the consequences of war while ensuring that the existing stockpiles of these bombs are destroyed and that the contaminated areas are cleared .
With a number of important events coming up , such as the Vienna meeting in December and the Brussels meeting the following week , as well as 5 November , the Global Day of Action to Ban Cluster Bombs , when there will be many events around the world , what are we going to do ?
In this context I would like to ask the Commission and Council representatives what we are going to do , what our position will be ?
What is the European Union 's position on the state of the discussions in the framework of the Convention on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons ?
Are we going to have a common position of the Council in this matter ?
What initiatives are we developing to encourage the Member States to adopt national measures aimed at prohibiting cluster bombs ?
What are we doing to support third countries in terms of clearing the areas affected by these munitions , providing education on the risks and destroying the stockpiles of munitions already prohibited ?
Finally , is the Commission going to consider organising an international conference on the European Union 's role in tackling the socio-economic , humanitarian and development consequences following conflicts in which these weapons have been used ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Borrell , I should firstly like to thank you for your three questions on this specific issue of the ban on cluster bombs .
I will try to briefly and as objectively as possible answer each of the three questions put to the Council .
As regards your first question , I must say that , within the framework of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons - to keep my speech short I will simply refer to this as the ' Convention ' - the Presidency of the Council of the European Union has , as you know , voiced its concern , on behalf of the European Union , about the humanitarian impact of cluster munitions .
In particular , at the Third Review Conference of States Parties to the Convention which was held in Geneva from 7 to 17 November last year , the European Union expressed the view that cluster munitions represent a particularly important element of the future work of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons .
The EU presented a proposal supporting the establishment of an open-ended Group of Governmental Experts with the purpose of drafting recommendations for further action in the context of the Convention .
This proposal was not adopted by the Conference of States Parties .
However , it was agreed to convene , as a matter of urgency , an intersessional meeting of the Group of Governmental Experts on Explosive Remnants of War , with particular focus on cluster munitions .
This meeting was held in Geneva from 19 to 22 June 2007 when the EU submitted a draft negotiating mandate for a legally binding instrument to address all aspects of the humanitarian concerns raised by cluster munitions .
This instrument should be adopted by the end of 2008 .
The EU Troika carried out extensive consultations with third countries to promote the EU approach .
The Group of Governmental Experts decided , however , to postpone any decision on a legally binding instrument until the 2007 meeting of the High Contracting Parties to the Convention which will be held next month .
In parallel with these efforts to address the concerns relating to cluster munitions , as you know , a number of EU Member States have subscribed to the Oslo Declaration and participated in a series of meetings organised within the so-called ' Oslo Process ' , aimed at a total ban on cluster munitions .
EU Member States have participated in their national capacity .
So far no agreement has been reached on an EU position concerning the Oslo Process .
The majority of Member States perceive these two processes as complementary and consider them to be parallel efforts leading to a common goal , namely an international legally binding instrument on cluster munitions .
As regards your second question , I must say that , in relation to the forthcoming meetings in Brussels and Vienna , as already mentioned , EU Member States , including the Presidency , will participate in a national capacity if they so decide .
No EU common position is planned .
Finally , as regards your third question , I can say that the recent decisions taken by Austria and Belgium on the prohibition of cluster munitions , as referred to by Mr Borrell in his question , have been taken , as you know , on a purely national basis .
The Council has not taken any specific action on this issue .
Let us hope that it will express its view soon .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Borrell Fontelles for putting this oral question to us .
I am glad because I think this is an opportunity for us to comprehensively answer this question on something which has particularly appalling consequences .
It has a highly negative impact on human beings , particularly on civilians .
The question is , therefore , very dear to me because things that affect human security are always very close to my heart .
I fully agree with the position expressed by our Council President , but I would like to mention a few other things also .
Over the past year I have had the opportunity to discuss it in several formal and informal fora , including in meetings organised - the first in Paris and then a later one in Alexandria - by the Institute for Peace Studies and chaired by Ms Mubarak .
She took on this issue very strongly and I think she has tried to bring things forward .
As in the case for antipersonnel landmines , explosive remnants of war pose great threats to the lives and safety of civilian populations and I would like to comprehensively answer the questions that Mr Borrell Fontelles has asked here .
Their effects can be both immediate and long-lasting .
By scattering explosives over wide areas they can kill and injure , as we all know , large numbers of civilians , very often children .
In addition , many of the bomblets or submunitions fail to implode and to explode on impact , and their lethal effects remain after conflict so furthermore cluster munitions seriously hinder international humanitarian assistance .
We have seen it in the war in Lebanon .
As regards crisis management and post-conflict reconstruction programmes during and in the aftermath of conflicts over the past several years , we in the Commission have been very active in countering the problems created by landmines and also by other explosive remnants of war , including cluster ammunition .
Through the two European Commission mine action strategies covering the period 2002-2007 , over EUR 300 million have been committed worldwide in projects covering activities such as demining , stockpile destruction , mine risk education , mine victim assistance , rehabilitation and social economic reintegration .
Projects covering cluster munitions have also been carried out in countries which are highly affected by these weapons , such as Afghanistan , Laos and Cambodia to name a few of them .
As for the future , we will maintain our engagement through mainstreaming actions against antipersonnel landmines and explosive remnants of war in our Community external assistance strategies and programmes - so this will be everywhere .
The Commission also makes use of the humanitarian aid instrument managed by ECHO to fund humanitarian demining efforts .
The most recent case of humanitarian demining support has been in Lebanon , which received significant humanitarian aid following the conflict in December 2006 , which I mentioned before .
Concerning the Commission 's role in the negotiation of disarmament treaties or conventions , I would like to recall that such negotiations are sometimes not in our competence .
If the Community is not a party to the disarmament treaties or conventions , it can then legally only encourage partner countries to engage fully in multilateralism , in particular via participation in treaties and conventions .
I think our President has said a lot on this already .
We took part in the EU troika démarches carried out in key countries such as the United States of America , Japan , Brazil , South Korea , Canada , Pakistan and Ukraine , to promote the multilateral initiatives on cluster munitions in the framework of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons , and in particular a negotiation on a legally binding instrument addressing humanitarian concerns about cluster munitions .
The objective is to conclude negotiations by the end of next year .
At the same time , the Commission closely follows the Oslo Process and intends to participate as an observer at the meetings planned in that context in Brussels and in Vienna .
In conclusion , I would like to assure you , Mr Borrell Fontelles , and also the European Parliament , that the Commission will continue to make its best efforts to support all the multilateral initiatives that are aimed at a comprehensive and effective ban on cluster mines .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I should like to say to the Commissioner that I am encouraged by the fact that we share the same worries and goals and I thank her for her presentation and description of the developments .
I am also glad about the good cooperation between the Members of Parliament in preparing a relevant motion for a resolution .
First of all , it is a matter of urgency .
It has a human and political urgency because , in spite of warning signals from all around the world , cluster bombs are still being actively used .
So there are two problems we need to address .
Firstly , the use of cluster bombs has an especially inhuman aspect .
Those who launch these bombs are usually not able to target them very specifically .
The failure rates happen to be much higher than might be expected .
The tragic result is extremely high numbers of casualties among civilians , more than 90 % , as has been said .
Another problem is the multitude of unexploded cluster bombs that lie in the former conflict areas .
This is a major handicap to states that have resolved to start to rebuild their economies after conflicts .
Against this background I think the EU should take the lead in trying to ban any kind of production , use and sale of cluster munitions .
The first step should be to introduce an immediate moratorium on the use of these weapons .
Further , our resolution insists that EU troops should under no circumstances make use of any kind of cluster ammunition until the relevant international agreements have been achieved .
We ask Parliament and the Commission to urgently increase financial assistance to communities and individuals who have been affected by both exploded and unexploded cluster munitions , using to this end all available instruments .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I am speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament .
These questions exemplify the leading role played by this House in relation to conventional disarmament , controls on the transfer of munitions and the strengthening of international humanitarian law .
We fought for the extension of the Ottawa Convention to all types of mines .
Well before the European Council , we argued for a global treaty on the arms trade .
The vital need to convert the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports into a legally binding instrument has also been a constant demand of this Parliament .
These questions on cluster bombs look to the future and to what Europe must do to eliminate these weapons which make no distinction between civilians and military personnel and which destroy so many human lives .
We are calling for an immediate moratorium on using , producing , stockpiling and exporting these weapons .
The moratorium must in due time be converted into a legal instrument which has the effect of banning these barbaric munitions , in the long term , from arsenals and battlefields in the same way as anti-personnel mines have already started to disappear .
In addition to calling on the European Union to begin a diplomatic offensive in favour of this new instrument , we want the Member States to lead by example and eliminate the use of these weapons by their Armed Forces .
Not only that , they must also permanently stop their export , production and stockpiling .
Every day in the Lebanon , Chechnya , Afghanistan and dozens of other countries where the wars have already ended , people are paying the ultimate price for the criminal and immoral irresponsibility of Armed Forces which have lost any sense of the ethical and legal limits that should guide the actions of civilised people .
It is up to Europe to lead a global alliance to re-establish , reaffirm and reinforce these limits .
We urgently need a common position in order to eradicate cluster bombs and other cluster munitions .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , civilians - many of them children - are indiscriminately killed or injured by cluster bombs .
Dreams are shattered and lives are destroyed .
Take the case of the Iraqi boy , Ahmed Kamel .
Attracted by a shiny object , Ahmed picked up a bomblet and it exploded .
He lost both of his hands and his sight .
How is a 12-year-old supposed to make sense of this ?
And yet the shocking fact is that cluster munitions are stockpiled in over 15 EU Member States .
Horrifyingly , at least 10 EU Member States are producing these weapons : France , Spain , Greece , Italy , the Netherlands , Poland , Romania , Slovakia , Sweden and Bulgaria .
It is my view that these countries , as well as those that have used them , including the UK , have blood on their hands .
Whilst I welcome moves by countries such as Belgium to establish national legislation to ban cluster munitions , all other EU Member States must follow suit .
I urge the Council and the Commission to endorse the Oslo Process , as we have already called on them to do .
Diplomatic manoeuvres by the UK Government and others to suggest there are ' dumb ' and ' smart ' cluster munitions must be given short shrift - they all kill and maim .
The word ' smart ' could not be more misleading or more inappropriate .
We need an immediate moratorium on the use , investment , stockpiling , production , transfer or export of all cluster munitions by all EU Member States .
All states which have used them must accept responsibility for their clearance , and the Commission must urgently increase financial assistance to the communities affected by unexploded bomblets .
I urge you all to support this resolution .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Oslo Process offers an historic opportunity to achieve an international agreement - not just a declaration , but an international agreement - banning cluster bombs .
For two decades , there have been campaigns and international initiatives , but they have been repeatedly bogged down in the diplomatic mire of military and economic interests .
Now we have an opportunity to reach an agreement in 2008 .
This requires support not only from Parliament , which has a clear position here across all parliamentary groups .
I was very pleased and interested to hear , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , that the Commission also supports this position , which is most welcome .
The Council now needs to follow the clear stance that has been adopted by Parliament and the Commission ; that is very important .
It is not just about banning the use and stockpiling of cluster bombs and the trade in these weapons ; it is also about production .
We should have a ban on the production of these bombs , and the European Union is still one of the main producers of these weapons .
They are still being manufactured in Germany , in the United Kingdom , in France , in Spain and Belgium .
Legislation has now been adopted in Belgium and Austria to ban production but I know that production has still not stopped entirely in Belgium .
There are loopholes in this legislation as well .
We must press ahead with a ban on these weapons .
The Member States must move forward towards a ban , and the Council must defend the clear position that has been set out here .
That is the only way to ensure that , in 2008 , we actually get an agreement .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the first time I dealt personally with this issue was during NATO 's war of aggression against Yugoslavia , one of the wars which I opposed and which like many other wars was waged by Western countries .
Some 98 % of the victims of cluster bombs are civilians .
Between 5 and 40 % of the submunitions of cluster bombs do not explode .
Let me be blunt : it is mainly the major Western industrialised countries which produce and equip their armies with fragmentation bombs and deploy cluster bombs in wars .
There are 34 countries which produce cluster bombs , including 13 EU Member States .
Cluster bombs are a factor in wars being waged by EU countries , for example in the former Yugoslavia , Afghanistan and Iraq , so please , let us not shed any crocodile tears here !
The EU must bite the bullet .
In specific terms , this means that we need the European Union to adopt a common position condemning these murderous weapons .
That means an end to the production of cluster bombs , and of course no use of fragmentation bombs as occurred in the Gulf War , Yugoslavia , Afghanistan , Iraq and Lebanon .
It cannot be allowed to continue .
( FR ) Madam President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , much has already been said on this subject and we of course deplore - the word is hardly strong enough - the use of cluster munitions , which have caused so much serious damage in a number of countries , and I wish to thank Mr Borrell for having in fact raised this disturbing issue .
However , if this ban is to be effective , and if the resolve expressed in the resolution is to succeed , we of course need to go much further than banning the use of such weapons .
We also need to deal with their manufacture and sale , because we cannot have a humanitarian debate on the one hand - and it is true that these bombs that do not explode but that lie hidden in the ground in all kinds of places , thereby preventing communities and refugees from returning to their homeland , also prevent the distribution of humanitarian aid - we cannot have such a debate that seeks to highlight the humanitarian side of the problem without at the same time taking effective measures against those industries here at home that , regrettably , are still producing and selling these weapons .
I would like to conclude by saying that this resolution perhaps gives us an opportunity to appeal to the Member States too .
In this respect my own country , Belgium , has passed the necessary legislation , indeed I think that it was the first to do so , and I believe that we could be inspired by the law that has been adopted in Belgium to appeal to the other 26 Member States to follow suit .

( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Minister , President-in-Office of the Council , I would like to use my turn to speak to support both the question and the way it has been worded by Mr Borrell , as well as our joint motion for a resolution on this issue .
I am all too well aware that all the efforts being made on arms control are always very difficult and are sometimes more like a procession of Echternach , where you take two steps forward and then one step back .
I think that we must intensify these efforts , because it seems to me in the last few years as if people who are working for disarmament , for arms control , to control weapons , are old-fashioned specimens from a bygone age , because now rearmament is the order of the day .
I find that extremely alarming .
When you think that a head of state of the only remaining superpower in the world recently threatened a possible third world war , that strikes fear right to my heart .
In this context , which is far less conducive to joint efforts , I think that it is more important than ever that both the Council and the Commission continuously underline that the Member States must act together on this , which unfortunately has not been the case up to now .
( SV ) Thank you Madam President .
I am also speaking on behalf of my colleague Raül Romeva .
He comes from Spain , I come from Sweden , and both countries produce these dreadful weapons and both countries have promised to ban them .
But what is my own country doing ?
At the talks in Oslo , Sweden argued that we should have restricted use rather than a ban .
That is a disgraceful position .
No civilised country can defend these cruel weapons , and I am delighted to see the great unity that exists between the Council , the Commission and Parliament today in support of a total ban .
When these weapons strike , they constitute a weapon against innocent children .
It is an effective weapon against human rights and economic development .
We must therefore be highly effective in our fight to ban them .
This is the beginning - let us complete the process as soon as possible , as another child is dying every minute .
Thank you .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to echo those who have already talked about banning the production , export and stockpiling of these weapons - cluster bombs - which are so harmful to civilians , and to express my support for the Oslo Process , despite the fact that , as the previous speaker said , my country manufactures , stockpiles and exports these types of weapons .
I must make one point , however : on 21 September - i.e. just a month ago - the government , in the shape of the party that supports it , the Socialist Party , tabled in parliament an amendment to the Law on control of external trade in defence and dual-use material aimed partly at restricting - and , where appropriate , prohibiting - cluster bombs that are particularly dangerous for civilians .
In other words , the trend is changing in my country : the manufacture , stockpiling and export of these weapons were approved by previous governments .
This government is fully committed to the Oslo Process and wants to see the gradual elimination and , eventually , complete prohibition of their manufacture , stockpiling and export . This was the important point that I wanted to make .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to raise two vital points , but I will be very brief as I know we are overrunning .
The first is that this debate has given me a very clear idea and conviction that this issue will be followed very closely by the European Parliament and is something that concerns many Members .
I will therefore of course duly take this into account .
Secondly , I would point out that the European Union is also playing a leading role in this issue , possibly not with the energy that many Members would like , and certainly with some difficulty , but , despite everything , with a certain optimism .
We have already voiced in the appropriate place , in other words in the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons , the European Union 's concern about the humanitarian consequences of this type of weapon .
We have also already proposed the negotiation of a legally binding instrument to be adopted by the end of 2008 at the latest , although possibly not with the ambition that many of you desire .
However , the fact is that we are here to take decisive steps .
This is a process that I hope will amass ever more political will , enthusiasm and effort so that we can ultimately achieve the proposed goals .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would just like to add one thing to what I said before .
I can , of course , only speak on areas within the Commission 's competence , and you know that this area is a particular competence of the Member States .
However , I can speak on the financial assistance to those affected .
I can reconfirm what I said before , which is that we have already done our best to alleviate the problems caused by explosive remnants of war , including cluster munitions , in particular through our mine action strategies and the related horizontal budget line , which accounted for about one third of the funds spent in this domain .
I can assure you that actions against mines and explosive remnants of war will continue to be carried out through the new geographical instruments , and are even being mainstreamed now - and this is new - into our external assistance strategies and programmes .
Some actions can also be funded under the new instrument for stability , so we now have more instruments on hand to address this major challenge , and will take clearly into account the strong position expressed by Parliament in using these as effectively as possible , where necessary , because I totally share the objective that you have expressed .
I have received a motion for a resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
( The sitting was suspended for a few moments before Question Time )
Council Question Time
Ladies and gentlemen , the next item is questions to the Council .
As happened yesterday during questions to the Commission , we are going to experiment with some new rules which are proposed as part of the reform of Parliament .
These are being studied by a special group and basically cover two areas .
Firstly , I would invite Members to move to the front benches so that the sitting feels more inclusive and , secondly , supplementary questions will be answered in one go by the President-in-Office of the Council after they have been asked .
As a result , as we usually have two supplementary questions , instead of each being answered immediately , the Council will respond to both questions together at the end .
The next item is questions to the Council ( B6-0318 / 2007 ) .
The following questions to the Council have been tabled .
Subject : Solidarity Fund for major disasters
Given the gravity of this summer 's forest fires in certain countries of the Union such as Greece and Spain , and in the light of the Union 's failure to respond quickly and effectively , will the Council be reviewing the Solidarity Fund rules so that in the future we may be armed with appropriate mechanisms to face up to these disasters and mitigate the damage caused ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in answer to this question I would say that , as you know , the current European Union Solidarity Fund was established to respond to disasters of major and extraordinary proportions , following the floods which affected Central Europe in the summer of 2002 .
In 2002 , on a proposal from the European Commission , the Council adopted a Regulation establishing the European Union Solidarity Fund .
Article 14 of that Regulation on the Solidarity Fund provides that the Council shall review this Regulation on the basis of a proposal from the Commission by 31 December 2006 at the latest .
In 2005 the Commission proposed that Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 be replaced by a new Regulation on the Solidarity Fund .
This proposal particularly aimed to extend the scope of the instrument in order to cover industrial and technological disasters , public health emergencies and acts of terror and to reduce the thresholds used to classify a disaster as major .
The proposal was that the regional exceptional criteria should be removed from the Regulation in force , but that , in exceptional circumstances , the Commission could recognise that a major disaster had occurred .
The European Parliament issued an opinion in that regard in May 2006 and , still in 2006 , the Council discussed the Commission 's proposal and Parliament 's opinion at the appropriate levels , although no agreement was reached .
As a result , Regulation ( EC ) No 2012 / 2002 continues to apply , with the Commission having proposed its mobilisation during 2007 .
As I had the opportunity of telling you last month in answer to a similar question , as far as the Council is aware , in cases of disasters provided for by the Regulation , its application has been effective .
The European Commission periodically prepares reports which describe in detail the use of the Solidarity Fund .
( ES ) The Council 's proposal was perfectly clear .
This new regulation is hugely delayed .
The complementary and concrete question I want to put to the Council is the following : this summer the cradle of Western civilisation , Ancient Greece , along with the Olympic stadiums were almost burnt down .
Is the Council waiting until the Vatican is burnt down , until the Prado is burnt down , until Belém Palace is burnt down , or can we hope that before next summer we will have a regulation that can cope with these types of disasters ?

( PT ) Mr President , Mr Medina Ortega , we are obviously not waiting for Rome , Lisbon , London or Paris to suffer natural disasters before we look at this issue in more detail .
We truly hope that Belém Palace and Belém Tower will remain standing for many centuries , as they have done to date .
As regards specific deadlines for amending the current rules , I cannot of course , on behalf of the Council , commit to any specific date .
Thank you for your reply , but I would concur with the follow-up question .
We do need to know when this is going to be changed .
I am speaking particularly about flooding in the UK .
Obviously this refers to fires , but the solidarity fund covers flooding .
My region in the West Midlands was very badly hit .
My particular village in Worcestershire was hit , along with the rest of Worcestershire and the surrounding areas in Hereford and Shropshire .
Obviously the UK Government has put in a bid for solidarity fund money .
I am hoping the Commission is going to look favourably on that and the Council will actually try and make changes to the way the solidarity fund operates so that in future we can get this funding at a faster rate .
Also , can the Council representative tell us what he feels about the rapid reaction force and whether this is going to be brought forward so that emergency flood defences could be brought into affected areas ?
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , let me say that I think it is very good that we can now sit together down here .
I think that is a very good idea .
As to the question itself , I would like to say a few words about the fires , Minister , which in some cases are due to natural causes but in others are started deliberately .
This fire-starting is encouraged by the legal position in some countries because it offers certain advantages to certain people .
Has any thought been given to the possibility of bringing pressure to bear on these countries to change the legal position so that this incentive no longer exists in future ?
( PT ) Very well .
I believe that I have already answered at least some of the questions that have just been asked .
I have also already said that our assessment of how this Solidarity Fund has functioned in the past was positive , in the sense that it functioned properly .
The issue of the rapid reaction force is being considered .
No decision has yet been made as this is still being assessed and debated by the Council .
No decision has been made either on the prevention of fires , although a great deal has been done .
Much remains to be done and I suppose that this is an area in which the exchange of experiences known as ' best practices ' and cooperation between Member States at EU level may prove useful .
Efforts still need to be made in this area .
I must say that my own country is somewhere that is systematically , year after year , badly affected by fires , arson and all the issues relating to fires , particularly forest fires .
Nationally , we have adopted a series of measures and initiatives that have proven to be very successful in terms of preventing fires and arson and of course we are very happy to share our experiences with all the Member States .
Subject : Integrated European policy for persons with special needs
Is the Council envisaging the adoption of a joint decision with a view to establishing an integrated European policy to support and provide vocational training for citizens with special needs and ensure their integration in society ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Thank you for your question , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou .
As you know , the Council can only act in its legislative capacity on the basis of a proposal made at some stage by the Commission .
As things stand , the Council has not yet received any legislative proposal for a Council decision with a view to establishing an integrated European policy to support and provide vocational training for citizens with special needs and ensure their integration in society .
As you will know , in 2000 the Council adopted Directive 2000 / 78 / EC establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation .
This prohibits discrimination on a number of grounds , including disability .
In addition , this year ( 2007 ) was designated the ' European Year of Equal Opportunities for All ' through a decision which the Council and Parliament took jointly under the codecision procedure .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council .
The elimination of discrimination in employment is not an effective way to address the problem of disability .
Only yesterday the health programme involving new technologies was announced .
Could this proposal not be used to enable a large proportion of European citizens , who could be active and useful to society as whole at a time of demographic decline , to reach their potential and live in social cohesion ?
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , I feel that speech was more a general comment than a direct question .
However , I believe that , despite everything , we have seen a gradual increase in awareness among the Member States and also at EU level of the need to work together in order to adequately respond to the issues involved in this area .
I must also say that , during the Portuguese Presidency and as part of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All , the Presidency will be hosting , in Lisbon on 19 and 20 November , a major conference on this issue during which we will of course try to review the situation as regards the relevant issues .
We will also of course try to obtain political commitments on this issue for the future .
( DE ) What measures is the Council planning with a view to making public transport more accessible to the disabled ?
Do you see any opportunity for the use of best practice and benchmarking in order , quite simply , to help improve the situation here ?
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , we have explicitly enshrined the rights of the disabled in the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which will be part of the Lisbon Treaty and will thus be fully and legally binding .
Do you see any opportunity for the Council Presidency to call on Member States to react very practically to the new opportunities that have been created and take appropriate measures to ensure that the disabled have more and better prospects ?
( PT ) I should like to make two comments .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights is not yet fully in force and has not been published .
Neither has the Treaty of Lisbon and we therefore have to wait for the time being .
I obviously cannot predict in October what initiatives or decisions the Council may adopt in this area .
Furthermore , as you know , the Charter of Fundamental Rights is not in itself a legal basis for legislative initiatives .
With regard to the issue of transport , as the Commission does not propose initiatives to be adopted by the Council in this area , this issue still comes under the competence of the Member States .
It will clearly be up to them , at national level , to propose the necessary measures as they see fit and according to specific circumstances .
Ladies and gentlemen , the next three questions by Marian Harkin , Avril Doyle and Esko Seppänen were put down in yesterday 's debate .
In accordance with Annex II ( A ) ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , these questions are not admissible so we will move on to the next question .
Questions Nos 3 , 4 and 5 are not admissible as the subject in question is already on the agenda for this part-session .
Subject : Sex offenders
Is the Portuguese Presidency satisfied that the EU and its Member States are taking all possible measures to identify , bring to justice and monitor after conviction perpetrators of sex crimes against children , to exchange information on child sex crime and to protect and rescue children who may be missing , abducted or at risk ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Ludford , protecting children from sexual exploitation and combating trafficking in human beings are extremely important issues for the European Union .
In this respect , I would refer to the Council Resolution of 27 September 2001 on the contribution of civil society in finding missing or sexually exploited children in which the Council declared that combating the disappearance and sexual exploitation of children is a priority for the European Union .
To this end , the Council has adopted various legal instruments which tackle specific aspects of this issue , including the Joint Action of 24 February 1997 concerning action to combat trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children , said Council Resolution of 27 September 2001 on the contribution of civil society in finding missing or sexually exploited children and , finally , the Council Framework Decision of 22 December 2003 on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
The recent proposal for a framework decision on the recognition and enforcement in the European Union of prohibitions arising from convictions for sexual offences committed against children , presented by the Kingdom of Belgium , has been assessed by the Council together with other proposals , such as the proposal for a Council framework decision on taking account of convictions in the Member States of the European Union in the course of new criminal proceedings and the proposal for a Council framework decision on the organisation and content of the exchange of information extracted from criminal records between Member States .
Following the negotiation process , the Council has decided to merge the provisions of the initiative presented by the Kingdom of Belgium with the instrument on the exchange of information extracted from criminal records .
As a result , information on a person 's conviction for the sexual assault of children should be made available to the competent authorities of Member States .
The Council Framework Decision of 22 December 2003 on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography contains a definition of offences concerning sexual exploitation of children and child pornography and calls on Member States to take measures to ensure that these offences are punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to three years and , in some cases , the maximum of five to ten years .
Said Framework Decision sets 20 January 2006 as the date for implementation by Member States .
On the basis of the notifications received by the Council and the Commission on the implementation measures and the report prepared by the Commission , the Council must assess , by 20 January 2008 , the extent to which the Member States have complied with the obligations arising from this Framework Decision .
I thank the Presidency very much for that reply .
The case of Madeleine McCann has aroused a lot of interest and , indeed , controversy .
I am not going to go into the details of that case , but what concerns me here is what lessons we can learn generally about the adequacy of European action in the case of missing children .
I want to ask about three issues .
The first is a missing children 's hotline .
Yesterday , Commissioner Frattini told us that he was not at all satisfied by Member States ' action to implement the Council decision from February for a single 116 phone number for missing children , which should have been in place in August .
Only four Member States have chosen a service provider , three Member States have failed to respond to a request for information at all .
That is not very impressive !
Will you chase up the other 23 Member States ?
Secondly , a few weeks ago , Justice and Home Affairs Ministers called for an EU database on missing children .
I believe that some private attempts have been made in cooperation with YouTube and Madeleine McCann 's parents .
Will the EU support having a proper database ?
Thirdly , you talked about work on the exchange of information on sex offenders , but when are we going to have a computerised database ?
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Ludford , I should just like to say the following in response to the various questions asked .
Firstly , many of these measures are relatively recent or very recent and their effects therefore need to be assessed .
This is happening and we will of course be assessing what has worked and what has failed and whether we are making good progress in this area .
This is what we have to do , not go hounding the Member States , trying to lay blame or apportion responsibility .
This is a cooperation process which requires dialogue between the Member States based on experiences which we must exchange .
Despite everything , I consider that we have made good progress in this area in response to situations which are truly terrible in humanitarian terms .
Finally , I consider that the Reform Treaty is also good news in this respect as it effectively encourages and enables wider and better cooperation between the Member States in combating this type of offence .
President-in-Office , you mentioned - and I was glad to hear you use the word - the ' trafficking ' issue , because I think that , while we have publicity about children , including the McCann case , there are many children and young adults who are trafficked into Member States of the Union .
I would like to ask you if you believe that enough is being done on this issue .
And I would also ask to assist those when they are found in the Member State : to rehabilitate them and either get them back to their own countries or to make sure that they do not become criminals within the Member State in which they are trafficked .
I think this is a really serious problem in the Union .
( DE ) Minister , I tried to listen very closely to your response to Mrs Ludford .
She asked you a very specific question which you have not answered , namely how you propose to chase up the Member States which have not yet set up the hotline .
Perhaps you could be more specific in your answer .
( PT ) I am neither an expert in criminal policy nor a Minister for Justice .
I am here representing the Council and I can only tell you what , at the moment , seems to be the general feeling of the Council .
It is always possible to do more and to do it better , but the truth is that , as I have already said , there is a series of legal instruments which duly correspond to this desire to effectively combat this type of offence .
As I have said , many of these measures are recent and they will all need to be properly assessed .
There was one new question : raising the awareness of Member States and their citizens about a phenomenon which , in terms of raising awareness about its extent and gravity , is actually new .
As always happens with new phenomena which must be considered and assessed , there is of course a procedure to be followed .
We will , where necessary , continue to call on those Member States which have perhaps not yet complied with their obligations in relation to implementing initiatives or legislation to do so as quickly as possible .
If a commitment has been made , then this must be fulfilled and implemented in this and all other areas .
Subject : Merger between Suez and Gaz de France
On 3 September it was announced that the boards of the French energy company Suez and the state enterprise Gaz de France had decided to proceed with the planned merger .
This would create the fourth largest energy company , after Gazprom , Electricité de France and EON .
The Commission has already ordered the merged company to hive off a number of operations in Belgium and France .
Does the Council believe that these merger plans still accord with the current principles which it espouses with regard to liberalisation of the energy market in the European Union ?
To what extent have the new merged company and the French State promised to carry out the divestment of ownership of the main networks which the Commission has called for ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I must firstly say that , as you know , the conclusions of the 2007 Spring European Council comprehensively covered the EU 's energy policy , including the issue of the internal market for gas and electricity .
The Council cannot venture an opinion as to whether the merger plans , as they currently stand , are in accordance with that part of the conclusions .
The Council would point out that these European Council conclusions formed a contribution to the European Commission 's Third Energy Package , presented in September 2007 , which has the goal of subsequently opening up the internal market for gas and electricity .
Only after obtaining agreement on the proposed regulations and directives and after these have entered into force will it be possible to assess whether the merged company GDF Suez complies with the relevant legislative provisions .
Secondly , the Council must point out that , under the Treaty provisions on competition , the European Commission is responsible for ascertaining the compatibility of all inter-company agreements with the Community rules .
( NL ) . I think that it is entirely right that policy and concrete steps are evaluated by the Commission .
I do have an additional question relating to the European market , the realisation of the single market .
The explicit aim behind the unbundling of companies is to bring about real investment in the networks , and we can see that in this area , including between countries , we have not kept up with the agreements that have been made .
Countries are supposed to be able to exchange 10 % , this was called interoperationality , and we are lagging behind on that .
My question is this : what activities is the Council undertaking to actually prime the investments in order to improve the connection between France and Spain , for instance ?
People can buy in cheaper from their neighbours but if there is no mains connection that is not possible .
What are you going to do about that ?
( PT ) Mr President , Mr van Nistelrooij , the Council adopted a series of measures on energy issues at the last European Council in March .
These must of course now be implemented , based on Commission proposals .
Each body and each institution must assume its own responsibilities : the Commission by presenting its proposals , the Council by adopting , rejecting or amending these , and then the Court by ascertaining whether or not the legislation and penalties of Member States comply with the legislation in force .
That is all I can say for the time being .
Question No 8 has been withdrawn .
As the author is not present , Question No 9 lapses .
Subject : Facilitation of visas for citizens of Moldova and Georgia
Citizens of Moldova and Georgia are confronted with considerable difficulties in obtaining visas for the EU Member States .
In addition , the entry into force of the visa facilitation agreement between the EU and the Russian Federation has brought about a paradoxical situation whereby the inhabitants of the separatist regions of Abkhazia , South Ossetia and Transnistria , who mostly hold Russian passports , now benefit from a less restrictive visa and travel regime .
What action will the Council take to contribute towards easing the visa regime for Moldovan and Georgian citizens and implementing the respective agreements ?
It is also necessary , as a matter of urgency , that the Common Visa Centre in Chisinau should be able to count on the cooperation of more EU Member States with a view to transposing the practical process of facilitating visas .
How does the Council explain the fact that so far only a small number of Member States have done so , and how it will ensure that the rest cooperate forthwith ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mrs Anastase , in a decision of 19 December 2006 , the Council mandated the Commission to negotiate an agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Moldova on the facilitation of visas .
This agreement was initialled in Chisinau on 25 April 2007 and signed in Brussels on 10 October 2007 , by myself in fact .
Given the rapid conclusion of this agreement , the European Parliament will be consulted on the draft decision on the conclusion of this agreement .
On 17 October the Moldovan Government passed two bills ratifying the agreements with the European Union on visa facilitation and readmission .
On behalf of the Council , I can tell you that the Commission does not currently have a mandate to begin negotiations on a similar agreement with Georgia .
As regards the Common Visa Centre in Chisinau , cooperation between Member States is a matter to be decided by them alone .
( RO ) Congratulations on signing the agreements with the Republic of Moldova .
As regards this issue , I would like to point out two things : first of all , I consider it necessary to include in the discussion regarding the relations between the Council and the Republic of Moldova a situation that occurred immediately after signing these agreements : on 12 October , at the border of the Republic of Moldova , some official delegations coming from Romania were refused access to the territory of the Republic of Moldova .
Since I believe that a visa facilitation for a third country should be followed , eventually , by its reciprocity , I would be interested to know if the Council intends to approach this subject .
Secondly , in the agreements you signed , a reference to the Moldovan language is made , a language that is not recognized .
I would like us to point this out especially since there is only one language , the Romanian language , recognized in the European Union .
As regards Georgia , I believe things should move toward avoiding the situation that the citizens of Georgia deal with as compared to the citizens of South Osetia .
( PT ) Mr President , as I said , I signed this visa facilitation agreement with Moldova and I can tell you that this action , this initiative , this agreement was duly appreciated and recognised by the Moldovan Government .
This is an extremely important instrument in terms of both our relations with Moldova and all our relations with our neighbouring countries .
I sincerely hope that this agreement will help , as intended , to strengthen relations between the EU and Moldova and in particular to reinforce the ' human dimension ' of the European Neighbourhood Policy , in other words to bring people closer so that we can all get to know each other more and better , because undoubtedly this is what reinforces European spirit and understanding .
Any difficulties in applying this agreement will of course have to be assessed .
Such difficulties are very recent but I can say that , whenever agreements concluded by the European Union with third countries result in problems or difficulties , when they do not produce the desired results or when they produce the wrong results , the Commission , possibly in cooperation with the Council , must look into what is happening and , if applicable , make the necessary changes .
With regard to Georgia , I have taken note of your comment , Mrs Anastase .
( LT ) Are there any plans to adopt an agreement on a visa facilitation regime for visas to Belarus ?
After the expansion of the Schengen area , Lithuania , having extensive borders with Belarus , will have difficulty inviting people from that country to visit and , in addition , Belarusians will not be able to visit relatives living across the border .
Are there any plans for this ?
( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Budreikatė , as you know , decisions on the conclusion of visa facilitation agreements are taken on a case-by-case basis .
They naturally take into account the country in question , the type of relationship that we have with that country , technical security issues and so on .
As a result , where applicable , with regard to Belarus or any other country , a decision would have to be duly proposed by the Commission to the Council and the latter would have to decide on this .
However , as I have said , a decision cannot be simply made to conclude this type of agreement or to begin negotiations without certain technical and political conditions being met .
However , where it is technically and politically feasible to conclude these , visa facilitation agreements do help , as I have said , with the ' human dimension ' or ' humanitarian dimension ' of the Neighbourhood Policy .
We cannot be strangers to one other ; on the contrary we must and can get to know each other more and better .
Subject : Creation of a European civil defence force
On 4 September 2007 the European Parliament adopted a resolution ( P6 _ TA ( 2007 ) 0362 ) on natural disasters that makes particular reference to the lethal fires that affected Greece this summer .
Like other documents , both the resolution and the report on establishing a Community civil protection mechanism of 18 September 2006 ) recognise the importance of the Community civil protection mechanism and call for the creation of a European civil defence force that could react immediately in emergencies , as also proposed in the report by former Commissioner Barnier .
Given that the creation of a civil defence force would be of particular assistance in supporting Member States ' national authorities responsible for civil protection , what are the Council 's views on the creation of a civil defence force ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr Papadimoulis , the Council would point out that , on 15 and 16 June 2006 and also on 14 and 15 December 2006 , the European Council endorsed or took note of Presidency reports on reinforcing the Union 's emergency and crisis response capacities in order to improve coordination and delivery of available assets .
The June 2006 European Council also provided further guidelines on improving the Union 's emergency , crisis and disaster response capacities , both inside and outside the European Union .
It called for particular attention to be given to further developing the European Union 's rapid response capability , based on means made available by Member States , including civil protection modules , and to work on the Commission 's proposals on reinforcing the Community 's civil protection capabilities .
As regards the report submitted by Michel Barnier in May 2006 , the Council would also point out that the European Council of 15 and 16 June 2006 welcomed this document as an important contribution to the debate .
Although certain ideas in the Barnier report have been incorporated in Community rules or practices , no proposal has so far been submitted to the Council aimed at creating a European civil defence force .
In its conclusions of 15 and 16 October 2007 , the Council , taking into account the recent devastation in some Member States and recognising the need for the European Union to be able to respond effectively and in a timely manner to crises and emergency situations following natural disasters , invited the Commission to continue examining the issue and to submit relevant proposals before the meeting of the General Affairs and External Relations Council on 10 December 2007 .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office , but in familiar Council terms , he has chronicled 18 months of inertia and delays .
The text you have read to us manages to undermine the entire Barnier proposal .
I ask you : how many more fire and flood victims must we mourn ?
How many properties must be lost ?
For how long can the Member States waste their resources before you finally propose , in Council , the inquiry the European Parliament has long been demanding ?
I ask you : will you , as President-in-Office , propose on 10 December that the Council examine what the European Parliament recommends , namely that this auxiliary civil protection force should be set up , or will your successor again tell us , 18 months from now , another tale of yet more delays ?

( PT ) Mr Papadimoulis , the Council is naturally awaiting with great interest the Commission 's proposal on this issue , in other words on the possible creation of a civil defence force .
It is hoped that these suggestions or proposals will be made by the Commission before the meeting of the General Affairs Council on 10 December , in fact in less than two months .
We hope to look at and assess the Commission 's proposals and we will then act accordingly .
( LT ) I too would like to point out the importance of this issue , so I am pleased that the Council has addressed the Commission and is awaiting an answer .
Nevertheless , I would like to ask : what are the Commission 's views on the force as regards extraordinary situations , and , bearing in mind all these floods and fires , climate change and the events taking place far from here , in America , what are the Commission 's views on the actual role of such a force in extraordinary situations ?
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , you have mentioned the Barnier report several times .
This report has prompted fears among the aid organisations because it seems to provide for quasi-military leadership structures or preliminary decision-making at military level .
Is the Council aware of these fears about the ' militarisation ' of this civil protection force , and how can , and will the Council , respond to these concerns ?

( PT ) Mr President , as I have already mentioned , the Council 's proposal and conclusions on Mr Barnier 's report were that this could form a working basis for future decisions .
This was not a 100 % endorsement nor even a partial endorsement that this should form a working basis .
It was simply what the Council agreed at the time .
As I have just said , I cannot pre-empt the Council 's reaction to proposals , models and methods that do not yet exist , as that would be to pre-empt history .
We must await the Commission 's proposals and assessment .
We will then discuss these in the Council and come to conclusions .
We will also decide on the direction to be taken in that respect , which brings me to an important point .
The Council , by asking the Commission to submit proposals on this issue , has unequivocally indicated its interest in the subject and its desire to move forward in this respect .
In my opinion , that is an undeniable and positive sign .
Subject : Fate of Professor Ukshin Hoti
The internationally recognised scientist and peace activist Professor Ukshin Hoti , Foreign Minister of the democratic underground Republic of Kosovo led by President Rugova in the nineties , was arrested by the Milosevic regime and disappeared without a trace many years ago .
Can the Council ascertain from the government in the now democratic Serbia what happened to Professor Hoti and determine if the Belgrade authorities are prepared to conduct an investigation into this matter ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr Posselt , Professor Ukshin Hoti is one of more than 2 000 people included on the list of the International Committee of the Red Cross ( ICRC ) whose families reported their disappearance during the Kosovo conflict .
The ICRC has , since January 1998 , been gathering information on people who disappeared in Kosovo .
This information has been sent to the authorities in Belgrade and Pristina , together with a request for them to do their utmost to discover the whereabouts of these people .
The ICRC in Kosovo is also working on this issue in strict cooperation with the United Nations Missions in Kosovo .
As part of the dialogue on issues of mutual interest between Pristina and Belgrade , the working group on missing persons which has representatives in both governments has met periodically since March 2004 under the auspices of the Red Cross .
Work is being carried out on both sides in order to discover the whereabouts of missing persons , but progress is slow .
The right to know the whereabouts of missing loved ones is a fundamental issue of humanitarian law and human rights .
As a result , the Council of the European Union is supporting the work being carried out by the international and local authorities in Serbia and Kosovo to this end and is encouraging them to increase their efforts .
( DE ) Mr President , every victim is of course equally important , and so I welcome this inquiry .
However , Professor Hoti really was very well-known .
I am in close contact with his family .
He was the closest aide of Ibrahim Rugova , our Sakharov Prize Laureate , and he has been formally detained by the Serbs .
In that case , they must have some knowledge of his whereabouts !
This is an issue which has to be clarified formally with the government in Belgrade , with the involvement of the Council .
What does the Serbian Government have to say about the whereabouts of its prisoner , for whom it has assumed responsibility , given that it is holding him in custody ?
( PT ) Mr President , as I have already said , the Council is of course supporting all efforts being made by the authorities with direct responsibility in this area to try and determine the whereabouts of Professor Ukshin Hoti .
We also understand , as I said , that this is an issue of human rights and protection of human rights .
In that regard , it must form part of our political dialogue with the respective governments which are responsible in this respect .
Subject : Climate change
Does the Council still feel that the European Union 's goal of keeping the global temperature rise to 2 ° C is likely to be met ?
Has the Council discussed what additional measures need to be considered at EU level to meet the concerns expressed in the 2007 report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , as you know , the European leaders decided to send the international community a clear signal of their determination to combat climate change by assuming the following commitments , with a view to encouraging negotiations on a global agreement for the post-2012 period .
Until said agreement is reached , the European Union has made the firm and independent commitment to achieve , by 2020 , a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions equivalent to at least 20 % of 1990 levels .
Secondly , the European Union is ready to commit to a 30 % reduction if the other developed countries make similar reductions and if the developing countries which are economically more advanced also make an appropriate contribution .
The European Union believes that it must take the lead in terms of ambitious emissions reductions so that the developed countries can convince the developing countries to contribute to the global effort .
Clearly , an ambitious target will also reinforce the global carbon market which must remain in place in order to limit the costs resulting from emissions reductions .
Various measures have already been taken under the European Climate Change Programme and others are planned within the strategic analysis of energy policy in the European Union in order to achieve a significant part of the greenhouse gas reduction target .
The emissions trading scheme will play a central role in achieving the EU 's long-term targets for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and its analysis will be vital in realising the overall targets set for the European Union .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for that quite encouraging response .
You said you want to send a strong signal and that we need a global agreement .
I was interested to hear about a 30 % target .
I agree with you that we need to be ambitious .
Of course , this is an area that not only affects most European citizens but also one about which they are very concerned .
I wonder if you could outline a little bit more about your thinking on what positive real steps we could be taking to encourage those countries that ought to be able to do more - like the United States - and to assist those countries - whether it is China , India or Russia - that are perhaps struggling at the moment .
What more could we actually be doing to push this process forward , rather than talking ?
I am not suggesting that is all you were doing , but , rather than just talking about the issue , what are we actually going to do to make it happen ?
( PT ) The tools available to the European Union are diplomatic tools and also our conviction and , shall we say , political determination .
I feel that the best way of persuading others to follow us is to set the pace and lead by example , which is exactly what we are doing .
Clearly , by setting ourselves ambitious targets which correspond to what our citizens expect of us , we are leading by example , not only within the Union but also globally .
This inspires public opinion in other countries which in turn forces the respective governments to take measures on a par with our ambitious targets .
As regards the United States , this leadership effect has , in my opinion , been very evident .
The example set by the European Union in this respect at world level has led to pressure being applied by US society on the respective authorities in the sense that they must also be more ambitious .
My personal view is that Mr Al Gore having received the Nobel Peace Prize for climate change issues has a lot to do with this , with our ambitious policy , with our desire for change , with our desire to make others commit to our targets , all of course in a context of multilateral diplomacy via the United Nations .
Could I urge Parliament to show leadership by turning off the air conditioning , because I am frozen and it might help our contribution to climate change ?
President-in-Office , you have answered one of the questions I wanted to ask , but it will probably take more than Al Gore to get the public engaged in this .
I would therefore ask the Council to outline how it intends to translate public concern into public action within the European Union , and also to take into account that we do not want to stop the developing world making progress , because we are actually gaining from the fact that they are developing .
We will try to solve this problem of the temperature in this House .
( PT ) Mrs McGuinness , thank you for your question .
What we must do is engage in a constant campaign of awareness-raising and information .
We must also lead by example .
This has been done .
Clearly there still remains much to be done , but I feel that the process of raising awareness among people of the climate change issue is increasingly gaining ground because the effects can be seen every day , they are real and people can feel them .
I could mention my own personal experience , if it would be of any interest .
The climate in Portugal when I was six or seven years old is not the same as it is today when I am fifty .
In fact , I have observed , as have others , that things have changed .
As a result , people are asking why things have changed and what are the consequences of these changes .
On the other hand , the Member States must adopt the legislation needed to deal with , halt or minimise the causes of climate change .
The Member States have made political commitments at EU level and must now make the commitment to adopt the legislation needed and ensure that this legislation is effectively observed .
Once again , we must lead by example at world level .
I would not wish to underestimate the campaign of former Vice President Al Gore as I believe that this has had a significant impact on public opinion worldwide .
Subject : Turmoil in global financial markets
During a recent informal meeting of the EU Finance Ministers ( Porto 14-15 September ) the crisis that has arisen in Europe because of instability in US financial markets was discussed .
Could the Council outline the nature of these discussions ?
Did the Council consider the particular case of Northern Rock which is currently experiencing financial difficulties as a direct result of instability in the US ?
Does the Council consider that this matter has broader implications for Europe 's financial markets ?
Finally , is the Council satisfied that existing safeguards in the financial services arena provide adequate protection to consumers , particularly those who have purchased financial products outside their ' home ' Member State ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , what I have to say on this issue is as follows .
At the informal meeting of EU Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors which was held in the Portuguese city of Porto on 14 and 15 September , various issues were discussed , including developments in the economic and financial situation .
As indicated on the Portuguese Presidency 's website , our assessment is in two parts .
On the one hand , we believe that we are experiencing a period of volatility and re-appraisal of risk in global financial markets , triggered by difficulties in the subprime mortgage market in the United States which have been passed on to the global financial system through complex financial instruments .
The functioning of the money markets has also been affected and this has required prompt and firm action by the main central banks , including the European Central Bank .
On the other hand , although it is undeniable that the financial turbulence has heightened uncertainty about economic prospects , the macro-economic fundamentals in the European Union are strong and world growth remains robust , despite the slowdown in the US .
European financial institutions appear to be strong and their healthy profitability in recent years ensures that they are in a position to weather the current period of increased volatility in the financial markets .
However , I would point out that specific cases in the Member States were not discussed .
During this assessment , we also discussed the lessons that may be drawn from recent financial market volatility .
It was stressed that , although we have a sound regulatory and supervisory framework in the financial sector which has been reinforced by recent legislation such as the implementation of the Capital Requirements Directive and by the work in hand on the Solvency II Directive , we must remain alert , particularly in light of the rapid and innovative developments in the area of financial products .
Accordingly , the recent episode of financial turbulence has increased the urgency of certain issues which are still on the Council 's agenda and has heightened the need for the European Union to find , alongside its international partners , ways of reinforcing transparency , improving valuation processes , continuing to reinforce risk management and improving market functioning , particularly with regard to complex financial products .
The Ecofin Council on 9 October agreed on a detailed work programme to be carried out until the end of 2008 by relevant bodies at EU level , in strict cooperation with the main international partners .
At the same Ecofin Council meeting in October , conclusions were also adopted on reinforcing financial stability mechanisms in the European Union .
These conclusions are available on the Council 's website and are the tangible result of over a year 's preparation .
In particular the Council adopted a set of common principles to guide cooperation between national authorities in the area of financial stability .
In addition , it was agreed to extend the Memorandum of Understanding on Cooperation and Exchange of Information signed in 2005 between EU Banking Supervisory Authorities , Central Banks and Finance Ministries in order to include three new elements : firstly , the common principles formally adopted at the meeting ; secondly , a common analytical framework for the assessment of systemic implications of a potential crisis and , thirdly , common practical guidelines on procedures to be followed in potential cross-border crisis situations .
A work programme was therefore defined with a timetable for this and other actions to be carried out in order to reinforce the effectiveness of the financial stability mechanisms in the European Union .
Clearly , all this work is intended to protect consumers and investors who depend on the proper functioning of the financial markets .
Please allow me to conclude by highlighting that , as I understand it , the Council , together with the European Parliament and the Commission , subscribes to the goal of achieving effective levels of prudential supervision and regulation in order to ensure financial stability , global competitiveness and consumer protection .
Thank you , President-in-Office .
I shall have to study your very detailed response , which is one that I appreciate because this is a very serious issue .
One would have to agree that the confidence of depositors in Northern Rock has been shattered , and that there is a knock-on effect .
Confidence is indeed the key to stability in the banking system and also to cross-border services and business in the financial services sector .
Do you think that the actions you have outlined are enough to restore that confidence ?
( PT ) The Council can always surprise the Members .
As I said , the Ecofin Council asked a working group to analyse the situation in great depth and detail and also any new instruments or measures which might in the future prevent situations such as these from affecting the European financial markets .
It is therefore alert to the problems as it has asked the competent bodies to carry out detailed work .
It has asked this working group to propose the measures which might need to be adopted in order to prevent situations such as the one we have seen recently .
We will have to wait and see whether or not these measures prove effective in practice .
However , the Council will be advised of the measures which might have to be taken in order to prevent our economy from being affected in the future by any further financial turmoil .
I must mention that this issue was also covered at the Informal Meeting of Heads of State and Government which was held in Lisbon last week .
At this meeting the following message was heavily underlined by our Heads of State and Government : firstly , that the European economy is presenting what the economists call ' good fundamentals ' , in other words our economies remain sound , and , secondly , that it supports the measures which have been taken by Ecofin and which are proposed in this area .
Subject : Growing number of European agencies
There are currently 23 European agencies , spread over a number of EU countries and cities .
There is scarcely any scrutiny of their activities or operation .
The latest agency set up is the Agency for Fundamental Rights , which has its seat in Vienna and currently employs 100 people .
The purpose of the agency is to monitor the protection of human rights in the European Union , although this task is already perfectly taken care of by the European Court of Human Rights and , in fact , also the Council of Europe , both of which have their seat in Strasbourg .
All these agencies spend around 1 billion euros a year of taxpayers ' money .
Some observers take the view that hardly a European Council summit goes by without a new agency being set up .
Does the Council intend to set up more new agencies ?
Is the need to set up an agency carefully considered in each case ?
Is the Council aware of the financial impact on the European budget ?
Is the Council prepared to abolish some agencies if their existence is not justified ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Van Hecke , I would point out that questions on setting up and closing down Community agencies should be put to the Commission which has the exclusive right of initiative in this respect .
The legislative bodies , Parliament and the Council , act solely on the basis of proposals presented by the Commission .
As regards the Council , the honourable Member may be sure that the need to set up a new agency is carefully considered in each case .
As for the budgetary aspects of agencies , I would refer the honourable Member to the Joint Statement of 18 April 2007 in which the three institutions agreed on a common set of principles for the budgetary management of existing or future Community agencies .

( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Minister for his reply .
My concern in putting this question was twofold : first , the explosion in the number of agencies opened up after each Council session ; 12 new agencies in five years , with an increase in the number of staff working for these agencies from 166 to 3 700 .
The second part to this question is : does the Council re-evaluate the need to retain these agencies on a regular basis , when the reason for their existence may no longer be evident ?
My second concern is how does the Council itself organise its internal control over the expenditure of all these agencies , and what role does he see for Parliament in this ?

( PT ) Mr Van Hecke , as I have already mentioned , the proposal to set up an agency is presented by the European Commission and then , in dialogue with the Commission , the Council assesses whether or not the Commission 's proposal is justified .
Decisions are then taken in accordance with the Treaty rules .
I must say that Portugal hosts one agency , the European Maritime Safety Agency which has its seat in Lisbon , which we feel is definitely a very useful European agency .
As regards the specific management of agencies , as you know , these have their own supervision mechanisms which , in my view , are pretty rigorous .
In addition , the institutions have also agreed , as I mentioned , a set of common principles which very directly apply to the budgetary management of these Community agencies .
My personal experience tells me that particular care is taken to ensure rigorous management and strict use of the funds made available to these agencies .
That is my personal experience , for what it is worth .
Subject : Cybercrime 24 / 7 emergency contact network
It is reported to me - from the USA - that 10 EU Member States are not taking part in the 24 / 7 emergency contact network for cybercrime .
These are Belgium , Cyprus , Estonia , Greece , Ireland , Latvia , Poland , Slovakia and Slovenia , and also Portugal , the current Council President .
How great an importance does the Council attach to the fight against international cybercrime ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Newton Dunn , the Council has not been informed about the participation of Member States in this network which is primarily an initiative of the G8 and Council of Europe Member States .
As a result , the Council cannot confirm or refute this .
However , the Council does regard the fight against cybercrime as extremely important , as demonstrated by the adoption of Framework Decision 2005 / 222 / JAI of 24 February 2005 on attacks against information systems and the fact that the Council supported the rapid ratification of the Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime of 23 November 2001 .
In addition , the Council 's conclusions on a general policy on the fight against cybercrime will be presented and discussed at the next Justice and Home Affairs Council which is planned for November .
Furthermore , Portugal has a national central reference point which is available 24 / 7 and which is responsible for fighting this type of crime through Interpol and a global operational network .
Thank you , President-in-Office , for that quite open , honest and factual reply .
Will you , at the next JHA Council meeting , to which you referred , raise the interesting point that the Council does not appear to know about this , and that 10 of the Member States are not involved , which seems completely extraordinary to me ?
Would you please raise this issue in the Council ?
( PT ) I note your question and your concern .
Whether or not this issue will be on the agenda and discussed will naturally be decided at a later date , but I will voice your concern on this matter .
Subject : Ban on visiting Cuban nationals imprisoned in the United States
Earlier this year I requested authorisation from the US Government to visit the Cuban nationals , René González , Gerardo Hernández , Antonio Guerrero , Ramón Labañino and Fernando González , who are being unlawfully detained in US prisons .
However , I was refused authorisation on the grounds that I did not know them before they were imprisoned .
It appears that in September this year two prisoners ' wives were once again refused permits to visit their husbands , whom they have not been able to visit for nine years because of successive refusals .
What does the Council think of this situation which does not constitute respect for these citizens ' human rights ?
Is it willing to convey its concerns to the US authorities ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mrs Figueiredo , as the honourable Member must surely know , a country 's decision as to whether or not to grant entry to its territory is a matter of national competence .
In the specific case of the treatment dispensed to Cuban prisoners and their family members , this is a bilateral issue between the United States and Cuba as , under the Vienna Convention on Consular Relations , the protection abroad of the rights and interests of a country 's citizens is the responsibility of that country .
The Council is not therefore competent to give an opinion on this issue .
( PT ) That is true but the Presidency must consider this issue : there are five Cuban citizens who have been detained for nine years in US prisons and who have been denied visits by family members and even , in the case of two of them , by their wives .
The latter have previously been to this Parliament and are in fact here today .
It is also true that I am a Member of this Parliament and that I asked for permission to visit these citizens , but that this was denied .
Now I am a Member of this House ; I did not make this request solely as a citizen , but also as a representative of this Parliament .
I believe that the European Parliament and its President and of course the Portuguese Presidency should take a stand on this issue , bearing in mind that refusing to allow a visit by one of the Members of this House , in this case myself , is a violation of human rights and also demonstrates a lack of respect for this House .
However , there are also other Members of this House involved in this case and I therefore ask you , Mr President , to convey our concern .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PT ) Mr President , I have of course noted the observations and comments made by Mrs Figueiredo but I have nothing further to add to my previous answer .
You must also understand that I cannot give a personal opinion on this issue .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.30 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Production of opium for medical purposes in Afghanistan ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Cappato , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , with a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on production of opium for medical purposes in Afghanistan .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in this report we propose that Parliament should take the initiative and make a proposal to the Council , primarily in the context of the common foreign and security policy , on the issue of opium production in Afghanistan .
Our starting point is the realisation that the results achieved to date are inadequate .
There has been a 50 % increase in the production of opium used to produce heroin over the past two years .
It seems that we are unable to find an effective means of reducing this enormous production mountain , all of which then goes to enrich not the growers , the farmers , of course , but the large international drug mafias , the terrorists and the Taliban .
The report also starts from another premise : that at the same time there is in fact a very severe lack of access to painkillers . Some 80 % of the world 's population has no access at all to painkillers .
Of course , the two issues could be regarded as completely separate , but I believe it is the job of political institutions to be pragmatic and hence to understand that , faced with this enormous volume of production used for heroin - whilst a product from the same agricultural origin is in very short supply - it ought to be possible , as it were , to combine the two points of departure .
The amendments put forward in the Committee on Foreign Affairs and by Mrs Gomes on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , as well as those tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in plenary , have helped to ensure that the proposal on the table today is not an alternative one , that is , a negative proposal calling for the policy pursued hitherto to be replaced overnight .
What we are asking of you , of the Council and of the Commission , is to conduct an experiment , to run some pilot projects converting part of the crop currently used to produce heroin to produce painkillers instead .
On the demand side too , policies could be launched to try and take painkillers to continents such as Africa and Asia which are practically bereft of any such medicines .
That is why the report , as it emerged from the Committee on Foreign Affairs and taking into account the proposed amendments , seems to me fundamentally well-balanced .
It proceeds from a very simple assumption , namely that it is probably - I believe definitely - easier to cooperate with farmers if we propose converting part of their output to legal ends , rather than simply coming along with a policy of eradicating , fumigating and destroying plantations .
That response in fact creates yet another reason for conflict with local populations and has proved counterproductive and unhelpful , at least until now .
I therefore hope that , beyond the understandable official line taken by Europe 's governments and the Afghan Government , asserting the need to fight opium production , beyond that official line we might send out another message , and the European Parliament is perhaps freer than others to make such a proposal .
We have already assumed this responsibility and I hope we will reassert it tomorrow at the vote .
We are freer than others to propose that alternative experiments be carried out and assessed pragmatically , not ideologically .
Every one of us here has his or her own ideas about international politics and drugs , and about international policies in Afghanistan .
This report is not intended as an ideological proposal , but as a practical attempt to help find a solution for what really is a global tragedy .

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I too would like to say thank you very much to Mr Cappato - tante grazie !
I welcome this very timely debate on the drug problem - and particularly on Afghanistan 's drug problem - which , as we know , is a major complex issue in the political and security context .
We recently had a lot of discussions in New York .
There were a number of very important discussions during the UN General Assembly with President Karzai , with UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , and with a host of countries .
These focused exactly on this whole complex question .
Tonight 's discussion contributes to the wider debate on Afghanistan 's reconstruction , but also on the role of drugs .
Let me also commend you for setting up the EP Delegation for relations with Afghanistan .
We are taking a keen interest in your work and consider it very important that you have done this .
Afghanistan 's drug industry does indeed pose an enormous challenge to progress in state building .
The latest United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) report makes for troubling reading .
Both poppy cultivation and processing capacity have , unfortunately , increased significantly .
Afghanistan 's southern provinces are most affected , with 70 % of all the production .
The strong link between the insurgency and the drug economy hardly comes as a surprise .
However , we must not overlook the positive developments , especially in the more stable parts of the country , where there have been real improvements in health and education , as well as economic growth .
Thirteen provinces in northern and central Afghanistan are indeed poppy free .
That , at least , is very promising , and something on which we can build .
The Cappato report gives a complete picture of this situation - and I should thank you for your encouraging remarks on what the Commission is doing - and it also points , quite rightly , to Afghanistan 's responsibility for tackling the opium industry .
On that we are in absolute agreement .
Yet I must say that I cannot share - at least not yet - the conclusions reached in the report , which proposes to legalise the opium poppy for medical purposes , albeit on a trial basis .
At first sight that may be an appealing proposition , but unfortunately there are no simple answers to Afghanistan 's complex drug problem .
Let me share with you some of my concerns .
Countries like Australia , Turkey and India , which are already producing raw opium for medical purposes , usually have effective law enforcement and also an absence of widespread conflict .
Even then , implementation is very difficult .
Where such conditions are not being met , opium cultivated legally is promptly diverted , as we have seen in Peru and Bolivia .
Obviously , in the case of Afghanistan , licit cultivation would , we fear , simply add to illicit cultivation instead of replacing it .
Also , the legal production of opium remains unappealing to local farmers as their revenues would only be around 25-30 % of what they can now obtain on the black market .
The implementation of such a scheme is complex , and only feasible with subsidies for quality monitoring and the distribution of medical products .
Should we support this with taxpayers ' money ?
The Afghan Government , which is notoriously weak and has weak institutions , unfortunately does not at the moment have - and that is why I said ' not yet ' - the capacity to oversee such a scheme .
In some parts of the country , there is simply no governance , let alone good governance , at the moment .
This applies notably to the unstable southern provinces , where the bulk of opium is produced .
Finally , the Afghan Government itself has firmly ruled out - and this is an important argument - any licit production of opium .
Against this backdrop , the political message in this report does not really send the right signal to our Afghan partners .
It might even backfire .
The hard and undeniable truth is that reconstruction in Afghanistan will need much more time and resources .
It will also require stamina , if we want to bring lasting development to this war-torn country .
Progress in state building is only possible with more resolve , including from Afghanistan 's political leadership , notably at the local level .
That was , by the way , the message we gave in New York .
I agree it is high time to visibly tackle corruption .
We have not only said this , but are also trying to help in this by building up a good judicial system and having a police force that really works , in order to convince ordinary Afghans who often remain sceptical .
There is a clear way ahead .
It is through Afghanistan 's national drug control strategy , which has been endorsed by the international community and contains all the elements needed .
This really deserves our unequivocal support , being a comprehensive strategy that includes interdiction , public information , prosecution of known drug dealers and the promotion of local development .
Where such a careful policy mix has been used , farmers have already abandoned poppy cultivation , sustainably .
In that context , the Commission considers that a proposal to legalise the opium poppy might simply undermine the work it is currently doing in other sectors , notably concerning the rule of law and policing .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have no doubt whatsoever that Mr Cappato , with whom I have been friendly for a long time , is trying desperately to contribute to the fight against drugs in the world and to help the unfortunate young or older people who are suffering close to death and who can be assisted with drugs .
Regrettably , however , I cannot go along with him .
Regrettably , I repeat , I am not of the rapporteur 's opinion . I believe the problem stems from the fact that his proposal concerns Afghanistan , a state where insecurity could not be any greater .
Yes , Iraq is perhaps less safe , but Afghanistan is hardly the place to begin trying to convince farmers to abandon what for them is the very lucrative cultivation of poppies and switch to crops that are fairer , more Old Testament-like and more in tune with the civilised farming practices we are all familiar with .
The report itself makes perfectly plain that the largest quantity of drugs in the world , about half , comes from Afghanistan and that opium growing is illegal in Afghanistan .
Even though it is illegal , however , that country is the source of half of the raw materials needed to kill our young people or make them fall prey to drug traffickers who , as we know , draw them into the use of drugs , which harms them and society as a whole .
I believe that there is only one effective weapon to combat all drug traffickers , beginning with the Afghan farmers who in my opinion are the first drug traffickers .
Our inability to control and monitor them means that the only way to fight drugs is through prevention , and hence by helping to reduce opium-growing as much as possible .
For this reason the PPE-DE Group opposes this part of Mr Cappato 's report , and I think that what I am saying now must be clear to everyone , whatever tomorrow 's outcome may be .
( The President cut off the speaker )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) I must congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Cappato , not only on this very useful report but also on his readiness to accept contributions in order to get as wide-ranging an agreement as possible .
His original intentions were laudable as he was trying to kill two birds with one stone : legalising poppy cultivation and opium production for medical purposes would not only have ended heroin production in Afghanistan but also the lack of painkillers worldwide .
Unfortunately , we came up against several practical problems , such as the fragility of the Afghan institutions and their inability to regulate opium production , the uncertainty as to the economic viability of such a scheme and the danger in allowing the reintroduction of opium in some of the thirteen Afghan provinces which have stopped production .
My Group 's amendments tried to refocus the report on the essential element : the fight against opium production in Afghanistan which is affecting not only Afghanistan but also neighbouring countries .
The drugs illegally produced from this opium constitute what some call the true weapons of mass destruction , particularly in Europe .
In the fight against opium production , we must be sensitive to the individual characteristics of the various Afghan regions .
Only a combination of measures will be successful .
Firstly , the corruption permeating the Afghan central administration , particularly the Interior Ministry and police , must be eradicated as this has paralysed all policies to combat opium production .
Secondly , the 30 or so main drug traffickers identified in a 2006 UN and World Bank report must be sought , captured and put on trial so that this murderous trafficking can be stopped .
Thirdly , NATO must support the Afghan operations to fight this trafficking , by destroying laboratories and stores and preventing drug transports .
Fourthly , the poppy eradication actions must be carefully and selectively applied and concentrated in areas where farmers have real alternatives .
This brings us to the points of agreement with the rapporteur .
We all oppose indiscriminate fumigation of poppy plantations , as has been advocated by the US , which will simply swell the ranks of the Taliban without substantially altering the production of heroin .
Finally , in the context of a package of measures to deal with the Afghan drug problem , the rapporteur 's proposal for a pilot project for the legal production of opium-based analgesics should be studied .
More than anything , this report tries to encourage the European Council to be creative and daring in the fight against heroin production in Afghanistan .
There are no easy solutions to this problem , but we know that the terrorism and violent obscurantism advocated by the Taliban and Al-Qaeda will only be defeated when Afghanistan is freed from the clutches of drugs .
I am about to end , Mr President .
This report must be viewed as an urgent appeal to the Member States not to spare any efforts in the economic and political reconstruction of a country which has been so badly affected by bloody conflicts and which is so important for regional and global security .
Madam President , I speak on this matter in a personal capacity , and not on behalf of my Group .
The production of illicit opium in Afghanistan has flourished since US and allied forces have been in that country .
This despite the setting-up of various anti-drug-production authorities and anti-narcotic programmes , sometimes using large amounts of EU taxpayers ' money .
So it is obvious , even to the blind , that the Afghan people will go on producing opium come what may .
The reason for this is quite simple .
The world 's anti-narcotic agencies are growing in size , number and expertise , and they are doing their job more effectively .
They are therefore managing to confiscate larger amounts of drugs .
However , since the demand from drug-addiction sufferers remains unaltered and since criminal drug traffickers continue to make huge profits from the illegal supply of opium to these sick people , the price of opiates goes up and the profits from dealing in opium increase .
Therefore , the Afghan people are just following basic liberal market principles .
They are increasing their production in order to meet illicit trade demand and in order to increase their profits .
So it is a pure fallacy to expect that sponsoring more opium control programmes in Afghanistan is going to have any significant effect .
The only way to deal effectively with opium production in Afghanistan , and elsewhere for that matter , is to deal with the drug problem globally .
The only common-sense way to do that is to legalise drugs and recognise that drug addicts are not criminals , but sick people who need help .
If those addicts were offered therapeutic drugs in a controlled medical setting , then the chance of avoiding serious side-effects , as well as the chance of achieving detoxification , would be much improved .
At the same time , the enormous criminality involved in drug trafficking would vanish , and all anti-drug police agencies would be scrapped , leading to phenomenal budgetary savings .
The logic of this is so basic , but politicians worldwide are having difficulty seeing it .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the issue addressed by Mr Cappato 's report is extremely delicate and requires careful appraisal by the European Parliament to avoid putting forward misguided and disastrous solutions , albeit motivated by good intentions .
I wish to highlight two points .
Firstly , to increase the production of opium and its derivatives in Afghanistan could compromise the country 's reconstruction and the already difficult stabilisation of the rule of law in that unfortunate region .
Secondly , the increasing production of opium - up by 30 % this year - has not been matched by an adequate anti-drugs strategy .
For these reasons I think the proposal put forward in the report is absolutely unacceptable , and I would stress that :
1. the necessary quantities of morphine are already being produced in Afghanistan under special licences and subject to supervision by the United Nations drugs agency and the Afghan Government 's Ministry of Counter Narcotics ;
2. the International Narcotics Control Board maintains that there is already a worldwide surplus of opiates for medical use ;
3. large-scale legal production of morphine would lead to more drugs being produced ; these would ultimately meet the demand for drugs on the world market .
Once they were placed on the market cheaply they would be available to all .
We should instead oppose drugs - always and in every case and by all means - from production , to trafficking , to illegal distribution . Demand should be curbed through a value-based policy and through ongoing , widespread prevention work and information campaigns , especially among young people .
In a country like Afghanistan , given the conditions in which it currently finds itself , the solution proposed by this report could be regarded as an indication of surrender and defeat ; it could also thwart the efforts being made by the international community , the European Union , the United Nations and the reconstruction agencies in Afghanistan through programmes to diversify away from opium plantations and into other crops , supported by financial incentives .
Finally I would just mention that the International Narcotics Control Board has approved the Afghan Government 's decision rejecting the proposal to legalise illicit opium poppy cultivation and reiterating its commitment to comply with its international treaty obligations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I want to begin by emphasising that this report is extremely important , timely and courageous .
The two emergencies to which it refers both merit political attention and a political response that they clearly have not yet received .
While the security situation and the situation regarding opium production in Afghanistan are increasingly worrying , the need to supply analgesics on a global scale is one of the greatest humanitarian emergencies of our time , although unfortunately it is also one of the most ignored .
The rapporteur , Mr Cappato , did not have an easy task with this report and it is thus all the more remarkable , and I again reiterate both my support and that of my Group .
As he himself said , although the link between the two issues is not simple , nor necessarily immediate , it is our responsibility as politicians to analyse the complex realities in order to find complex solutions to the complex problems .
That is exactly what this report does .
As regards security in Afghanistan , there is no doubt that it must be a priority if we want to implement reconstruction and development programmes with future guarantees .
The problem , however , is that certain armed groups are funded precisely as a result of the lack of regulation of opium production .
We also know that there is illegal cultivation and trafficking of opium , which accounts for 40 % of Afghanistan 's gross domestic product .
In the light of this situation , I think it is appropriate at least to study and take account of initiatives such as those of the Senlis Council , which is proposing a system to authorise the cultivation of opium for medical purposes in Afghanistan . This would focus mainly on the production of painkillers such as morphine and codeine , which could also be sold to other countries that currently have little or no access to these types of vital medicines as a result of preferential trade agreements .
It is unfortunate that this proposal , at present and in real terms , does not have stronger support from the Commission or the Afghan Government itself .
Even more worrying is the fact that the measures being touted as alternatives often consist of chemical eradication , as stressed over and over again by the US authorities .
If this measure were to be carried out , it would give the Taliban a new argument to defend its positions and eventually would most likely result in the farming communities ending up as rebel camps .
It would also have very serious health and environmental repercussions .
It is clear right from the start that aerial spraying , which is presumably what is proposed for Afghanistan , guarantees that the contamination will extend to the humans who live in the treated areas and surrounding areas . This was demonstrated at the start of year when this practice was used by Colombia to fumigate cocaine production along the border with Ecuador , with the latter consequently taking a complaint and case to The Hague .
I am not an expert and obviously this chemical issue is much more complex , but I believe that at this stage we should be well aware of some of the disasters caused by napalm and depleted uranium .
We should not repeat this a third time and I hope that we do not .
( SK ) Production of opium must be controlled .
The entire international community must concern itself far more with control of opium production everywhere in the world .
Efforts undertaken so far by the UN and its Economic and Social Council ( ECOSOC ) , as well as by the World Health Organization , to regulate the use of opiates for the treatment of pain are necessary but still insufficient .
At the same time the international community must not allow an unrestrained use of opiates and their misuse by drug addicts .
In my opinion it is our duty not to give up the fight against the misuse of hard drugs that quite clearly destroy their users ' lives .
Neither do I support the notion that society should supply addicts with drugs instead of trying to re-educate them and return them to reality .
What exactly is the Cappato report about ?
According to one point of view , the international community suffers from a lack of availability of opiates , or might suffer from such a shortage in the near future , and it is therefore necessary , under certain conditions , to buy this drug from Afghanistan .
It is true that opiates are needed for the treatment of various illnesses , for post-operative pain relief and , last but not least , for the treatment of people with malignant diseases .
However , this theory suffers from several fundamental defects that cannot be ignored in the present situation .
Firstly , the current political situation in Afghanistan is unstable .
In Afghanistan it is necessary to fight the Taliban on the one hand and to side with the opium black market on the other hand .
This black market has a decisive impact not only on the Afghan economy but also on Afghan politics and foreign relations .
I have serious doubts and worries over this and I will explain now why in my opinion such an approach cannot work .
Projects involving legal poppy cultivation for the purpose of opium production will not work because the International Narcotics Control Board can only impose sanctions on a country afterwards but the country will be losing a part of the crops to the black market .
International demand is constant .
The Afghan Government is not capable of acting as the sole manager of opium crops .
It is clear that under these circumstances the Government will lose the fight against traffickers .
Competition will increase the price of opium and farmers who grow poppies legally will turn to the black market .
In addition to that ( and this is very important ) Afghan prices are not competitive compared with Australia where one kilo of morphine costs USD 56 , India where it is USD 159 or Turkey where it is USD 250 .
In Afghanistan the price can go up to USD 450 per kilo .
Regarding the use for medical purposes , if Afghan opium were to be used in medical products , this would only add to further over-saturation of the market in this area .
I am about to finish , Madam President .
I will oppose any support by the EU and its Member States for poppy cultivation in Afghanistan for at least four reasons : insufficient infrastructure , absence of economic competitiveness , huge expansion in the wrong direction and , finally , there is no lack of opiates on the world markets at present .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Cappato for his work on this report .
The report posed a great challenge as it attempts to respond to one of the most difficult problems in the contemporary world .
Opium production in Afghanistan is increasing year on year .
According to the latest annual report , opium production is now double what it was two years ago .
In practice , Afghanistan currently has a monopoly of the supply of the deadliest drug in the world . It accounts for 93 % of world production of opiates .
Our President is numbered amongst those who believe that Afghanistan 's fate is our common cause .
The heroic struggle of the Afghan people during the Cold War period contributed to the spread of freedom across the contemporary world and to the fall of the Iron Curtain in Europe .
The European Union is now honour bound to provide Afghanistan with military , administrative and economic assistance .
This also involves assistance in combating the production of drugs in Afghanistan .
It should be remembered that the main incentive for Afghan growers to produce opiates is financial profit .
This should be borne in mind when devising the European aid programme aimed at resolving the problem .
That is why I particularly wished to commend Mr Cappato on the courageous proposals he makes in this report .
They may well help to resolve the situation in question .
One of these proposals involves offering aid through the introduction of a pilot scientific project for the production of poppies for medical purposes which will allow for further research into the extent to which awarding licences can contribute to poverty reduction , diversification of the rural economy , general development and improved security .
In a nutshell , this is not about moralising but about the European Union making an effective contribution to resolving this problem in Afghanistan .
( RO ) According to the 2007 Afghanistan opium survey , conducted by the UN Office on Drugs and Crime , opium production reached a record of 8,200 tons , representing 93 % of the world production of opiates .
Thus , 40 % of the gross domestic product in Afghanistan resulted from production of and illegal trade in opium , involving 2.9 million people in this process .
Despite this fact , only 10 countries consume 80 % of the opium derivatives legally available in the world , while in over 150 countries serious treatment insufficiencies generated by the illegal trade in opium have been found .
We should emphasize that the main source of finance of the Taliban and terrorist groups is illegal drug trafficking .
Moreover , the actions to eradicate or destroy drugs , which are sponsored by the international community , are used by the tribal political and military leaders for their own benefit and for eliminating competition .
Based on the things stated so far , I am convinced that a strategic and balanced approach of the process of reducing and controlling opium production should involve social and economic alternatives to favour the establishment of a rule of law and democratic institutions in Afghanistan .
This is why such an action could represent one of the basic solutions for preventing and eradicating terrorism .
Madam President , I consider that an anti-drug plan in Afghanistan , consisting in the control of opium quantities by using them to obtain analgesics and other derivatives , might represent one and not the only alternative economic solution and a means of reducing poppy cultivation .
( PL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by congratulating Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner on the outstanding performance by the Altenburg Boys ' Choir that we have just heard .
I am truly impressed .
I must now turn to less pleasant subjects , however , namely the Cappato report .
Members who took the floor earlier persisted in quoting the figure of 40 % of GDP because that is the proportion of Afghanistan 's GDP that is allegedly generated by the production of narcotics .
That figure has been accepted but I should like to emphasise that a year ago our representatives in Afghanistan clearly stated otherwise before Parliament 's Committee on Foreign Affairs .
They maintained that the proportion of GDP is above 50 % which is even higher .
I am reluctant to provide explanations , but at least 10 % of the population of Afghanistan lives off drug production and trade .
We should also recognise that soldiers from the international forces are involved in this trade , along with Americans based in the country .
I consider this to be a risky proposal , although I do of course accept it has certain underlying advantages .
I am firmly convinced , however , that the proposal will actually result in legalisation of the trade in drugs rather than of medical aid .

( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is not a matter simply of observing that 92 % of opium in the world is produced in Afghanistan but of noting the upward trend : in 2001 , according to data from the UN drugs agency , 8 000 hectares were given over to opium growing while in 2006 it was 165 000 ; 185 tons were harvested in 2001 , 6 100 in 2006 .

This obviously means that the current strategy of destroying crops by fumigation solves nothing . Rather , it has social consequences that will subsequently cause opium production to spiral .
Crops other than opium poppies are destroyed , so farmers become ever poorer and end up in the hands of drug traffickers , namely the Taliban and the warlords sitting comfortably in government .
The goal is therefore to provide farmers with support which at least initially must be at the same financial level as now , freeing them from dependence on drug traffickers .
This plan will not solve the problem , of course , but no one is claiming that it will .
We are talking about an experiment in a limited area , and it could not be otherwise in a war-torn country where land is controlled by rival gangs .
It nevertheless constitutes a step forward , in that at least part of that opium will not end up as heroin , but as morphine .
That , I believe , is beneficial for the West and the entire world .
Besides , I think we must clarify the fact that there is already provision for morphine production .
I am not aware , Commissioner , that all these problems exist in India and Turkey ; if so , regulation is needed .
The resolution before us , however , envisages a regulatory role for international bodies : not over Afghanistan as a whole , which is unmanageable at present , but over an extremely limited area .
Furthermore , international medical associations are making plain that there is still a need for morphine today , not only in the South of the world , but paradoxically in the North too .
It must of course be sold at official prices , but it is a painkiller and in my opinion everyone is entitled to it , including African people and poor people .
If we are talking about expense , it undoubtedly costs less to take action of this kind and to place price controls on morphine , rather than deciding to destroy crops using the existing methods which get us nowhere .
One last comment : I welcome the fact that this has been a pragmatic debate , not an argument between those wishing to liberalise or legalise drugs and prohibitionism .
We are trying to take practical , pragmatic action to assist part of the Afghan population .
Madam President , it is important that substances derived from opium , like diamorphine ( also known as heroin ) , are available for medical purposes , especially pain relief , but poppy cultivation provides the Taliban terrorists with 20-40 % of their funds , which enables them to kill NATO soldiers .
Regrettably , Afghan opium production increased 34 % this year and constitutes over 90 % of global supply .
Troops from my country , the UK , are leading the fight against the Taliban as part of the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) .
They do not have the mandate or the manpower to police a large-scale poppy-growing medical project - or , for that matter , to eradicate the crop .
They have got quite enough to think about dodging bullets , without becoming part-time market-gardeners .
However , I do have some sympathy , as a doctor , with the arguments put forward by the British Medical Association , which does support cultivating poppies - under strict supervised conditions - to ensure the ready supply of analgesics .
My UK parliamentary colleague , Tobias Ellwood MP , has done much to develop a plan of a six-year period of tapered replacement of poppy crops in Afghanistan by cash crops diverting the opium production for medical use .
Therefore , we should at least explore the idea of a very limited pilot licensing scheme , mindful of the danger of it being hijacked by the Taliban for illegal purposes .
Any trial will , inevitably , have to be confined to a very small area .
It will need support from a range of partner organisations if it is going to work .
We certainly cannot divert our brave troops from their vital task of fighting terrorism , but it might just have some beneficial effects all round .
On the issue of EU-Afghan aid , we need a far more coordinated approach by the EU to developing Afghan infrastructure and fighting corruption ; otherwise , the Taliban will indeed prevail , as we are barely containing the Taliban in the south of the country .
The West must wake up to the realities of Afghanistan .
International bodies are not coordinating their activities properly .
The rampant corruption of the Afghan Government means that provinces are losing patience with President Karzai 's Government in Kabul .
The current centralised model of government does not suit the diversity of interests and ethnicities across the country , which has never had a tradition of strong central government in the past .
The provinces are currently given no operational funding to pursue objectives separate from Kabul .
No long-term economic plan is being followed to harness the plentiful water supply , 92 % of which - shamefully and ludicrously - runs out of the country .
Construction of dams and irrigation systems would allow industrial-scale growth of fruit and vegetables .
Afghanistan was once upon a time famous for its pomegranates , now very much ' in ' with the health food lobby .
Building a much needed railway system would help ship such goods onto the international market .
If the country is to be rescued from political and economic disaster , much still urgently needs to be done , Madam Commissioner .
Madam President , as someone who has long opposed fumigation to eradicate drugs as inefficient , often counterproductive and always with damaging side effects to human health , I am sorry that this resolution combines this position with what I believe to be a misguided attempt to encourage licit opium production in Afghanistan .
This resolution quotes the Senlis Council report suggesting a global poppy shortage ; but that is not poppy , it is poppycock .
The International Narcotics Control Board shows world stockpiles of licit opiates equivalent to two years ' demand , whilst London-based Johnson Matthey , the largest producer of morphine in the world , attest to a world surplus of more than 250 tonnes .
The Commissioner is right to argue that conditions in Afghanistan would not allow Afghan farmers to benefit .
This is just one of many forced assumptions in the draft resolution .
Opium poppy is grown on less than 4 % of agricultural land .
Licit cultivation would add to illicit cultivation , not replace it .
According to the independent Asia Foundation survey , 80 % of Afghan people oppose this drugs trade .
The Afghan Government opposes it , President Karzai calling opium ' the enemy of humanity ' .
Just weeks before the time for sowing poppy , it would send precisely the wrong political signal .
I have every respect for the rapporteur , but on this issue , I regret , the House will divide .
Poppy for medicine is a beguiling phrase ; but the truth , instead , is that opium funds the violence and insecurity in Afghanistan .
Poppy for corruption and terrorism would be the more apt phrase .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to express my support for the proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on production of opium for medical purposes in Afghanistan .
I also wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his courage . Combating the illegal trade in drugs is one of the major global challenges of the contemporary world .
The European Union should organise its activities in such a way as to try and effectively control drugs and reduce the supply of drugs in the world on the one hand and , on the other , to increase the availability of analgesics and bring down their prices .
The proposal to legalise opium production to meet the needs of the international pharmaceutical industry may well be a useful way of attaining the aforementioned aims .
Following the example of Turkey and Australia , licences could also be granted in Afghanistan for the cultivation of poppies used to produce useful analgesics such as morphine or codeine .
The specific conditions prevailing in Afghanistan must be taken into account , however , if licensing is to go ahead .
Afghanistan is the main supplier of the raw material for the production of opiates in the world .
Opium production and trade in Afghanistan have become an important factor in the growth of GDP , the basis of cross-border trade , the main source of income for growers and the only way for most of society to access land , work , and credit .
Legalising poppy growing in Afghanistan will make sense only if the right conditions are created .
The security situation must improve and the country become politically stable if the national authorities are to ensure effective control of the opium production process .
Effective democracy has to come about and state credits be made available to farmers . In addition , the conduct of economic activity should be regulated .
( SV ) Madam President , I want to begin by thanking Marco Cappato for an interesting report .
I am responsible on the LIBE committee for the long-term budget for the drugs programme .
On that committee we are trying to be practical in our work on how we in the EU can reduce harmful use and supply .
I therefore think that the debate on Afghanistan is crucial , because it is the origin of the majority of the heroin ( 93 % ) that kills our young people on the streets .
If it is possible through production of opium for medical purposes to reorganise control and production for some farmers under EU and UN supervision , then let us say yes to the project .
This is coming from me , someone from Sweden , which has a very strong anti-drugs programme and drugs policy .
Unfortunately I do not think that it is enough , but we must of course also look at other possibilities , such as energy production .
However , the farmers need jobs and livelihoods , and we in the European Parliament must therefore take responsibility and demand more action .
We will be replacing 40 % of the GNP , and we need to take responsibility for that !
As regards paragraph 1 ( a ) calling on the Council to oppose the use of fumigation as a means of eradicating the poppy , I take a different view .
I think that we must also look at it in order to break the deadlock we now find ourselves in , with nothing happening .
Lastly , a few words on overproduction .
It does not mean that there is a greater need for analgesics among the world 's poorest , among women and children .
They use very few analgesics compared with us in the EU .
So let us take a global view and find constructive solutions in the EU and the UN together with Afghanistan , to support peace and democracy and to combat terrorism and drugs .
Thank you .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to say something about the demand side and something about the supply side .

On the demand side , Mr Tatarella , who is no longer with us , and Mr Howitt raised the problem of overproduction : the fact that the opium currently available actually exceeds demand for processing into opiates for drugs .
That is true , but it is true only of current demand levels .
What the report attempts to address is potential demand .
Some 80 % of the world 's population has no access whatsoever to painkillers , even for the commonest operations , for amputations or for the care of cancer sufferers .
That is what we are talking about , and the International Narcotics Control Board bears partial responsibility for the absence of a global policy to promote painkilling drugs .
On the supply side , I would take the liberty of saying to the Commissioner that this proposed pilot project would indeed cost money , resources from the taxpayer .
That is true , but the existing policy costs huge amounts of taxpayers ' money .
The problem is simple , therefore .
What we are asking you to check is whether it is more difficult and more costly to go in and forcibly uproot crops from one area which will then very probably be moved to the adjoining area , or else to buy up that harvest and process it on the spot , under supervision by the international community , so that it cannot be used to produce heroin but is used there and then to produce medicines .
The second alternative is less costly , in my opinion , including for European citizens and taxpayers .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I think it was a very interesting discussion .
Again , I appreciate Mr Cappato 's courageous idea .
But , again , let me also argue and say : yes , it is true that our strategy has not yet been successful .
But , as I said before , it is not only a strategy with regard to drugs ; it is a hugely complex situation .
We are in a post-conflict situation and , of course , all the different elements are there : NATO , the European Union and the UN .
We had these meetings in New York exactly on this matter .
Now let me come back to the drugs question .
There are indeed problems on the demand and on the supply side .
On the demand side , there is , at this moment , no demand for additional licit opium for medical purposes according to the International Narcotics Control Board .
And I hear that world demand is indeed fully met now , and Turkey and India had to cut their production in 2005 and 2006 .
The stockpiles were so high that they would last worldwide for two years .
That is one point .
I understand your saying that maybe people in other parts of the world do not even have the possibility of having medical treatment without pain relief .
I understand that .
But this is something that you are taking out of context .
These are the realities today .
On the supply side , let us also look a little at the proportions .
Afghanistan is , as some colleagues have said , the country that produces the highest share of opium and drugs : 8 200 tonnes .
If it were even allowed to produce legally , there would only be a possibility for a small amount and that would only be very small .
So , even if there were a possibility , I think that would represent only five tonnes of opium production .
Now , comparing 8 200 tonnes to five tonnes : this is nothing !
So you see , neither on the supply side nor on the demand side is there a real balance .
Therefore , apart from this very complex situation , I think your idea is courageous ; I agree .
But I think that , for Afghanistan , it is maybe not useful at this stage .
On the contrary , I think what we have to do as a strategy is to have a combination of sustaining Afghanistan 's long-term development and offering farmers alternatives to poppy cultivation , combined with improved governance .
So the focus will be on justice and police , as we will try to do and as we have started doing .
We have also been at the forefront on the rural livelihood agenda and helping to support legitimate employment .
To this end , the European Commission is also supporting the Afghan Government 's National Drug Control Strategy through supply-control and demand-reduction initiatives and the improvement of governance .
For instance , we have been supporting the Law and Order Trust Fund , up to now with some EUR 135 million , while a sum of EUR 70 million is planned for the next two years .
But I must also say , since we have been concentrating on rural development , on health care and on justice , and also helping on the police and justice reform , plus alternative production , as the European Union and European Commission , we cannot do everything alone in Afghanistan .
This I would like to say to the honourable Member Mr Tannock , because I think he is addressing only us , the European Commission and European Union , but there are many other important actors there .
I think we all have to get our act together .
This is what we are trying to do more and more through a very coordinated strategy , which , on the one hand , is going to combat drugs .
But , again , I think that , maybe , it is too early .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Improving the efficiency of the enforcement of judgments in the EU : attachment of bank accounts ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Lechner , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , on the Green Paper on improving the efficiency of the enforcement of judgments in the European Union : the attachment of bank accounts .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , that was an interesting debate .
We now move on to a very different subject area .
We will see if we can achieve an outcome sooner or later .
There is a saying which , I presume , is understood throughout Europe , namely that money does not bring happiness , but it does bring peace of mind .
In that spirit , let me start by wishing all our citizens in Europe peace of mind .
However , if you are owed money by another person , if someone owes you money from a sale , damages or similar , this often gives cause for concern rather than peace of mind .
Will the debtor evade his commitments ?
Will he conceal his money or his assets , perhaps at an even later hour than our debate this evening ?
All Member States have procedures which aim to prevent this from occurring .
They include attachments , injunctions , arrest and seizure : there are many different terms .
Procedures vary very widely and the situation is extremely complicated , and there is of course the language issue as well .
Anyone wishing to make use of Member States ' various cross-border procedures may well find that the horse has bolted , or as we say in Germany , the hare is already on the other side of the hill .
In other words , the debtor has had time to hide his assets .
This is now a widespread problem across Europe 's borders , and it is becoming increasingly pressing given that we are all aiming for a single payment area with cash-free transactions .
That means that the opportunities to hide assets on the other side of the hill are steadily growing .
That is why the Commission has taken the initiative and , I would emphasise , is quite right to do so .
It has presented a very good Green Paper which is comprehensive and detailed , albeit with some points which will undoubtedly require further clarification .
That is still ahead of us and is the purpose of the hearing .
At this stage , the European Parliament cannot deal with all aspects in detail , and neither can I , so I shall simply mention some of the key points .
First of all , although this can really be taken for granted , the report is only about the attachment of bank accounts and temporarily freezing bank deposits .
It is not about final settlement .
Secondly , it is only about financial assets held in bank accounts .
It does not deal with injunctions or the attachment of other assets .
That raises the question of whether our purposes would really be served through the harmonisation of 27 different systems .
In my view , that would be an extremely unwieldy approach and would take forever to achieve .
It encroaches on so many other areas that it would not be helpful .
The right approach is what the Commission has in mind : an independent and additional European procedure , preferably in the form of a regulation , to exist in parallel to the national provisions , which would remain in force .
I should also mention the ' Brussels I ' Regulation at this juncture .
The Regulation which already exists is not adequate .
The creditor must not only demonstrate credibly and summarily that he has a claim but must also demonstrate the risk .
Our particular concern , which I share , is to protect the creditor .
What I do not want , under any circumstances , is a situation in which creditors or third parties suffer harm precisely because we have a European regulation .
That would reverberate on Europe itself .
In some cases , attachment without just cause can destroy a person 's livelihood .
I would simply like to mention the main points : that a creditor may be liable for damages arising for the debtor , that the creditor should be obliged to institute the main proceedings within a fixed time limit , that the creditor may be required to provide security , that the debtor should be entitled to appeal , that a procedure should not be selected which takes an eternity but which is broadly in line with the previous proceedings , that there should be provisions preventing too much money being frozen for the benefit of the creditor , and that the debtor must be guaranteed the wherewithal to live on .
There is the problem of trust accounts .
If there is to be any possibility of attachment here - and I will leave that open - they certainly need to be specially protected .
The same applies to joint accounts , although this is not the same thing ; in fact , the two are not directly related .
The point is that it is also important to protect third parties , and special protection measures are required for any third parties involved .
I would just mention that standardised formal notices would be useful for banking communications and , in this connection , would like to conclude by saying that studies comparing the laws in force as well as detailed analyses are undoubtedly required .
I would also , and specifically , like to thank the Commission for these comprehensive analyses and studies , and also thank all my colleagues .
We worked together very well .
I assume that there will be a broad consensus in favour of the report .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I think the report is an interesting contribution to dealing with a very complex issue : the difficulty of cross-border debt recovery .
I think the rapporteur , Mr Lechner , is to be congratulated for paving the way for a general European solution to the current fragmentation of national rules on enforcement , which severely hampers cross-border debt collection .
This situation is of particular concern to a creditor who has the misfortune of seeing his debtor swiftly moving his money out of a known account into another account in the same or another Member State .
Therefore , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's report .
I will carefully consider the main concerns expressed by the rapporteur and by Parliament in relation to the Green Paper .
In particular , the form and the scope of the possible Community instrument , the effects of future procedure , the legal condition for granting an attachment order , the compensation of costs and the protection of debtors are important issues that have been highlighted by the rapporteur .
I can confirm to you that any proposal or communication in this area will be preceded by an in-depth evaluation and impact assessment , in close cooperation with this Parliament .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Madam President , I welcome the Green Paper and look forward to an early follow-up on more concrete proposals .
It is clearly in the interests of fostering cross-border trade for businesses to have the confidence to be able to recover debt .
Citizens also need that confidence at an individual and private level .
My opinion received unanimous support in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , not because we reached hard-fought compromises , but because there was a common view from the outset .
I am pleased that almost everything that we adopted has fitted into , or been covered by , the final report by the Committee on Legal Affairs , for which I thank the rapporteur .
Two points that did not make it into the report were the possibility of applying attachment to joint accounts and the investigation of optional domestic use of the cross-border provision .
In a less prescriptive form , there is an amendment concerning joint accounts that has gained support elsewhere .
It is clearly a loophole if a nominal joint account enables evasion of attachment orders , but genuine third party funds must be protected .
Concerning the optional domestic use of the cross-border provision , I note what colleagues in the Committee on Legal Affairs said about the measure only being possible cross-border , be that for legal reasons or for practical reasons of achieving something in a reasonable timescale .
However , unless alternative remedies exist in those Member States where attachment is not possible , or is extremely difficult , there could be a competitive mismatch , at least from the business aspect , with the rather unusual situation of a cross-border business being better off than a domestic one .
Perhaps Member States will take note of this and competition will deliver what we do not or cannot legislate for .
Madam President , I welcome the Commission 's initiative on the cross-border regulation of the attachment and temporary freezing of bank accounts .
I congratulate you in particular , Mr Frattini , as the competent Commissioner for this initiative .
The Commission 's Green Paper on this issue has laid down procedures for dealing with the problem , which arises when the enforcement of court judgments is avoided because of the operation or transfer of bank accounts outside national borders .
The measure under discussion is contained in the strategy for developing judicial cooperation between EU Member States .
The measure is a move in the right direction ; it must be completed soon with the submission of a relevant proposal .
The cause of justice is not served if civil or criminal court judgments cannot be enforced .
For this reason , the proposal relating to the attachment and freezing of cross-border bank accounts that is under consideration really contributes to the evolution and consolidation of justice .
The European Parliament rightly takes a positive view of the Commission 's initiative and of the judicial procedure under preparation .
The Lechner report and the opinions of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Finance set out the basic parameters for preparing a balanced proposal for a Council decision on the issue .
I congratulate Mr Lechner on his succinct but very informative and comprehensive report .
As rapporteur for the Committee on Civil Liberties , I hold positions that essentially coincide with nearly all of his .
The report is expected to be approved by an overwhelming majority .
It emphasises the need to meet the requirements for issuing a cross-border attachment order for bank accounts .
It also stresses the concurrent need to protect the procedure against abuse and to provide guarantees of compensation to the alleged debtor if his order turns out to be to be null and void .
I believe that a freezing order can serve , at the end of court proceedings , as an enforcement measure for a final exequatur judgment .
This is not Mr Lechner 's view , but it must seriously be considered when the relevant Commission proposal is submitted , in the interests of preventing unnecessary duplication of proceedings .
I call on the Commission to proceed at once with preparation of the proposal on this issue .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , an unquestionable weakness of the current provisions of enforcement legislation is the situation in which , having verified enforceability of a court order in another Member State , enforcement remains the exclusive competence of national legislation .
Pursuant to Community legal acts currently in force there is no way of obtaining an order to attach a bank account that could be enforced across the territory of the entire European Union .
That is why a European system for an order allowing the attachment of bank accounts seems to be such an appropriate and necessary solution . It would allow creditors to secure the sums due or the value of their claim by making it impossible to withdraw or transfer funds deposited in one or many bank accounts across the territory of the European Union .
Such a system should be created following the development of an additional independent procedure that would stand alongside national provisions with the proviso that it would only apply to cross-border issues .
It is worth emphasising that such an order would only have a preventive effect .
In other words , it would block the debtor 's funds in the latter 's bank account , without transferring them to the creditor 's account .
The court must of course refrain from hearing or informing the debtor of the proceedings before attaching his or her bank account , otherwise the effect might be the opposite of what was intended .
The sum to be attached should be calculated on the basis of the creditor 's claim .
It should be emphasised , however , that the debtor must have the right to appeal the order issued , and the competent institution to hear that appeal should be the court where the order was issued .
Provision should also be made for derogations from enforcement to allow the basic needs of the debtor and his or her family to be met .
Clearly , at that stage , additional comparative legal analysis would be required , as many aspects call for further investigation .
Nonetheless , the fact remains that the introduction of a Community legal procedure such as a European order for the attachment of bank accounts aimed at streamlining the implementation of monetary claims and improving effectiveness would be a milestone along the road to the creation of a European economic and judicial area .
In conclusion , I should like to congratulate Mr Lechner on an outstanding and well-prepared report .
The House must be well aware , of course , of how difficult it is to change Union provisions , particularly in this field .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I want to begin by congratulating my colleague , Mr Lechner , on the excellent report he has produced : it is both balanced and moderate .
Here at this time of the night , I cannot help but think about what attachment means .
In practice , in day-to-day life , normally the creditors are large institutions with a great deal of economic power while the debtors are usually people in a much weaker economic situation .
Indeed , one of the nicest poems in the Spanish language is dedicated to the attachment of a poor unfortunate worker .
It is true that if there are no attachments - if creditors do not have the possibility of recovering their claim - those who need credit will not be able to get it .
Since I think we are all a bit bored , I am going to tell you a story about one of the dictatorships we had in Spain , that of General Primo de Rivera .
He believed that attachment of the assets of military personnel was an insult to the military profession .
He therefore banned the attachments of accounts of military personnel .
As a consequence , the banks refused to lend money to the military , and the military then had to ask the General to allow them to be subject to attachments again .
That is only a story , however .
I believe that Mr Lechner has managed to achieve a balance in terms of the protection of debtors ' rights , but I still have one question , and Mr Frattini will probably be aware of what I want to say in this respect .
When it comes down to it , the large debtors , the people who are involved in major financial operations and who end up owing billions to thousands of defenceless people , those large debtors do not usually have their accounts in a bank in Belgium , Brussels or Strasbourg , or even in London .
They usually have them in tax havens .
This , of course , is not covered by the provisions of the Commission 's Green Paper . However , since I know that Commissioner Frattini has an interest in this matter , I will put the question to him : would it not be advisable to come up with a way of ensuring that these large international criminals who ruin the lives of thousands of families could also have their assets attached ?
As I said , this is a scenario that is outside the scope of the Green Paper , outside the scope of what we are discussing tonight . However , since the main topics already appear to have been discussed very clearly by the previous speakers and by Commissioner Frattini himself , I think that it is something that we must examine .
I am sure that Commissioner Frattini will have something to add in this respect .

In conclusion , I just want to reiterate once again my congratulations to Mr Lechner : I think that he has produced a balanced report and that the position of debtors , of poor debtors , which means most citizens , is guaranteed .
I hope that the Commission will soon present us with a legislative text that enables the cross-border credit market to continue to function .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Lechner on his report .
I want to start with , as it were , a confession .
Before I arrived in this House I was a lawyer .
In fact I was not only a lawyer , but a lawyer dealing in debt collecting , often cross-border .
My experience in this area is that the most damage is caused to small enterprises that have plucked up courage to trade cross-border , and are then ruined by a bad debt and a professional debtor hiding in another country .
I therefore consider this initiative to be a way , if we can get it right , of boosting Europe 's economy and encouraging cross-border trade .
We have to get tough .
The payment order was a step in the right direction .
This is the next piece in the jigsaw .
However , I have two points to make .
First of all , we are dealing with cross-border cases only .
We accept the reality of that constraint , but what I do not want to see is creditors having to make two applications to courts : one in respect of debtors in the home country , followed by another in a different country , cross-border .
That may give the debtor warning and it may cause all sorts of complications .
We therefore need to ensure that there are concurrent procedures available .
Secondly , this is , of course , a balance of interests between the creditors and the debtors .
We have a good system in England , under which when you are given such an interim measure , you have to provide an undertaking to the court , in damages , to respect the interests of third parties .
This may be the bank that has to organise the attachment , or a third party that might hold a joint account .
I would recommend a system along those lines .
I commend the report and the ideas in it .
I believe it could do much to boost Europe 's economy if we get things right .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the Green Paper on improving the efficiency of the enforcement of judgments in the European Union represents a further stage in the development of a European area of justice .
I endorse the view put forward by the rapporteur in this report and support the introduction of a swift and effective procedure for obtaining an order for attachment of bank accounts in the European Union .
In the context of ongoing integration in the Single Euro Payments Area , a legal provision of this nature seems to be both appropriate and desirable .
In view of the many difficulties involved in investigating claims , it is my belief that the European Union should introduce an independent additional procedure that would stand alongside national provisions .
Such a procedure ought to apply only in cross-border cases and relate solely to funds in bank accounts and not to other assets .
It is simply a case of provisionally securing a creditor 's claim , not of finally settling it .
Unjustified attachment may have serious consequences for the debtor and impact negatively on confidence in the European legal system .
I therefore believe that particular care should be taken to protect the debtor .
This could involve , for instance , submission of security by the creditor , the right to object , limiting the amount liable or even a requirement for the creditor to submit an application for court proceedings to be brought regarding the main action .
( PL ) Madam President , the provisions relating to enforcement legislation are often described as the Achilles ' heel of the European system of justice concerning civil cases .
To date , no legislative motion has been submitted regarding the actual means of enforcing judgments .
Enforcing a court order after establishing its enforceability in another country is still the exclusive competence of national law .
The current variations between the principles for debt recovery in individual Member States of the European Union seriously hinder the recovery of cross-border debts .
Creditors seeking enforcement of an order in another country are confronted with unfamiliar legal systems and legal requirements . They also have to cope with the language barrier , which entails additional costs and delays the enforcement procedure .
Difficulties relating to the recovery of cross-border debts hinder the free movement of payment orders within the Union and impact negatively on the proper operation of the internal market .
Payments that are delayed or never made endanger the interests of companies and consumers alike .
The Commission 's proposal to introduce a single European legal instrument that would be independent of national legislation and stand alongside it therefore seems to be entirely appropriate , if not essential .
Article 65 ( c ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community could serve as the legal basis for such a document .
In this connection , pursuant to the provisions of the Green Paper , the creditor should have the right to submit an application for an order to be issued for the attachment of bank accounts before the start of the main proceedings .
In view of the provisional nature of the procedure , the creditor should , however , be required to justify his or her claim and also the urgent need for an attachment order to be issued .
Unjustified attachment can of course have very serious implications for a debtor , and can even deprive the latter of the means with which to satisfy his or her basic needs .
Other important issues are a debtor 's right to contest the order and setting the amount to be paid .
Setting a single limit for the sum to be exempted from enforcement at European Union level does not seem to be a good idea .
Such decisions should remain within the competence of the legal system of the debtor 's home country .
As regards serving orders for the seizure of assets from bank accounts , it is important to ensure that uniform standards concerning communication between courts and banks are established within the European Union .
It seems essential to regulate the matter of recovery of cross-border debts by way of adoption of the relevant legal act .
It is , however , important not to overlook the need to first undertake an in-depth study of the provisions already in force in individual Community countries and to assess the effectiveness of alternative solutions in relation to European provisions .
I should like to conclude by thanking Mr Lechner for a well-considered and well-prepared report .
( PL ) Madam President , the problem of effective enforcement of monetary claims across the territory of the European Union is very important in terms of ensuring proper functioning of the internal market .
It is worth considering Community action in this regard .
There is a very important saying that was impressed on me when I was a trainee lawyer , according to which when we do someone a favour we become indebted to them .
This is sometimes true .
Delaying payments or failing to make them altogether endangers the interests of companies and consumers alike .
The differences in the efficiency of debt recovery that currently exist within the European Union can threaten the competitiveness of companies whose activities extend beyond the borders of a particular Member State .
The systems for enforcing orders differ between individual Member States .
In some states they are more effective than in others .
As things stand at present , a debtor may almost instantly transfer funds from accounts known to the creditor to other accounts located in the same country or in another Member State .
This makes it practically impossible for creditors to block those funds .
Furthermore , creditors seeking enforcement of an order in another Member State are confronted with a different legal system and procedural requirements .
The language barrier and cost of the proceedings represent additional obstacles .
I therefore believe that we should respond positively to the proposal to create a European system to attach bank accounts .
Bearing in mind the increasing integration in the Single Euro Payments Area , legal regulation of this type is both appropriate and essential .
I would like to thank Mr Lechner for this report .
I am sure it will represent a turning point in the Union 's legal system .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , just a brief remark about the comments made by Mr Medina Ortega and also to thank everyone who has spoken .
This European instrument , this European attachment order that is under discussion , really could complement national legislation and hence deal with the serious infringements of creditors ' rights that occur on a transnational basis .
I very much agree with Mr Medina Ortega about the fact that we must give thought to attachment , or protection , as it were , in respect of people who take refuge in tax havens .
Clearly , as you are all aware , Europe has no unilateral power to act .
What we must work towards , in my opinion , is closer cooperation between the judiciary , the financial investigation authorities and the major banking groups which operate in these so-called tax havens . We need to convince those countries ' governments that it is ultimately in their interest to cooperate with the European Union .
Therefore , even if we do not have an active instrument in the near future , a unilateral tool to counter the system of tax havens , we ought to be able to use the instrument of democracy , on the one hand , and that of judicial and financial cooperation , on the other , to tackle what is a very real problem .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Recognition and supervision of suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and conditional sentences - Mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports on criminal matters and sentences :
by Mrs Esteves , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany and of the French Republic with a view to adopting a Council framework decision on the recognition and supervision of suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and conditional sentences [ 06480 / 2007 - C6-0129 / 2007 - 2007 / 0807 ( CNS ) ] ;
by Mr Varvitsiotis , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the draft Council framework decision on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgements in criminal matters imposing custodial sentences or measures involving deprivation of liberty for the purpose of their enforcement in the European Union [ 09688 / 2007 - C6-0209 / 2007 - .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I support both initiatives , which are , in my view , complementary and which would both enable the greater social reintegration of persons sentenced either to a non-custodial sentence or to a custodial sentence in a Member State other than the one in which they habitually reside .
We also support initiatives such as these , which implement the principle of mutual recognition .
The draft texts of both initiatives have evolved very much in the course of discussions in the Working Party on Cooperation in Criminal Matters .
Many of Ms Esteves 's and Mr Varvitsiotis ' suggested amendments during the first parliamentary consultation have already been taken up during the course of the following discussions .
I thank both rapporteurs for their interesting reports , and , in particular on the first initiative , Ms Esteves has carried out a very rigorous legal analysis of the German / French text .
She has identified the main problems as being the different sanctions available in the Member States and the problem of how to operate mutual recognition when one 's own system has no precise equivalent .
The other problem she , as rapporteur , has highlighted is that of how to deal with a breach of non-custodial conditions , and of which Member State - the issuing Member State or the executing Member State - should be responsible for imposing the sanction for that breach .
Some comments on some main amendments .
I have a comment on Amendment 1 on the first report .
The title will have to change on adoption , since conditional sentences have been removed from the scope .
This is also relevant to a number of different amendments which refer to conditional sentences .
Amendment 12 relates to the definition of ' lawful place of residence ' .
This is currently under discussion in Council , as is the possibility of going to another Member State for work or study .
I refer , in particular , also to Amendment 16 .
I can inform you that discussions of the text in Council are going very well , and the Portuguese Presidency hopes - with the full support of the Commission - for political agreement by the end of December 2007 , before the end of the Portuguese Presidency .
On the second initiative , the initiative on the European Enforcement Order and transfer of sentenced persons , I welcome the second report by Mr Varvitsiotis , which states that issues raised by the European Parliament in the first report have largely been taken into consideration .
This is correct : we took into consideration amendments and proposals by Parliament .

Concerning the sole amendment suggested by the rapporteur concerning the new Recital 2a , I fully share the substance of the statement that procedural rights in criminal proceedings are a very crucial element for ensuring mutual confidence among Member States , and I also agree that it is highly regrettable that this instrument on procedural rights was not adopted , despite the support from Parliament and despite our efforts to make possible an agreement on procedural rights .
This , unfortunately , was not possible .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I must firstly thank the Members who worked very closely with me on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and who helped me with their critical contributions , in particular Mr Guardans , Mr Demetriou and , last but definitely not least , Mr Correia .
We all greatly miss Mr Correia who was a Member of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and a fellow Portuguese Member .

He died after having helped me with this report .
I think that the best tribute I can pay him is a kind of public promise that I will try , through my presence in the European Parliament , to help realise his ideas on Europe as a project of ambition and vision and as a giant capable of bringing its culture of rights to the world .
It is this tribute that I want to pay , here today , to our friend and colleague , Mr Fausto Correia .
I should like to briefly summarise the issues raised by this report .
I must firstly stress that this report , like all other reports , is an open report : open to seeking and finding the best solutions .
There are two fundamental benefits to this initiative by France and Germany , as underlined by the Commissioner .
The first is that , by encouraging the recognition and supervision of alternative measures to prison sentences , we are promoting a political culture which will make the courts more likely to apply these measures .
We are promoting the humanisation of criminal law in the Member States and the quality of European criminal law .
The second benefit concerns the fact that this initiative will help to make criminal law increasingly European in terms of being more harmonised and less feudalised within the European space .
In reality , European integration , which took a fundamental step forward in the recent Treaty on which agreement was reached in Lisbon last weekend , is at a level which criminal law in the European space has not yet been able to match .
It is essential that we increasingly promote a culture not just of mutual recognition , but also of harmonisation in criminal law in terms of the design of sentences , their method of enforcement , the relationship between offenders and society and even greater equivalence between the substantive and procedural criminal laws of Member States .
Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union , by referring to a set of fundamental principles forming the common principles of the European Union , clearly shows that this only makes sense if we increasingly have European criminal laws .
Most of these principles are protected by criminal legislation .
Specifically on this report , I should like to make just two or three comments which I regard as fundamental .
Firstly , Parliament 's contribution has particularly underlined the need for the distribution of powers between the issuing State and the executing State .
There is a clear logic to the State which exercises a given power applying its own laws thereto .
Secondly , there is the principle that refusal is the exception , so that the future framework decision can be as effective as possible .
Thirdly , there is the logic according to which it is impossible to adapt the nature of measures , otherwise the principle of strict penal legality will be called into question .
Finally , there is also a need to safeguard the principle of hearing defendants in cases involving the revocation of a suspended sentence or the imposition of a conditional sentence .
I will end , Madam President , by saying that all this progress in European criminal law will , despite everything , soon seem very limited to us .
Europe will only be achieved as a project when we can establish anthropocentric and cosmopolitan laws , which must include criminal laws that are more harmonised and less divided by borders .

rapporteur . - ( EL ) Madam President , I should like to begin by turning my thoughts respectfully to our late fellow Member , Mr Correia , who contributed substantially to the compilation of the correct and comprehensive report cited by the Vice-President of the Commission .
I should like to point out that the topic we are discussing today has a very long history .
It began in 1983with a Council of Europe convention , which was accepted by all the Member States .
However , the convention stipulated that a prisoner could be transferred from one country to another only with the prisoner 's consent .
The convention was therefore ineffective .
A second convention was drawn up stipulating that the consent of the prisoner was not required , but this convention was not signed by all the Member States of the Council of Europe , and thus the attempt foundered .
On the new initiative of three EU Member States - Austria , Finland and Sweden - a draft was submitted , which was properly prepared by the Council and issued as a framework convention .
What does this framework decision provide ?
It provides that a sentenced citizen of an EU Member State must be transferred to the Member State of which he is a national or in which he has his permanent residence or all his interests .
This is very reasonable because we can see that rehabilitating him will become much easier when he comes out of prison : someone transferred to the Member State of their nationality will have much easier access to the language , and their friends and relatives , and will be in a familiar environment .
This report , as you will recall , Madam President , was approved in June 2006 by a large majority in Parliament .
Unfortunately , it met with a bureaucratic response from Poland , which , by various procedural ploys , delayed the implementation of this framework decision .
We thus find ourselves in the midst of renewed deliberation .
Fortunately , with a concession to Poland 's demands , the problem has finally been solved satisfactorily .
However , let me point out , Madam President , that if we think like this , talk of a united Europe is impossible .
We cannot speak of a European consensus when each Member State , for its own petty reasons , undermines such a sound measure .
In such cases , what sort of united Europe are we talking about ?
I should like to underline that the Constitutional Treaty presented two days ago by the Prime Minister of Portugal fortunately provides for an augmented majority in this area , too , so the veto will finally be lifted .
To conclude , let me thank the Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Frattini , for his contribution , and express the wish that , after 25 years , this well-conceived initiative will finally become a reality as soon as possible .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , freedom , security and justice are three words we keep hearing in the EU .
They are the three components of the Hague Programme that , in combination and individually , were invoked to serve all the Member States of the Union .
The principle of mutual recognition and enforcement of court judgments , which eight years ago , in 1999 , was described by the European Council in Tampere as the cornerstone of judicial cooperation , is making no progress .
The few steps needed to implement this principle are being taken very slowly .
Mr Varvitsiotis has correctly identified and dealt with the root cause of the problem : the individual , nationalist positions held by various states .
The Council Framework Decision on the recognition and enforcement of judgments in criminal matters involving deprivation of liberty issued in other EU Member States is the subject of Mr Varvitsiotis ' report .
The decision proves how slow and sporadic the action has been in creating an area of freedom , security and justice because this decision is only one of many measures that should have already been taken , and because it took such a long time to prepare .
In any case , we welcome the completion of the deliberation procedure and the adoption of a common position on the issue of recognising court judgments in criminal matters .
Mr Varvitsiotis deserves praise for his contribution to the favourable outcome of the proposal , which we have adopted and shall be voting in favour of .
The recognition and supervision of suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and conditional sentences , the subject of Mrs Esteves ' report , is certainly another step among the many that must be taken to implement the principle of mutual recognition and enforcement of court judgments .
The Franco-German proposal seeks to reintegrate sentenced persons into society .
It proposes to allow them to serve , in their Member State of residence , suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and conditional sentences imposed by the courts of other Member States .
The rapporteur has done excellent work and I congratulate her .
However , I believe the definition given for ' lawful and ordinary residence ' is incorrect .
Furthermore , the use of the word ' unacceptable ' for violation of human rights is unnecessary , because there are no acceptable violations .
I understand , however , that there is a problem in the translation of these two terms , and I therefore call on Mrs Esteves to make the necessary verbal amendments so that the text can be rendered correctly in all languages .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the European Union is not simply a common economic area .
The European dimension must also be understood now in terms of intensive political and legal integration within the Union .
The Union is an example of a political organisation bringing together the interests of individual Member States within the framework of a developing cosmopolitan legal system . A number of the criminal law provisions of Member States are still at an initial stage of harmonisation .
Nonetheless , we should rejoice at the fact that relations between Member States are characterised by trust in each other 's legal systems . This facilitates cooperation and makes it possible for the executing State to recognise a decision taken by authorities in the issuing State .
It should be noted that the humanisation of criminal law permeates through to the European legal system . The latter is of course based on the value of the fundamental entity , namely the human being .
European policy should be consistent in every respect as regards handing down and enforcing sentences and the general links between convicted persons and society .
Making it easier to impose alternative punishments will help to promote a humanitarian approach to criminal law and sentencing , and consequently to European law .
Particular attention must be paid to the convicted person 's right and opportunity to be reintegrated into society .
A wider range of alternative sentences replacing custodial sentences should be considered .
It is important to bear in mind that according to international standards the status of a convicted person is the basis for assessing the extent to which the judicial system of every political community may be deemed to be civilised .
Consequently , the framework decisions on enhanced cooperation in the area of criminal law presented today are worthy of support . After all , the ongoing harmonisation of criminal law provisions across the Member States is a fundamental condition for the creation of a European area of freedom , security and justice .
Madam President , I would like to focus on one aspect of what is being proposed .
It is evident that the raison d 'être for this particular legislation is a humanitarian basis .
If one looks at why a judgment given in one particular country can be enforced in another with regard to the criminal and penal sentences , one appreciates that , basically , what we are doing is making life for the person who has been convicted a better one : being closer , perhaps , to his family , being closer , perhaps , to his place of origin .
In fact I am surprised that , whilst we are taking this legislation from a humanitarian point of view , one of the criteria that is absent when it comes to transferring a person from serving a sentence in one particular state to another is , in my view , the humanitarian aspect .
We are basing the criteria , basically , on nationality , citizenship or legal permanent residence .
On the other hand , we do talk about , as a proposal and counterproposal , ' close links ' , but the humanitarian aspect as a criterion in itself is absent .
Let us take a particular case , for instance : it would not be possible for a person who is not a citizen of an EU country serving imprisonment in an EU country to serve closer to his homeland , because this aspect - the humanitarian criterion - has been left out .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Business registers for statistical purposes ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading by Mr Martin , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a common framework for business registers for statistical purposes and repealing Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2186 / 93 [ 07656 / 5 / 2007 - C6-0218 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , fellow Members , it is now so late that I can count just four of us here , including myself .
However , one of the next speakers is a Quaestor who , I am sure , will use this opportunity to ensure that these forms of so-called debate , which in reality only take place for the purpose of the records , become more efficient and rational .
Nevertheless , I am grateful , Commissioner , for your willingness to come here and subject yourself to this .
To my mind , better governance , efficient and transparent governance , would be rather different from these debates at such an ungodly hour .
As to the matter in hand , we have come here to resume work on an issue which goes back some time .
It is a key area , namely statistics .
On the one hand , we have an entirely justified and necessary interest on the part of most persons involved in the political process , which is to inform themselves and to find out more quickly and in detail about linkages which may exist , especially in the corporate sector , and how they work , especially across borders : borders which , happily , we have already dismantled successfully between many countries throughout Europe .
We have thus taken up the Commission 's proposal and taken it forward in response to this need , always being careful - through my numerous discussions at the time with my excellent colleague from the secretariat of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , from first reading onwards - not to create even more red tape , not to erect even more bureaucratic obstacles , and not to inflict even more form-filling on businesses in the Member States through the amendments and simplifications and , in some cases , more precise controls that this entails .
This goal has been achieved .
What has not been achieved is a situation in which the data available on the basis of the new directive is genuinely accessible to a wider interested public .
We could have done more to facilitate transparency .
Nonetheless , it was important for the House to achieve swift and clear results from first reading onwards .
Unfortunately , having achieved an appropriate consensus , and soon after its adoption here - I am not aware that there was even one vote against in the House - amendments were made in other areas of the legislature , with the result that the report , which we believed to have been dealt with conclusively , suddenly could no longer continue in its present form .
This has meant that at second reading , we have now had to make some minor changes consisting of just two words in three places .
Taking account of all that has happened , the question which arises , as I have said , is this : was that really necessary ?
Would it not have been possible to inform us , through better coordination of the exchange of information on and during decision-making , so that we could have spared ourselves this whole evening debate , which is a debate in name only ?
We could have dealt with it at first reading , if we had adopted the report a few weeks later .
The fact that we are sitting here at all is a classic example of how , in the European Union , it is often the minor detail which causes the hitches .
There is an urgent need to push through all the initiatives which aim to achieve better coordination of the minor details of the legislative processes which are then played out on a large scale in Europe .
This would then remove any future need for the type of debate which we are enduring now and would also save money , if we consider what it costs - from the first to the second reading , with all the preparations , all the interpreters and translations , and all these meetings at such a late hour - which would certainly be in the European Union 's interests and improve its work on behalf of citizens .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I am very grateful to Parliament for this report , which should allow an agreement with the Council at second reading on the issue of statistical business registers , which is extremely relevant for the production of harmonised , complete and reliable statistics on business and other economic activities .
This new regulation will extend the business registers framework to cover the whole economy by including , on a mandatory basis , two sectors that are currently optional : agriculture and public administration .
But the most important innovation of this proposal is the extension to data on multinational enterprise groups active in the EU .
This is a key input in the context of economic globalisation .
Indeed , the informal European Council last week in Lisbon supported the approach proposed by the Commission to ensure that European policies are aimed at defending European citizens in a globalised economy .
To this end , it is crucial for policymakers and socioeconomic agents to have at their disposal accurate information on the activity of any kind of transnational companies operating here in Europe .
Concerning the alleviation of the burden of respondents to the surveys needed to produce statistics , the Commission , in the context of the overall drive towards better regulation , has paid particular attention to the simplification of the collection of statistics .
Business registers form an important building block in a number of projects aimed at reducing the statistical burden of businesses .
They are necessary for the efficient use of business-related data from different sources , such as a combined use of administrative data and targeted statistical surveys .
Of course , no new surveys are needed to fulfil the new requirements of the regulation , which can be implemented using nationally available additional administrative sources and feedback from existing surveys .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , let me say to the rapporteur - who has just complained that we are sitting here debating at an ungodly hour - that I was a Member of a national parliament for 20 years .
I do not know whether he has ever sat in a national parliament , but there , one becomes accustomed to holding night-time sessions , and for me , this is not an ungodly hour .
The rapporteur may well claim that the matter should have been dealt with more swiftly , but may I remind him that he himself took his time before declaring himself willing to produce this report .
( FR ) Madam President , I would just like to say all the same that the current Regulation on business registers , which relates to the harmonisation of business registers used by Member States for statistical purposes , dates back to 1993 and is now partly obsolete .
The proposal for a regulation contains two major amendments in respect of the new data requirements that have been identified in this context .
All businesses engaging in economic activity contribute to GDP and their local units , as well as the corresponding legal units , will henceforth have to be registered on a compulsory basis .
Some business sectors are registered on an optional basis under the current version of the Regulation .
My second point is that financial links and enterprise groups should also be covered and data on multinational groups and their advisory units should be exchanged between the Member States and Eurostat .
As regards the recommendation for second reading of the report , we have been presented with two technical amendments that have been proposed by the legal service of the European Parliament .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has proposed , as I do myself , to follow the recommendations of the legal service , which quite rightly points out that the inclusion of the terms ' purpose ' and ' scope ' among the powers given to the Commission would allow the latter to modify the obligations of the Member States , the authorities and the central banks , as well as its own obligations .
These obligations are elements of the basic act ; any modification of them in one direction or another could affect political choices made in the basic act and these modifications of the common position do not constitute an obstacle to an agreement at second reading , given that they reflect the results of agreements reached between the three main institutions , thereby allowing us to conclude this item of business at second reading .
I believe that is the important thing .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for the extensive effort he has made in preparing this very complex technical document , as statistical matters are usually of little interest to the general public and hold little attraction for them .
That is why the discussion on this issue is taking place rather late .
I am very pleased that Mr Frattini is present , although statistical matters usually fall within Mr Almunia 's sphere of competence .
However , we are talking about large databases , the use , security and management of which must be clearly defined .
I believe that Mr Almunia is well aware of all the problems we are experiencing with different databases , their use , security and the possibility of their being used for the wrong purpose .
The document recognises a number of points that would help to avoid similar problems .
There is one more thing that delights me : the document will bring about increased transparency in government administrative functions .
To my mind , this is very important ; this sort of information should be accessible to the general public .
On the other hand , as a representative of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , I cannot help worrying that we have recently been discussing a large number of documents relating to obtaining statistical data and including various activities in different registers .
Less and less thought is given to profit , the ratio between the profit and the cost of data collection .
As an economist , I do understand the importance of this data for defining economic policy , decision making - even in view of security it is important to be aware of the different aspects of multinational companies ' activities within the EU , within the Member States .
As a representative of Lithuania , a border country , an EU border country , I understand it only too well .
Nevertheless , at the beginning of my tenure much has been said regarding the necessity of analysing how much it costs the trade and of making the relevant calculations .
Some Member States were prepared to do this .
For example , the Netherlands have actually done so .
Regretfully , this initiative has fizzled out .
I can only regret the fact that in this case the possibility of ascertaining the burden on business and the alleviation of this burden was not considered .
Various small European selection groups could have been developed and considered to be examples , while analysing the statistical basis for the whole of Europe .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , now that Mrs Lulling has addressed me directly , may I say that just because others are doing things badly , that should not be a role model for us .
The fact that debates are still being conducted at this hour or even later in the national parliaments does not improve the situation here .
It is a bitter experience , when one makes reform proposals , to find that others are constantly blocking them with reference to something else .
My second point is this : there was no delay , Mrs Lulling .
At most , there were misunderstandings .
The delay to which I have referred was the unfortunate coincidence of several matters having to be dealt with simultaneously .
As to my third point , I stand by my opinion .
I believe that , from a political and , indeed , a democratic perspective , it is not sensible to hold so-called debates at such a late hour , and I look forward to seeing the Commissioner again with our mutual friend Mr Staffler in the Hotel Laurin in Bolzano and conducting a dialogue there .
I think it is very likely that political progress will be made on that occasion rather than here , given that there are now just three of us plus the Commissioner - yes , let me repeat that , just three of us - engaging in pseudo-debates with each other at this ungodly hour .
( DE ) Madam President , the rapporteur claims that he was not responsible for the delay .
He most certainly was !
He was also behind the to-do in committee , and I really do not need to say any more about that .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to say one more thing by pointing out that the explanatory statement drawn up by the rapporteur contains remarks that are completely off the subject and out of context with the theme being dealt with in this report .
The rapporteur 's own personal views on ...
( The President asked the speaker to stand down )
You are the chairman of a working group .
I have to say that the rapporteur 's personal views on the pensions paid to EU staff members have no place in an official document put out by this institution .
I would like to have this put on record .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 10.00 )
European Ombudsman 's activities in 2006 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Luciana Sbarbati , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2006 .
We are pleased to welcome the Ombudsman this morning , and Commissioner Wallström .
Ombudsman . - Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for this opportunity to address Parliament on my Annual Report for 2006 .
I also wish to thank the rapporteur , Ms Sbarbati , and the Committee on Petitions , for their excellent report .
My report records progress in handling complaints , promoting good administration and providing knowledge about the Ombudsman 's role .
I received 3 830 complaints in 2006 .
That means that the total number of complaints has stabilised at around the level reached following the 53 % increase in 2004 .
I am delighted to inform you that the proportion of complaints falling within the mandate has gone up .
This suggests that citizens are beginning to have a better knowledge both of my mandate and of that of my national and regional colleagues in the European Network of Ombudsmen , which is thus commensurately strengthened to the benefit of all concerned .
The total number of inquiries dealt with in 2006 was 586 .
Of these , 66 % concerned the Commission .
Given that the Commission is the EU institution with which citizens have most reason to have material contact , it is normal that it should be the principal target of inquiries .
During 2006 , 250 decisions closing inquiries were made .
In 95 cases , the inquiry revealed no maladministration .
Such a finding is not always negative for the complainant , who at least has the benefit of a full explanation from the institution concerned .
Even when maladministration is not found , I may identify opportunities to improve the quality of administration provided by the institutions .
If so , I point them out in a further remark .
Many of my inquiries result in a win-win outcome that satisfies both the complainant and the institution complained against .
During 2006 , 64 cases were settled by the institution concerned to the satisfaction of the complainant .
Whenever I find maladministration , I try to achieve a friendly solution , if possible .
Three friendly solutions were achieved in 2006 and a further 27 proposals for such a solution were under consideration by the institution concerned at the end of the year .
When a friendly solution is not possible , I close the case with a critical remark , or make a draft recommendation .
A critical remark is appropriate if it is no longer possible for the institution concerned to eliminate the instance of maladministration .
I wish to emphasise that the criticism is intended to be constructive , so as to help avoid similar maladministration in the future .
In 2006 , I closed 41 inquiries in this way .
To better monitor the impact of my criticism and advice , I have this year launched a study of the follow-up to all critical remarks made in 2006 , as well as to the 38 cases involving a further remark made during the same year .
The results of these studies should provide further encouragement to the institutions concerned to improve their practices and develop a culture of service to citizens .
In cases where it is still possible to eliminate the instance of maladministration , I normally make a draft recommendation to the institution , which must respond with a detailed opinion .
During 2006 , 13 draft recommendations were made .
If an institution fails to respond satisfactorily to a draft recommendation , I may send a special report to the European Parliament .
Two special reports were made in 2006 .
The first concerned the Council 's responsibility for the choice of languages used in its Presidency websites .
The second called on the Commission to deal properly with an infringement complaint concerning sports betting services .
I am pleased to report that the Commission reacted promptly and positively to that report .
A new feature of the Annual Report which I wish to highlight , with an eye to supporting and encouraging good administration , concerns what I call ' star cases ' of good practice by institutions , revealed through my inquiries .
I would now like to mention some other activities that I have undertaken during 2006 with a view to ensuring the best possible service to citizens .
Firstly , I signed a memorandum of understanding with the European Data Protection Supervisor ( EDPS ) .
Our agreement aims to ensure the consistent treatment of complaints that raise issues of data protection and to avoid unnecessary duplication .
The agreement allows me to benefit from the expertise of the EDPS by consulting him in cases where the text of the Data Protection Regulation and existing case-law leave room for divergent views .
This has already proved to be a useful mechanism for me when dealing with cases in which it is necessary to reconcile the legal right of access to documents with the right to privacy .
I also signed an agreement with the Spanish Government to enable citizens to complain to the European Ombudsman in any of the co-official languages in Spain .
I thus aligned my practice with the conclusions reached in June 2005 by the Council , which provide for the use of those languages to facilitate Spanish citizens ' communication with the EU institutions .
Honourable Members , I am grateful for the support for the work of the European Ombudsman expressed in Ms Sbarbati 's report , and I would like to inform Parliament that , as requested in her report , I am already engaged in preparing the ground for a memorandum of understanding with the European Investment Bank .
Given that the implementation of EU law is largely the responsibility of Member States ' administrations , I will continue to develop cooperation through the European network of ombudsmen .
I am happy to inform you that the sixth meeting of the network took place last week in this very building .
At the conclusion of that successful meeting , we adopted by consensus a statement that aims to make the EU dimension of the work of national and regional ombudsmen better known , and to clarify the service they provide to people who complain about matters that fall within the scope of EU law .
The voluntary cooperation among ombudsmen that is now crystallised in the statement can , I believe , make an important and growing contribution to the European Union 's ability to deliver concrete results , by ensuring that citizens can enjoy their rights as an everyday reality and that problems are solved in ways that are close to the citizen .
The European Ombudsman was established to help bring the Union closer to citizens and to give the EU administration a ' human face ' .
A fundamental aspect of our institution is that the Ombudsman is an individual who communicates personally with citizens , who reviews their cases , and who seeks to resolve their problems and complaints .
Each one of these ' microcommunications ' constitutes an opportunity to build trust between citizens and the institutions .
In pursuit of this goal , I will continue to promote a constructive dialogue with the institutions and to draw their attention to problems so that they can improve their performance .
The way in which a public administration reacts to complaints is a key measure of how citizen-focused it is .
While progress has been made in many areas , the year 2006 regrettably saw a rise in the proportion of cases which I had to close with a critical remark .
That should be cause for concern for anyone who wants better relations between the EU and its citizens .
Complaints offer an opportunity to put things right and to demonstrate that the institution concerned is serious about respecting the citizens ' fundamental right to good administration .
I am not sure that citizens can easily reconcile the statements often made by institutions concerning their desire to get ' closer to the citizen ' , and for ' more openness ' , with the fact that the very same institutions frequently fail to take up the opportunities offered by the Ombudsman to improve relations and increase transparency .
I am positively encouraged , however , by a number of indications that , during the present year , 2007 , there is a much greater willingness to take up the opportunities offered by my inquiries to resolve complaints .
Such cooperation is essential , because the Ombudsman cannot succeed alone .
Ensuring a top-class administration is a task that must be tackled in tandem with the EU institutions .
Delivering on promises , providing proper redress mechanisms , learning from mistakes , working openly and allowing for public scrutiny - these are the all-important ' means ' towards building trust .
Equally , the European Ombudsman must work concertedly and systematically with national and regional colleagues to ensure that citizens ' rights are fully respected throughout the Union .
Finally , the Ombudsman must continue to reach out to citizens so that they can become aware of his services .
With Parliament 's support and guidance , I will continue to endeavour to build on existing achievements with a view to truly fulfilling my institutional mandate of bringing the Union closer to citizens and giving the EU administration a ' human face ' .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like first to thank the Ombudsman for his excellent work as is borne out by this particular report .
I should also like to thank the Legal Services of the Commission and all my parliamentary colleagues on the committee , especially the shadow rapporteur and Mr Mavrommatis , for their cooperation .
The culture of service to the citizen , which is primarily designed to ensure high-quality , transparent , approachable , swift and cooperative public administration , has been encouraged and strengthened at Community level by the combined efforts of the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman , and its first emergence can be traced back to the resolution of 6 September 2001 , the date on which the European Parliament adopted the code of good administrative conduct proposed by the European Ombudsman .
Moreover , the Treaty of Maastricht produced a qualitative leap in European citizenship by offering all citizens the possibility of submitting petitions to a parliamentary body , which remains the sole arbitrator , or applying to a more specialised body which , while operating on an extrajudicial basis , follows a procedure which does not rule out parliamentary intervention in the event of the Community institution responsible for the instance of maladministration proving reluctant to cooperate .
I shall not talk about the statistics , as the Ombudsman has already talked about them and they are set out in the report .
Cases of maladministration currently relate to lack of transparency , refusal of information , abuse of power , legal error and failure to ensure fulfilment of Treaty obligations , in particular by the Commission .
The Ombudsman 's decisions are not legally binding , but the safeguards that his work offers help to strengthen his powers of persuasion .
He enjoys the active support of the Committee on Petitions , whose meetings he attended on four occasions in 2006 , and cooperates with the network of European Ombudsmen , which should be improved and extended .
Italy , for instance , does not as yet have a national Ombudsman .
It should be nevertheless be stressed that decisions with final effect should be reciprocally notified in real time in order to avoid conflicts of competence between the activities of the Ombudsman and those of the Committee on Petitions .
The report divides the decisions taken on completed inquiries in 2006 into various categories : lack of openness on the part of Community institutions and bodies ( 25 % of inquiries ) , the role of the Commission as the guarantor of the Treaty in relation to procedures under Article 226 , the management of contracts , remuneration and grants , and the recruitment and management of the staff of the Community institutions .
Procedures often end at the stage of critical remarks , which are a means of attempting to prevent the recurrence of cases of maladministration in future , in cases where it would be pointless to issue a recommendation .
Various examples have been given by the Ombudsman , and can be read at leisure in the report .
In that respect , the Committee on Petitions invites the Ombudsman to carry out a detailed study of the practical impact of critical remarks made during inquiries in 2006 .
The fact that institutions have a code of good administrative conduct is often not enough to guarantee the creation of a genuine culture of service .
The report also shows that there are still some grey areas in relation to the Commission making wrong use of its discretionary powers by failing to take prompt action before legal proceedings were begun , using political considerations as a pretext .
With regard to contracts and staff management , some of the investigations launched by the Ombudsman on his own initiative show how his powers provide an effective means of goading the administrative authorities into self-regulation , a sound principle that needs to be put to increasing use .
In the view of the Committee on Petitions , however , the lack of synchronicity in timing and views with regard to the handling of the same case by the Ombudsman and Parliament needs to be avoided through ongoing and constructive dialogue .
The Committee on Petitions has also issued a special invitation to the Ombudsman to investigate the systems used by EPSO , again with a view to protecting the rights of candidates , especially young candidates , in the European Parliament 's competition procedures , and to investigate alleged discrimination reported at the European School in Brussels .
In this year 's report , Madam President , the focus is on the Ombudsman 's role as a key actor in the Union 's democratic life .
He is a vital intermediary for citizens in their dealings with public authorities .
His effective activities highlight the distinction between good and bad administration , offering guidance on recognising mistakes , and seeking satisfactory solutions for complainants , likely to transform bad conduct into good .
To this end , it would be valuable if the Ombudsman were to draw up a list of best administrative practices , including not just exemplary cases , but less creditable ones as well .
One of the cardinal principles that always has to be stressed is the democratic equality of all Europe 's citizens , without any distinction or discrimination on the grounds of nationality or language ; something on which the Ombudsman can rely in his continuing efforts to scrutinise and protect linguistic equality .
The Committee on Petitions is in favour of speeding up procedures to ensure that the Ombudsman 's annual report is considered more quickly , and it is also in favour of amending the Statute , provided that the amendments simply involve a qualitative expansion of the Ombudsman 's powers , without affecting the nature of his competences or the non-binding effect of all his decisions .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission should ' take a leading role in promoting a service culture ' .
When the Ombudsman said this in the introduction to his Annual Report , I could not agree more .
The European Union needs to be closer to its citizens , to explain better , to listen better and to deliver good policies .
To have a top-quality public administration is a necessary condition for that .
To have a well-equipped watchdog to monitor our progress is equally important to our common success .
The Ombudsman acts as an external control mechanism for sound and accountable administration on the part of the European Union institutions and bodies .
I therefore very much welcome the Ombudsman 's Annual Report for 2006 , and I want to stress that the relations between the Commission and the Ombudsman are very positive .
For example , the number of open enquiries addressed to the Commission decreased by 20 % in 2006 in relation to 2005 and 2004 , and we more frequently acknowledge our mistakes and apologise .
We seek satisfactory solutions for complainants , just as we follow up the critical remarks and the draft recommendations of the Ombudsman .
I also welcome Ms Sbarbati 's very important report and the constructive proposals in it .
Just as I agree with the Ombudsman 's call for a service culture , I agree with Ms Sbarbati 's call for the necessary budgetary and human resources .
We are judged by our deeds and not by our words , so we need to really ensure that citizens receive prompt and substantive responses , as Ms Sbarbati says in her report .
Let me briefly comment on a few particular points in the report .
First , the Commission welcomes the Ombudsman 's initiative to draw up a list of ' star ' cases exemplifying best practices .
We also welcome this initiative to prepare a study on the follow-up given by the Commission and other institutions and bodies to the critical comments and further remarks of the Ombudsman .
I hope this can contribute to improving practices to the benefit of citizens .
Secondly , regarding the alleged overlaps between the activities and powers of the Committee on Petitions and those of the Ombudsman , the Commission reiterates its willingness to work with those two bodies within the framework of their respective remit , and the definition of that remit does not fall within the Commission 's competence .
Thirdly , Parliament has requested the Commission make proper use of its discretionary powers under Article 226 relating to infringement procedures .
Of course , we should avoid delays or failure to take action , and that is why the Commission recently adopted a communication on the implementation of Community law , and we laid down more targeted preventive measures , improved information provision and problem solving .
In short , this was the Commission 's new commitment : to seek a more efficient management of infringement cases and increased transparency .
Concerning Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 on public access to documents , as you know , the review of this Regulation is under way , and the Ombudsman 's contribution to the consultation has been very much welcomed .
Only a few weeks ago we had a meeting with the Interinstitutional Committee on public access to documents which was chaired by Vice-President Wallis , and I want to thank her for taking this matter about public access to documents forward in a very constructive way .
My penultimate point concerns the Ombudsman 's Statute .
It is being dealt with in a separate context but , as it is mentioned in the report , I just want to assure you that the Commission closely monitors the developments , and that contacts are under way between the Commission and the Ombudsman at different hierarchical levels .
I want this issue to progress in a spirit of close cooperation between the Council , Parliament and the Commission .
Lastly , concerning the Ombudsman 's communication strategy and the European network of Ombudsmen , we need to share experiences and administrative practices .
We need to raise public awareness and to bring citizens closer to the EU .
The Ombudsman has a very important stake in this , and so does the European Parliament and the Committee on Petitions .
This is important to me and the whole Commission , and you can be sure that we will do our absolute best to cooperate and find good , forward-looking solutions .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first of all thank and congratulate Mrs Sbarbati , the rapporteur on the annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2006 .
I would also like to thank the secretariat of our committee for its assistance in drawing up Mrs Sbarbati 's report , and also the European Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , for promptly submitting his annual report for 2006 and for his subsequent cooperation with the Committee on Petitions .
The Ombudsman is an independent institution and a control mechanism for the administration of the EU .
However , despite all the action taken by Mr Diamandouros to inform the public , confusion still reigns over the European Ombudsman 's areas of jurisdiction .
We must therefore continue to try and inform the public , with appropriate financial support from the EU .
For this reason we , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , have again tabled a relevant amendment , which calls for ever greater participation by the media in publicising the work of the European Ombudsman .
As shadow rapporteur , I have tried to contribute to the report on the European Ombudsman 's activities , with amendments that I have tabled and supported .
It was essentially through the adoption of these amendments that we saw progress in the following areas of the European Ombudsman 's activity :
Firstly , the European Ombudsman was called upon to continue with his investigation of third-pillar issues .
Secondly , reports concerning the European Ombudsman must be translated promptly into all official EU languages , particularly in the case of the European Ombudsman 's annual report .
Thirdly , the European Ombudsman must maintain good relations with the members of the Committee on Petitions and cooperate with them in order to achieve the desired results .
Lastly , the European Network of Ombudsmen is called upon to expand and include within its membership specialised ombudsmen such as those dealing with minors ' rights , family problems , the protection of personal data and prisoners ' or patients ' rights .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Diamandouros and Ms Wallström for their presentations and Ms Sbarbati for her excellent report .
The Lisbon Treaty just agreed opens the door to the European Union 's exit from a long-standing phase whereby its ability to function effectively on behalf of its citizens has been held back .
We have a long-needed institutional system that works more effectively , but it also opens the door to so much more .
I welcome the solemn proclamation of the Charter of the Presidents of the Institutions that will be made on 12 December .
The inclusion of the Charter of Fundamental Rights as part of the legal order in the European Union will allow for the Union to begin to work on more effective , transparent and democratic foundations .
European citizens expect , and will continue to expect , that the Union 's institutions will act in accordance with its basic principles : with the Charter , and with efficiency , effectiveness and openness .
The European Ombudsman is one vital part of the democratic structure and functioning of the Union .
The largest proportion of the Ombudsman 's enquiries concern lack of transparency .
This is an area of our activities that we must improve if we are to become more credible in the eyes of the citizens .
I am delighted with the work of the Ombudsman , as explained in his annual report and in his speech .
He took a number of important decisions during 2006 , including , not least , on the choice of the languages used in the websites of the European Presidencies of the Council , on inaccurate and misleading information contained in leaflets , posters and video presentations on air passenger rights produced by the Commission , and on access to the audit report of the European Investment Bank .
It is important that we support the work of the Ombudsman , as well as the work of the Committee on Petitions , as it is through handling complaints and petitions on EU matters from citizens that we can find out what is not working well at European level and take corrective measures .
Cases being brought to the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions are of increasing complexity and therefore require a greater investment of resources by the institutions , in order that the citizens ' concerns are properly addressed .
In this context I would like to remind Members of Paragraph 2 of Ms Sbarbati 's report : ' Calls for all European institutions and bodies to be given the necessary budgetary and human resources to ensure that citizens receive prompt and substantive responses to their enquiries , complaints and petitions ' .
There will be no better way of putting the Charter of Fundamental Rights into practice than taking this on board , and I call on all the institutions and bodies to give priority to the interests of the citizens in this respect .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Madam President , Vice-President of the Commission Margot Wallström , Ombudsman Nikiforos Diamandouros , ladies and gentlemen , to start with I wish to thank the rapporteur for her excellent work .

Over the years the role of the European Ombudsman has become ever more important for the citizens of the European Union .
Once the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union enters into force , that role will become even more important .
This means that in the future we have to be even more careful to ensure that the Ombudsman has sufficient resources and that the code of practice under which he operates is relevant to the current climate .
Commissioner Margot Wallström stressed the need for transparency .
I would hope that now that the code of practice under which the European Ombudsman operates is changing , the Commissioner 's words , increased transparency and promoting the idea that the necessary information is available from the Commission , will come true , because only deeds matter , not words .
The Ombudsman 's annual report and its summarised version are a splendid example of how our work should be presented to the public .
The report is clear , succinct and to the point .
Transparency is the key to European democracy and its principal construction material .
Under Article 41 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , every person has the right to have his or her affairs handled impartially , fairly and within a reasonable time by the institutions and bodies of the Union .
That is saying a lot , and it places an obligation on all the European Union institutions and obviously on the Ombudsman 's office too .
Consequently , I would like to stress the importance of ensuring there are adequate resources of the relevant kind in place , so that people do not have to wait years and years for decisions on matters that affect them , because waiting for decisions is a tiresome business .
Finally , I would like to thank the Ombudsman for the work he does , and I wish him every success in this very challenging role .
It is not always appreciated sufficiently , as fundamental rights are implemented more successfully among the elite than among ordinary people .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Sbarbati for her work and to express my appreciation for the achievements of the European Ombudsman , Professor Nikiforos Diamandouros .
I am expressing the views of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group as well as those of Mr Marcin Libicki , the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , who was unable to attend today 's sitting and asked me to speak on his behalf .
Hominum causa omne ius constitutum sit - every law should be applied from the point of view of human beings .
This Roman principle can be seen in the work of the Ombudsman , who , working within his area of competence , tries to comply with the fundamental principle that everyone has the right to have their case heard in an impartial and just manner by EU bodies and institutions .
It can be seen from an analysis of the report that only about 25 % of the complaints submitted fall within the scope of competence of the Ombudsman .
Is it that our citizens do not know the law ?
Perhaps , to some extent , this is the case .
However , I think that it is something different , that they treat the institution of the ombudsman as a last resort , when they are unable to find appropriate help in their own countries .
The scope and quantity of applications submitted to the Committee on Petitions would indicate something similar .
If the feeling that one is being treated in an unjust , sluggish , incompetent or bureaucratic way continues to grow , the European Code of Good Administrative Behaviour will just become a collection of aspirations , and not everyday practice .
Professor , may you , as the Ombudsman , be an effective guardian of the interests of the Community 's citizens , and may Parliament , the Council and the Commission , as well as national parliaments and national ombudsmen , assist you in this work .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I am not going to repeat all of the good things that have been said , apart from to thank both our Ombudsman and Commissioner Wallström .
In addition , I would like to say something that must be underlined .
I am a relatively new member of the Committee on Citizens ' Complaints , as it would be better to call it .
I have , to my consternation , discovered through being out in society that it is virtually only active citizens who are monitoring whether EU legislation is being respected in many places .
The institutions are not doing this , and neither are the Member States .
Therefore , if citizens do not do it , the whole thing will fall apart .
Therefore , citizens are not only the victims of individual cases ; they are indeed also active fellow players who are working to ensure that the EU 's extremely transparent system is both understandable and close to citizens .
We should also be clear that it is a perpetual battle even if we equip our instruments , i.e. the Ombudsman and the Committee on Citizens ' Complaints , with the correct tools .
An attack is currently taking place on the Swedish system of openness and access to documents .
We must not believe that this is a battle that we can win once and for all .
We must persist and continue to persist and we will not win the battle at any point .
We will win it only if we continue to have very strong tools .
Let me stress that I am very pleased with Mrs Sbarbati 's report . However , I would like to highlight the amendments that we have fortunately been able to incorporate into the report thanks to considerable support .
Firstly , it is now possible for Parliament to take the Ombudsman 's cases to court if the institutions do not respect the Ombudsman .
It is absolutely crucial that this can be done in reality and is not simply something that we can boast about around the world .
We have the institution of the Ombudsman , we have a Committee on Citizens ' Complaints , and yet this does not mean anything other than words and yet more words .
This matter is therefore of enormous significance .
The second aspect concerns the European Investment Bank .
On many occasions the bank has not been as ' nice ' as it should be .
On many occasions it has acted as if it were assisting the major industries , and it is absolutely crucial that the citizens who should benefit from the bank 's activities in countries outside Europe have the opportunity to bring matters before the Ombudsman .
It is really quite shocking that they are refused on the grounds that they are not EU citizens and are not able to have their say .
They have been treated in a patronising and arrogant way , and I am therefore also very glad that it has now been highlighted in this report that these citizens will naturally have access to appeal to the Ombudsman .
Finally , let me say that it is important to emphasise that the Ombudsman also has competence within intergovernmental areas under the third pillar .
Overall , we are taking a big step forward with this report , and I very much hope that the bodies of both the Commission and Parliament will take it seriously .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , today 's discussion and the excellent work carried out by the European Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , over the past four and a half years , as well as Mrs Sbarbati 's excellent report , all provide an opportunity for the European Parliament and the Commission to take stock of how the public views the institutions of the EU .
A large section of the public is calling for greater transparency and exemplary administration , which are too little in evidence .
I note some worrying signs in Mr Diamandouros 's report .
Fewer cases have been resolved by friendly settlement .
There has been a decline in the number of cases where the Commission ( I see that the Vice-President is not listening ) has complied with the recommendations of the European Ombusdman .
Congratulating the European Ombudsman , Madam President , is not enough ; we must listen to his recommendations .
Mr Diamandouros is quite rightly requesting an extension of his powers to cover third-pillar issues , thus providing for greater transparency and control .
He is asking for a change to the European Ombudsman 's Statute so that his work can become more effective .
I believe he has the support of the European Parliament , but he must also have that of the Commission , and not just in word , but also in deed .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we read in Mrs Sbarbati 's report that , according to the 2006 statistics , over 90 % of the 3 800 or so complaints come from individual citizens , which is a very interesting fact .
Mrs Sbarbati also tells us that the majority of complaints come from the larger Member States , with larger populations , but goes on to say that the figure changes if the ratio between population and number of complaints is considered , when Luxembourg and the new accession countries Malta , Cyprus and Slovenia take the lead with the largest number of complaints .
This reflects , in my view , the fact that issues of a European nature and of European competence and legislation are the main concerns of the Ombudsman 's day-to-day work .
In my opinion , it is interesting to note , however , that it would be more useful to have functioning Ombudsmen in those countries and in particular in Italy than to have a European Ombudsman .
I think I remember reading that in the 95 % of cases examined , the majority do not fall within the mandate of the European Ombudsman , as the complaints are not made against a Community institution or body .
Cases of maladministration relate to lack of transparency , unfairness , abuse of power , legal error and so on .
There are no data on administrative inefficiency and injustice in my country , and I am sure that if such data existed and were brought to the attention of the European Ombudsman , Italy would be well in the lead , especially the left-wing administrations of my country .
It is not surprising that the wrong use of the discretionary powers of the Commission is well in the lead in the ranking , and I would therefore exhort the European Ombudsman to scrutinise relations between citizens , the Council , the Commission and Parliament more thoroughly .
I also agree that the Ombudsman 's scope of investigation should be extended to cover the protection of minors , family problems , the protection of personal data and prisoners ' rights , and for that reason I support the Mavrommatis amendment .
However , I do not support , Mrs Sbarbati and Mr Mavrommatis , the exhortation to conduct inquiries under the so-called third pillar .
That is wrong , and I do not agree .
I would , however , congratulate Mrs Sbarbati on her productive work with the European Ombudsman .

Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and , through her , my colleague , Mr Mavrommatis , but , of course , especially the Ombudsman himself on another successful year .
Three hundred or so complaints a month is a huge workload and equates both to rising interest in the system but also to rising concern at aspects of EU maladministration .
Whilst many cases are dealt with by cooperation , the Ombudsman refers to the increase in critical comment that he is forced to make .
This must improve , or Parliament will have to find ways of compelling the Commission to be helpful and responsive and , equally , to act upon the conclusions produced by the Ombudsman .
He makes telling comments .
I want to pick out one : ' I am not sure that the citizen can easily reconcile the statements often made by the institutions that they want to get " closer to the citizen ” with the fact that the very same institutions frequently fail to take up the opportunities offered by the Ombudsman to improve relations . '
The services of the Ombudsman should , and do , work hand in hand with the Committee on Petitions , but the Commission must develop a culture of service rather than the avoidance of problems , and Ministers and permanent representatives must understand the vital importance of responding positively to grievances from constituents and citizens , voiced either through the Ombudsman or the Petitions Committee .
Finally , may I make a brief reference to an outstanding special report by the Ombudsman , namely that relating to a complaint against OLAF .
As the Petitions Committee rapporteur for this issue , I give notice now that , the judicial process having been completed on this case , I will not allow the issue of the special report to be swept under the carpet .
It will be reconsidered as soon as is practically possible .
May I conclude with thanks , again , not only to you , Madam President , for delighting us with your presence , but also to the Ombudsman and the Commissioner for being here as well .
( EL ) Madam President , it seems we have really begun to understand how important it is that European citizens should feel close to the Union through democratic and especially transparent institutions .
The European Ombudsman is the institution par excellence for receiving citizens ' complaints .
It is also the one most obviously able to make citizens feel that the Union is dealing with and responding to their problems .
It shows that progress is being made in acknowledging and correcting administrative errors .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on the thinking behind her report .
She correctly brings out the Ombudsman 's key role in the EU 's democratic character .
However , I am worried that although there have been fewer instances of maladministration , the Ombudsman 's critical remarks , in those cases where a friendly settlement was reached , did not meet with a satisfactory rate of acceptance by the institutional bodies .
The rapporteur is right , then , to remind us of Parliament 's right of recourse to the Court , although , of course , one would prefer not to use this right .
However , all of us here today should understand that we ourselves are the institutions - and the corollary of this is that the reliability of the institutions depends on our own attitude .
I also agree entirely with the rapporteur 's view of a balanced but at the same time energetic way of performing one 's duties .
The Ombudsman is not , cannot and should not simply be a display of democracy for the EU .
We must acknowledge this , make it our joint decision , and above all , we must assume our responsibilities .
In other words , we must be bold in our decisions , but above all more transparent in what is essentially our concern .
Madam President , the most important aspect of the existence of the EU and its institutions is to uphold the fundamental principles of justice , democracy and respect for human rights , especially with reference to the citizens of Europe .
Our Union would have no raison d 'être or functional purpose if it did not have as its main objective to offer a fair , comprehensive and efficient service to the people of Europe .
The European citizen was , is , and always will be , the centre of our efforts as a functioning Union .
It is mainly for this reason that the activities of the Ombudsman are of such paramount importance .
This is because the Ombudsman is the friend and guardian of the European citizen and is the facility through which Community institutions and bodies can be held to account over whether they have served the citizen properly and whether they are guilty of maladministration or bad practice .
We welcome the 2006 Annual Report from Mr Diamandouros and congratulate and thank him for the very good work he and his staff have performed in upholding the rights of European citizens .
At the same time , we congratulate the rapporteur , Ms Sbarbati , on her excellent report , which contains many important points and suggestions .
I find most interesting , for example , the suggestion made in paragraph 12 , which in effect encourages the Ombudsman to draw up and publish annually a list of shame and a roll of honour for the EU 's administrative services .
May I point out that the proper functioning of the Ombudsman may inevitably , in rare instances , lead him to be disliked by certain services .
In such cases , the Ombudsman deserves - and must be reassured of - our full support .
Lastly , may I commend the active support and cooperation the Committee on Petitions has shown the Ombudsman in the performance of his duties .
The work of both those entities is very often interlinked , and their smooth cooperation is to be much appreciated and praised .
( PL ) Madam President , I represent Poland , a country that is in fifth position , statistically , as regards the number of complaints submitted to the European Ombudsman .
Every 16th complaint submitted to the Ombudsman comes from my country .
Every 20th complaint , almost , is written in Polish .
Obviously I am speaking of absolute numbers , because , per inhabitant , the citizens of Luxembourg , Malta and Cyprus are much more active in submitting complaints than my own countrymen .
It is worth emphasising that last year the European Ombudsman received fewer complaints than in 2005 .
Just over 200 complaints came from companies and associations , and 18 times more than that came from individuals .
It could be said that the functioning of the European Ombudsman provides the best indicator of computer use in the European Union .
Twelve out of 20 complaints are submitted electronically .
On the minus side , an indicator of the lack of knowledge of EU citizens is the fact that almost four out of five complaints do not fall within the scope of responsibilities of the European Ombudsman .
This shows that this institution is treated as a receptacle for all maladies , even those that do not relate to EU institutions , which , by definition , is what the European Ombudsman is supposed to monitor .
Clearly Europeans feel that the European Ombudsman has the right to crack the whip over everyone .
In conclusion , I would like to express satisfaction that only 8 % of the investigations instigated by the Ombudsman related to the European Parliament , while almost 66 % related to the European Commission .
( SV ) Thank you Madam President .
The Ombudsman 's criticism regarding a lack of transparency is necessary and badly needed criticism .
I also welcome Parliament 's proposal that the Ombudsman should carry out a study of the practical impact of critical remarks that were made , inter alia , in relation to the Commission .
Certainly , Parliament is often touchingly united in criticising other institutions , but there is actually good reason for Parliament also to be self-critical .
The Ombudsman has recently asked Parliament to disclose information on payments received by MEPs for travel and for employing staff , but Parliament has refused to disclose the information , taking the view that it is a breach of data protection .
I believe that this is merely putting up a smokescreen , and I have the support of the European Data Protection Supervisor when I say this .
Payments to staff are obviously public documents .
It is time for Parliament to come clean on payments .
Only those who employ staff on slave-type contracts and other strange contracts have something to fear from more transparency .
It surely cannot be the case that any Members here are afraid of not being re-elected in 2009 if it emerges in the media how employees are treated in certain cases , I say in certain cases . Thank you .
( EL ) Madam President , I should , of course , like to mention that we are examining the 10th report by the Ombudsman , who in 2006 received 3 889 letters or e-mails of complaint , 3 619 of which were sent by individual members of the public .
Of the 3 889 complaints , 3 051 were outside the mandate .
In other words , there were , in a single year , a total of 838 complaints within the mandate .
I therefore think that the Ombudsman 's department is large enough in terms of staff and resources to handle 838 complaints , which , of course , mainly concern matters of maladministration by the Commission and the European Personnel Selection Office , and to a lesser degree the European Parliament and the Council .
It is of course commendable that the Ombudsman publishes a list of best administrative practices .
I do not know , however , whether his department allows citizens to make complaints about the operation of his own department .
I regret that the report by the Committee on Petitions refers us only to the European Personnel Selection Office , and not to the European Ombudsman , who until now has not carried out an ex officio scrutiny of his department .
We are therefore requesting not a change in the Ombudsman 's Statute , but rather a strengthening of the rights that we already accord him .
This should allow him to show due respect for citizens , be very active in the correct administration of European institutions , and respect the personal data of citizens , Members of the European Parliament , and employees who are required to maintain secrecy .
The European Court of Justice should operate independently , without the Ombudsman 's intervention , and there should be respect for the effective international agencies that operate independently to protect fundamental rights .
Our support for the European Ombudsman is not without limits .

Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking the Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , and Ms Sbarbati for their excellent work on the Ombudsman 's report .
It is important that this debate is taking place at a prime time in Parliament 's plenary working day , at a time when it can have a high public profile .
The service that the Ombudsman provides is extremely important for the citizen : it enhances the positive connection between Europe 's institutions and the citizen and enriches the legitimacy of the work we do in the institutions , whether it is in Parliament , the Commission or the Council .
The service continues to evolve and that is pointed up quite well in Ms Sbarbati 's report , where she makes various suggestions , and the Ombudsman himself makes various suggestions , as to how it could continue to improve .
Certainly , the idea of broadening relations with mediators who deal with issues regarding minors and children is an important development .
At the same time , there is resistance in the system : resistance to transparency , resistance to a common code of administrative practice for all the institutions and resistance , as well , to updating the mandate of the Ombudsman .
I believe the European Parliament should take a more active role , for instance , in dealing with the transparency issue , and I support the Ombudsman 's call for Parliament to be more transparent in the publication of allowances paid to Members .
( PL ) Madam President , the activities of the European Ombudsman give EU citizens the feeling that they have some protection against inappropriate actions taken by EU institutions .
The material presented raises some issues .
The first of these is that the largest number of complaints submitted to the Ombudsman relates to the European Commission , the European Personnel Selection Office and the European Parliament .
The failure of European institutions , with the exception of the Ombudsman , to implement the European Code of Good Administrative Behaviour in accordance with the 2001 Resolution of the European Parliament may be a contributory factor .
The second issue is that 78.5 % of the matters submitted to the Ombudsman fall outside his competence , and 93.7 % of these complaints do not relate to EU bodies or institutions .
This would indicate that our citizens do not have sufficient information about the work of the Ombudsman or that , for various reasons , they are unable to get important issues dealt with in their own countries .
This matter needs to be investigated .
The third issue is that the Ombudsman should have the powers that are necessary quickly to remove bad administrative practices that give rise to complaints .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
Madam President , I would like to welcome our visitors , the citizens , to this debate .
I hope that they understand what the Ombudsman is about , following his very detailed presentation of twelve months ' work in a very short space of time .
It is a pity that the Ombudsman receives so many cases that it is not within his competence to resolve , but I understand that these are redirected to the appropriate places .
It is important to say that to people listening to this debate .
Those cases do not fall by the wayside , but are sent in the right direction .
That you are dealing with a certain number of cases and bringing about a resolution is positive , but we need to do a bit more work to educate people about what you do and how you do it , in order to bring even more cases to your desk .
That would do no harm , because I am sure the small number you deal with does not truly reflect the problems of maladministration .
Turning to the Commission , I quite like the idea of a culture of service , but I am not sure that the Commission uses the carrot and stick approach internally to make sure that there is indeed a culture of service .
This is something that should be done through legislation .
Are there penalties for divisions or individuals involved in maladministration when it comes to citizens ?
Perhaps that is something we could have a closer look at .
I like the idea of putting forward the star performers and the worst performers so that we can have that comparison , but at the end of the day what people want is results and positive outcomes .
I keep saying to people in Ireland that the Committee on Petitions does not have huge power , but that through the work we do we can act as a pressure point for action .
I wish we had more power , but at least we can use that little bit of pressure to bring about results for citizens .
They are not interested in the process .
They just want positive outcomes .
Mr Diamandouros , I wish you well in your activities this year and hope you continue in the same way as in the past .
I will certainly work in Ireland to make sure that we know a lot more about you in the future .


( ES ) Madam President , I would like first to thank Mr Diamandouros for his report and to acknowledge the enormous amount of work being done by Commissioner Wallström , and to congratulate Mrs Sbarbati on her pertinent report which will act as our guide to assessing the improvements we anticipate for 2007 and 2008 .
We welcome the content of the current report , which shows that the task of the European Ombudsman has become established and has bedded in ; it also shows increased contact with authorities and with citizens .
Personally , I particularly welcome the agreement with the current Government of Spain on the use of co-official languages - Basque , Catalan and Gallego , as this will bring the citizens of Spain closer to their rights without diminishing the functionality of Spanish , which will prove very useful in future contacts with third country nationals .
There are , however , other aspects noted by Mr Diamandouros himself , which are a source of concern : more than 75 % of complaints are not about European competences but national or regional competences .
We therefore take the view that it is a matter of great urgency to strengthen the communication strategy of the European Network of Ombudsmen so that this can be put right .
Another problem highlighted is the fall in instances of maladministration concluded by friendly agreement or consensus .
We supporters of the Ombudsman urge him to improve his know-how and recover his effectiveness in this route .
Persuasion is better than force .
Finally I shall only add that it would be ironic if the legitimate ambition of the current Ombudsman to apply the Code of Administrative Conduct led him to be more diligent outside his home than within it .
( MT ) Thank you , Madam President .
The office of Ombudsman is today well established and I would like to congratulate it on its good work .
We now need to look ahead to ensure that the tools that citizens have at their disposal for seeking redress are clear , known to all and function more efficiently .
At present there is too much confusion regarding where citizens should go when they want to make a complaint .
Some appeal to the Committee on Petitions , some to the Commission , some to the Ombudsman , and some appeal to everyone , which results in a great deal of confusion , duplicated work and unnecessary expenses that could all be avoided .
There is therefore a need , as Commissioner Wallström rightly said , for better coordination between the institutions that hear and make decisions on complaints .
For example , there should be a clear commitment regarding the time within which these agencies must reply to citizens once they receive their complaints , and also a commitment regarding the maximum length of time they can take to give a definitive reply .
We still hear all too often about complaints that were lodged years before and are still pending .
As my colleague Ms McGuinness has stated , when a complaint is sent to the wrong agency , that agency should not send a negative reply but should itself pass the complaint on to the correct agency .
Finally , when a citizen formulates his complaint in an unclear manner , because , after all , not all citizens are lawyers , a greater effort should be made to ensure that whoever receives the complaint gives the complainant the benefit of the doubt and does not automatically consider the complaint inadmissible .
I think we have taken huge steps forward and once again I would like to congratulate the Ombudsman , but we still have a lot more to do . Thank you very much .
( PL ) I would like to express my satisfaction that the European Ombudsman fulfils his functions in a balanced and dynamic manner , both in the consideration of complaints , which numbered 3830 in 2006 , and in running and completing investigations .
Also encouraging are the good relations between the Ombudsman and EU bodies and institutions , as well as the encouragement given to citizens to exercise their rights .
As we are debating this report , I would like to emphasise how important it is to make sure that there are the necessary budget and staffing resources to ensure that citizens receive rapid and objective responses to their questions , complaints and petitions .
It is obvious that all institutions should work in a constructive manner with the Ombudsman at every stage of the procedure , and the Ombudsman should present Parliament with suggestions that , in his view , would help to improve procedures and make this cooperation even more effective .
In congratulating Professor Diamandouros on his achievements as Ombudsman , I would at the same time like to encourage him to continue his efforts and to promote his activities even more , so that , in the eyes of European citizens , he becomes a guarantor of good administration in EU institutions .
( RO ) Ten years after the institution of the European Ombudsman was established , I am pleased to find the evolution of its role and activities in the process of protecting the European citizen .
The 2006 activity report proves to us that , nowadays , European citizens benefit from a true competent court where they can defend themselves against any institution and , in fact , prevent and signal their defective operation .
In other words , we speak today about a true instrument of democratic control , performed in an autonomous and transparent manner , which can only be beneficial to the European Union .
Moreover , I am grateful to the European Parliament 's Rapporteur for pointing out the aspects to be improved in the Ombudsman 's current activity as well .
First of all , I regret the fact that there are still many complaints from citizens who have not obtained the information requested in their own language .
This proves to us that , in Europe , we still have problems in ensuring full linguistic rights and equality among citizens .
We are on the brink of the year 2008 , declared the year of intercultural dialogue , and are forced to immediately correct these deficiencies , which are contrary to the European Union 's fundamental values .
In my turn , I welcome the European Ombudsman 's communication strategy and I emphasize the need to consolidate it .
The current statistics regarding the complaints that continue to exceed the Ombudsman 's competence are a sad finding of the unsatisfactory information level of the citizens , as well as of their understanding and knowledge of the Ombudsman 's and other institutions ' scope of competence .

( PL ) Madam President , Mr Ombudsman , first of all I would like to congratulate the Professor on his excellent achievements and his work for democracy and the observance of citizens ' rights in the European Union .
The European Ombudsman is one of the principal bodies in the democratic life of the European Union .
He should guard the democratic equality of all European citizens and act as a mediator between citizens and the Community 's organs of public administration , which , for various reasons , do not comply with the standards that have been set .
It is encouraging to see the information presented in the report on the Ombudsman 's activities in 2006 , showing his dynamic involvement in the public life of the Community and his active cooperation with both EU citizens and the administrative bodies of the European Union .
To improve the effectiveness of the Ombudsman 's activities it would be worth considering the possibility of preparing lists of best administrative practice , with exemplary or exceptional cases in which the Ombudsman was involved in any given year , as well as a list of the cases where the actions of institutions were less appropriate .
In addition , in order to ensure that the Ombudsman is fully and decisively involved , support should be given to the idea that the Ombudsman should also carry out investigations in the so-called third pillar , that is , Police and Judicial Cooperation in Criminal Matters , which would also extend to the activities of Europol .
Ombudsman . - Madam President , first of all I wish to thank Ms Sbarbati , the rapporteur for my Annual Report for 2006 at this year 's plenary .
I also wish to thank the very large number of Members who , in fact , took the time to comment on my report .
I am deeply grateful for the interest that this expresses and the guidance that it contains .
With respect to Ms Sbarbati , let me just say that I of course worked very closely and intend to continue to work very closely with the Petitions Committee , with which I have excellent relations .
The Petitions Committee and the Ombudsman will continue to be the major instrument through which this august body will also be able to deal with citizens ' approaches to the European institutions .
I take note of your remarks .
I can tell you that I have already launched an own-initiative inquiry concerning EPSO , as you know , but I want to announce it to this body .
I also have taken a strong interest and continue to monitor very carefully developments in the European schools .
I wish to thank Ms Wallström for her remarks .
I note that she has recorded the increase in the number of cases where the Commission apologises for instances in which its services have not abided by best practice .
I am very grateful to her for acknowledging that .
I will be meeting with Ms Wallström in the near future , and I will also be meeting with the Directors-General of the Commission and the coordinators of all the services dealing with the Ombudsman , precisely in order to be able to bring about better coordination and better results .
This is an indication of how closely I am working with the Commission , and I hope to be able to elicit better results to report to you next year , and of course to report to citizens .
That includes the infringement , and I will be dealing with that as well .
On a more general point , let me just say that I am very grateful to you for your general support on broad issues like the culture of service , which is very central to my concerns ; for your references to the need for more resources for the Ombudsman ; for your support on the issue of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and of the Statute ; and for your call for greater accountability , which for me of course is extraordinarily important .
I can also let you know that I have launched , as of this year , a concerted effort to reach out to business associations as opposed to individuals , with an eye to better informing them of their rights as well .
Because of the pressure of time , allow me not to switch languages , but first of all to say to Ms McGuinness and also to Ms Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , that I manage to help 70 % of the 70 % that are outside my mandate .
Therefore , my work involves not only the percentage that is within my mandate , but on top of that there is a great deal of effort being expended by my staff to be able to help every single citizen who comes to us whose concern is outside the mandate , by referring to the appropriate institution , be it at European or national level .
Therefore , this covers 3 830 cases , not 885 .
Allow me now to switch languages .
Ombudsman .
( EL ) Mrs Panayiotopoulos , I want to assure you that the European Ombudsman is fully aware of his obligation to work within the legal limits .
He will , of course , always work according to the basic principle of accountability to Parliament and to you , and at all times he will be acutely aware of his responsibility .
Lastly , I am doing all I can to promote the creation of a national ombudsman in Italy .
I have been there four or five times and I will continue to do so , hoping that we will be able to welcome an Italian national ombudsman into our midst in the near future .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to respond to two direct questions .
The first concerns the reform of the Statute of the Ombudsman .
I can tell you that , very early on , the Ombudsman kept us informed about the work on the new Statute , and we have been in constant touch about this .
Of course , there are some things we could easily approve , but others are more complicated .
The Commission will formally give its opinion only after Parliament makes its proposals .
We have also met with Ms Jäätteenmäki , and we are looking forward to her report with interest .
The other direct question was from Ms McGuinness about the carrot-and-stick approach and whether we applied it .
No , not enough , I would say - or not yet .
But what we have been doing over the last period of time is to create more of a visibility of these issues and also create an ownership within the Commission for every directorate-general and through all the hierarchical levels in the Commission .
I think that creating that sense of responsibility and visibility will help us to encourage and also sometimes to make it known when we are not pleased with how individual officials are dealing with cases .
I think it is rather rarely the case of an individual official making a mistake ; it is more about the culture .
This is what we have in the walls , and this is what we have to change now .
I think the reforms we have taken will move us in the right direction .
Let me just finally mention one thing that I hope will be welcomed by the Commission as well as the European Parliament : we are working with citizens ' summaries on our proposals .
Again , to come closer to citizens , we also have to express ourselves not in EU jargon but in plain language , and I hope this will help .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) Mrs Sbarbati 's report on the European Ombudsman 's activities is evidence of her regard for this institution , which was set up under the Maastricht Treaty in 1992 to defend European citizens in the event of maladministration by Community institutions .
The report rightly emphasises certain priorities for the Ombudsman in the future : the importance of cooperating with ombudsmen in the Member States , for example , and the proposal for better internal supervision of how EU bodies are managed .
It also raises two questions , however , which we omit from the European debate at our peril .
On the one hand , the Ombudsman 's activities must entail a review of the institution 's profile and accessibility throughout Europe .
There is , in fact , a downward trend in the number of cases referred to the Ombudsman ( 3 830 in 2006 , a decrease of 2 % from 2005 ) , and complaints tend to come from Member States that already have a culture of encouraging people to raise issues with the relevant national institutions .
On the other hand , the report considers the question of extending the Ombudsman 's powers ( with regard to accessing documents and the unconditional hearing of witnesses ) .
No amendment to the Statute of the Ombudsman must be allowed to obscure the major role played by Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , which draws its legitimacy directly from the ballot box .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.20 and resumed at 11.30 )

Origin marking ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Announcement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , the Conference of Presidents has taken a unanimous decision , which I am relaying to you , addressing myself in particular to the Council .
In the context of its deliberations on the Commission 's proposal for the amendment of the Regulation on the funding of European political parties , the Committee of Permanent Representatives decided yesterday to split the Commission 's proposal in two and to adopt the necessary amendments to the Financial Regulation in a separate legislative instrument , to be created on the legal basis that applies to amendments to the Financial Regulation .
This would mean that key elements of this legislative process would be taken out of the sphere of parliamentary codecision and that the Commission , contrary to its own convictions , would have to present a new proposal , while it would also be essential , or at least advisable , to consult the Court of Auditors .
The European Parliament calls on the Council to reconsider its decision .
The amendments to the Political Parties Regulation proposed by the Commission are necessary to overcome practical difficulties that have arisen in its application .
They would also make it possible to continue supporting the development at the European level of political foundations , which play an important part in opening political processes to public scrutiny .
For these reasons , it is imperative that the proposed regulation should enter into force very soon .
On 22 October , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs adopted a report expressing willingness to compromise with the Council to pave the way for the rapid adoption of the proposed regulation .
The splitting of this instrument by the Permanent Representatives has thwarted these efforts .
It is legally unnecessary , undermines the Commission 's right of initiative , curtails the rights of Parliament , and is likely to cause significant delays .
On behalf of the Conference of Presidents I call on the Council to overturn at ministerial level the decision of the Permanent Representatives .
I have been asked for leave to speak , but there will be no debate thereafter .
Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( DE ) I am extremely grateful to you for this statement , Mr President , and also to the Conference of Presidents .
It is a serious matter when the European Parliament - the chamber of the people at the European level - is excluded from the legislative process relating to a regulation on European political parties .
That is truly a subject that concerns all of us here , whatever our party affiliation .
It is unthinkable that the bureaucracies in some finance ministries and then their governments should decide on this issue rather than the people 's representative assembly of the EU .
We should not stand for that !
With regard to the budget for 2008 , let me say that the national governments have wishes which they can only fulfil together with us .
When dealing with the 2008 budget , this Parliament should remember what the Council decided yesterday with regard to this Regulation on the European political parties .
Thank you for your statement .
We have not seen the end of this issue .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as this House will have understood from what you said , Coreper decided to split the Commission 's proposal into two legal instruments : one regulation under Article 199 , to which codecision applies , to cover political foundations and campaigning , and another regulation under Article 279 , which means simple consultation of Parliament and the Court of Auditors to cover the financial derogations .
The Commission opposed that splitting of its proposal for sound legal reasons , but also for political reasons .
The decision introduces uncertainty as regards timing , when we want the proposal to enter into force before the end of this year so that the foundations can be fully functional before 2009 .
That was the whole idea behind the proposal .
We also think that the whole proposal should be approved by codecision , under Article 199 of the Treaty .
We regret , therefore , that Coreper decided , against the Commission 's will , to reduce Parliament 's role in an issue intimately related to Parliament 's business , namely the financing of the political parties .
Just 36 hours after the Committee on Constitutional Affairs approved by a very large majority the Commission 's proposal , Coreper decided to follow a route which departed from that of the Commission and of Parliament .
However , our destination , I hope , remains the same : approval of the substance of our proposal before the end of this year .
( Applause )
2007 Sakharov Prize ( announcement of winner )
Ladies and gentlemen , I have another announcement to make before we move on to the budget .
At its meeting this morning - Thursday , 25 October - the Conference of Presidents unanimously chose the winner of the Sakharov Prize .
For his commitment to the all-too-long-forgotten victims in Darfur , the Conference decided that the prize would be awarded to Salih Mahmoud Osman .
( Applause )
For more than 20 years , Mr Osman , a human-rights lawyer and member of the Sudanese Organisation against Torture , has been defending countless victims of the conflict in Darfur who have been arbitrarily imprisoned , driven from their homes and tortured or who face the death penalty .
His seat in the Sudanese Parliament now enables him to bring their cause to the attention of the international community , though sometimes at great personal sacrifice .
Mr Osman champions the cause of dialogue and justice against violence and tyranny .
Without democracy there can be no justice .
By awarding the Sakharov Prize to Salih Mahmoud Osman , the European Parliament would like to support the work of this courageous man who has become the voice of Darfur and , through him , to support the establishment of the rule of law in Sudan .
The formal presentation of the prize will take place in Strasbourg on Tuesday , 11 December .
In addition , I should like to inform you that the Conference of Presidents was also unanimous in its view that we should consider an appropriate way to honour the murdered Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya , and ...
( Applause )
... the Conference of Presidents will decide at its next meeting what form that tribute will take .
Welcome
It gives me great pleasure to welcome a delegation of Members of the Majlisi Oli , the Parliament of the Republic of Tajikistan , who have taken their seats in the official gallery .
( Applause )
The members of the delegation have come to Strasbourg for talks with their European counterparts in the framework of the third interparliamentary meeting between the European Parliament and the Majlisi Oli .
This is the first time that the interparliamentary meeting has taken place here in Strasbourg .
Mr Makhkamboy Azimovich Makhmudov , who is leading the delegation , is accompanied by Mr Nosir Yusupovich Salimov and Mr Gulkhoja Gangibekov .
I hope that the delegation will continue to enjoy a pleasant and successful stay in the European Union .
( Applause )
1 .
Draft general budget of the European Union - Financial year 2008 ( vote )
- Before the vote
Mr President , before the beginning of the vote , I want to make the following statement .
As you know , the Committee on Budgets voted on more than 1 600 amendments to the 2008 draft budget .
Inevitably , there are a small number of technical adjustments that I hereby request to be put to the vote in plenary .
After the vote , the Committee on Budgets issued a request to retable the following four amendments :
Amendment 990 : + EUR 1.53m on line 16 03 04 , commitment appropriations only ;
Amendment 24 : on line 15 05 55 , commitment appropriations only , reserve and remarks as in Amendment 938 ;
Amendment 989 : + EUR 1 million on line 16 03 02 , commitment appropriations , and + EUR 1 million in payment appropriations ;
Amendment 1043 : + EUR 1 million on line 15 06 06 , commitment appropriations , and + EUR 1 million in payment appropriations , plus additional remarks from Amendment 25 , with the figure EUR 1 million instead of EUR 1.5 million .
These technical changes and specifications were dealt with and approved at the meeting of Committee on Budgets of 11 October 2007 .
As regards Frontex , a technical error was identified subsequent to the vote in committee concerning the remarks .
The correct modification to the remarks is contained in Amendment 1133 , which is annexed to the voting list .
Finally , the remarks adopted in Amendment 634 do not appear in Amendments 1018 on budget line 15 02 02 05 ; 934 on budget line 09 06 01 ; 938 on budget line 15 05 55 , and 940 on budget line 17 02 02 .
And , on budget line 09 03 03 , the right figure for commitment appropriations should be 5 and payment appropriations 4.85 .
I ask the Sittings Service to make the necessary corrections in the Minutes .
On top of that , we held a discussion at the coordinators ' meeting yesterday and , according to their decisions , I recommend rejecting Amendment 752 and voting in favour of Amendment 610 on line 16 02 02 ( multimedia actions ) , but taking the reserve from Amendment 752 , and rejecting Amendment 1044 and voting in favour of Amendment 32 on line 16 02 03 .
- After the vote on Amendment 878
( FI ) Mr President , regarding Amendment 878 , it has to do with the pilot projects and has been accepted .
There was broad consensus in the Committee that we should add the changes in Amendment 822 to the justifications .
They are otherwise identical , but a minor change has been made to Amendment 822 compared with the justifications for the previous amendment , and I propose that we could vote just on the justifications in the case of Amendment 822 .
Thank you , Mr Virrankoski .
I am told that is indeed the intention , but Mrs De Keyser has again asked to speak .
( FR ) Mr President , I am somewhat anxious because I see that in Amendment 231 we have voted for a European foundation for the improvement ' of loving and working conditions ' .
Surely some explanation is in order !
- Before the vote on Amendment 996
Mr President , I want to propose that we vote only on reserves , and I am in favour of lifting the reserve , because we have got all the information for which we have asked .
- Before the vote on Amendment 21
Mr President , I would just like to remind the House that this is the amendment concerning the Unified Sports Programme for the Special Olympics .
- Before the vote on Amendment 938
Mr President , line 15 05 55 is , I think , covered by my earlier statement , so we do not have to vote on it .
There remains , however , the question of the reserve , Mr Virrankoski .
We do not have to vote on the first part , but a vote must be taken on the second part , that is to say the reserve .
Mr President , in my statement I said ' reserve and remarks as in Amendment 938 ' .
- Before the vote on Amendment 1043
Mr President , this is also covered by my earlier statement .
- Before the vote on Amendment 752
Mr President , concerning the line 16 02 02 , I recommend rejection of Amendment 752 and approval of Amendment 610 , but that we take over the reserve from Amendment 752 .
I would therefore ask that we vote first on Amendment 610 , and then on the reserve from Amendment 752 .
- Before the vote on Amendment 990
rapporteur . - Mr President , I think this is covered by my earlier statement .
- After the vote on block 6
Mr President , in Amendment 951 , the German text is the correct one .
Some of the other languages contain mistakes , so please follow the German text .
- Before the vote on block 8
rapporteur . - Mr President , before starting to vote on the budgetary amendments , I would like to inform you of a limited number of technical adjustments that need to be made .
First , concerning Section I , in Amendment 1094 , only the budget line 20 26 will be voted on .
Concerning Chapter 101 , Plenary should vote only on the final amount in Amendment 1004 , which is EUR 5 million .
Concerning Sections VI and VII : in Amendment 1013 , the second and third paragraphs of the justification to the amendment should replace the respective paragraphs in the justification in Amendment 1001 , and the second paragraph in Amendments 986 , 1007 and 999 .
2 .
2008 draft general budget : Section III ( vote )
- Virrankoski report
3 .
2008 draft general budget : Sections I , II , IV , V , VI , VII , VIII and IX ( vote )
- Itälä report
4 .
Recognition and supervision of suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and conditional sentences ( vote )
- Esteves report
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would just like to propose an oral amendment to my Amendment 2 , to clarify the text .
I propose to delete the word ' unacceptable ' .
Therefore , it would read : ' in clear infringement of the fundamental rights laid down in the European Union Treaties ' .
The political groups have already been informed .
( The oral amendment was adopted . )
5 .
Mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters ( vote )
- Varvitsiotis report
6 .
EC-Madagascar Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( vote )
- Sudre report
7 .
EC-Mozambique Fisheries Partnership Agreement ( vote )
- Fernandes report
8 .
Business registers for statistical purposes ( vote )
- Hans-Peter Martin report
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I have a request to make on behalf of all democratically minded people .
It is unacceptable for Members of the European Parliament to be dubbed the ' cancer of Europe ' , in other words to be called after a deadly disease .
This did not happen in Budapest , like the insult to which Mr Schulz referred yesterday , but in Brussels .
In his speech in the plenary chamber of this House , a Member of the European Parliament described critics of the EU as a cancer .
The Member in question was Othmar Karas , Vice-President of the EPP Group .
He said it at the plenary sitting of 10 October 2007 .
I demand ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
That did not pertain to the report .
All I will say on that point is that Members of Parliament should always be exemplary in their words and actions .
9 .
Rise in food prices ( vote )
- Joint motion for a resolution :
10 .
Special Measure 2007 for Iraq ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
11 .
EU-Serbia relations ( vote )
- Kacin report
- Before the vote on Amendment 8
( DE ) Mr President , I wanted to say a word on this amendment .
We had to make a correction there , and I ask Mr Schöpflin and other Members to vote in favour , because there was a mistake in the original text .
1992 is the wrong year .
We would keep that mistake in the recommendation if we did not vote for Mr Kacin 's amendment .
Let us please vote for this amendment .
- Before the vote on Amendment 29
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have an oral amendment to Paragraph 29 , because there is something that has to be deleted .
In the English version , the words ' both entities of ' have to be deleted .
Otherwise , the split vote would not make sense .
This has been agreed by the PPE-DE Group .
( The oral amendment was adopted . )
- After the vote
Mr President , on a point of order , I rise under Rule 166 , which says that the Member shall first specify to which rule he is referring .
I am referring to that one .
I understand that you cut off Mr Martin before he had a chance to finish what he wanted to say .
He was making a point about yesterday .
Yesterday , Mr Schulz made a lengthy political statement without referring to the rule under which he was speaking .
It was allowed by the President , whereas Mr Martin was cut off .
I think there is a bias at work here and a double standard , where those in favour of the EU are allowed to say what they want and those who are not in favour of it are cut off .
Could we have an even application of the Rules please ?
( Applause from the right )
I am in the chair today , and I always endeavour to apply the Rules of Procedure as prescribed .
12 .
EU-Africa relations ( vote )
- Martens report
- Before the vote on Amendment 1
( FR ) Mr President , colleagues , I should like very briefly to propose an oral amendment to the new Article 61a in Amendment 1 , which would introduce the following wording in the second part : ' therefore calls on the Commission [ ... ] to find solutions while continuing negotiations ' .
I believe I have the support of my ALDE and PPE colleagues .
( The oral amendment was adopted . )
13 .
Cluster bombs ( vote )
- Motion for a resolution :
14 .
Production of opium for medical purposes in Afghanistan ( vote )
- Cappato report )
- Before the vote

( ES ) Mr President , before we proceed to the vote on the report by Mr Cappato , I would like to explain to the House that an error has crept into the Spanish version : in paragraph 1 ( b ) , the antepenultimate line reads ' the implementation of pilot projects ' , whereas the authentic version must be the English one , which reads ( EN ) ' looking at the possibility ' .
Thank you for looking through the text so meticulously .
That will , of course , be corrected .
- Before the vote on Amendment 4
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to forgive you for mispronouncing my name , and , secondly , on Amendment 4 , I should like to propose that what might be called the factual part of the amendment , that is , only the first part , should be maintained .
' whereas according to the report by the International Narcotics Control Board there is a global oversupply of opiates for medical purposes ' ,

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the amendment should end here ; if there are no objections , in that case we are in favour .
( The oral amendment was adopted . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 5

rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my apologies , here again only a factual replacement is involved ; as the Afghan law is cited , the appropriate wording of the law should be substituted :
' whereas the Afghan Constitution states that " the state shall prevent all types of cultivation and smuggling of narcotics ” and whereas Afghanistan 's 2005 Counter Narcotics Drug Law provides for the eventual licensed production and distribution of controlled substances in Afghanistan ; '
( The oral amendment was adopted . )
15 .
Improving the efficiency of the enforcement of judgments in the EU : attachment of bank accounts ( vote )
- Lechner report
16 .
European Ombudsman 's activities in 2006 ( vote )
- Sbarbati report
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
Explanations of vote
The next item is the explanations of vote .
in writing . - We are opposing a continued expansion of the EU budget , which today is already too extensive , with a large part of the funds going to the wrong ends .
Today there seem to be a reciprocal action between new objectives for the Union and demands on financing by the EU .
This means new demands on payments from the Member States , but also that new funds are being transferred to a system which is bureaucratic , inefficient and complex .
Today there is also too large a focus on industrial agriculture and foreign policy and military projects , and not enough on the environment and social projects .
However , there are many desirable initiatives being financed via the budget , and we support reasonable changes to existing means .
We did choose to support the specific amendment 945 , since it covers , among other things , aid to Palestine , even though there were other aspects of the amendment of which we do not approve .
in writing . - I completely oppose European funds being used to grow tobacco in the European Union .
Half a million EU citizens die needlessly each year due to tobacco addiction .
We cannot continue to subsidise tobacco growing in the EU .
in writing . - ( SV ) I have chosen to vote to the fullest possible extent in favour of the Council 's draft budget for 2008 , and therefore against all increases in expenditure proposed by the European Parliament .
It is extremely unfortunate that Parliament wishes to finance Galileo through the Community budget .
If it transpires that the private operators back out owing to profitability problems , the EU should take the consequences and discontinue the project or allow interested Member States to join in , as happened with Boeing .
I have also been involved in the issue of the abolition of subsidies for tobacco producers and support for wine production , and can only regret that Parliament is not prepared to support those proposals .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Of course no budget is perfect , but we must nevertheless strive to spend common funds in a just and future-oriented manner .
Unfortunately , most of the European Union budget continues to be spent on preserving the conditions of the past .
This is why it is important to ensure that some money goes towards the future , towards research , development and science .
The financing of the European Institute of Technology still needs to be resolved , because the Commission has proposed a bridging solution of a maximum amount of EUR 308 million .
Budapest would be an ideal location for the European Institute of Technology , owing to its excellent research results and the scientific expertise it has gathered in combating climate change .
This is another reason why I am keen to see a resolution to the issue of financing .
We Hungarians are able to provide an appropriate location for an Institute that is modest in size , economical , but all the more rigorous in terms of its intellectual basis .
( LT ) Today we have completed the first reading of the EU budget for 2008 and have voted in favour of it .
According to the budget , more than EUR 129 billion will be allocated for commitments and more than EUR 124 billion for payments in 2008 .
In comparison to the European Commission 's proposal we would like to increase the allocation of payments for the next year from 0.97 to 0.99 % of the European Union 's gross national income .
I would like to point out that this increase is fully justified and is related to the development of important projects such as the Galileo satellite navigation system and the European Institute of Technology project .
In my opinion , the allocation of additional funds for our commitments in Kosovo and Palestine - that is , for the implementation of the fourth category , ' The EU as a global player ' - is very important .

in writing . - ( NL ) Both rapporteurs on the EU budget , Mr Virrankoski and Mr Itälä , have rightly taken a somewhat critical line on the increase in the amounts for 2008 .
I should like to express my views on that .
Unfortunately the European Parliament is opting in too many cases today to spend more money .
That is why I have a problem with paragraphs 2 and 4 in the Virrankoski report .
That is not appropriate in a European Union that wishes to concentrate on the areas where there is a benefit , the core tasks .
Finally , an additional problem that makes it more difficult to approve the Virrankoski report is Amendment 2 by the Socialist Group .
That amendment proposes that sexual and reproductive rights be included in the position of Parliament .
However , these do not exclude abortus provocatus .
The term ' sexual and reproductive rights ' is therefore inappropriate .
in writing . - ( SV ) Today we Swedish Social Democrats voted on the 2008 EU budget .
We think that the adopted proposal was a good compromise and , even though we lost out in some respects , we fully support the proposal .
We voted in favour of reducing export subsidies in agriculture , but think that it is unreasonable to vote in favour of a complete and immediate withdrawal of aid .
We also voted against continued subsidies for tobacco producers and in favour of limiting the number of Parliament sessions in Strasbourg .
As regards Daphne ( protection of children , women and young people against violence ) , we voted in favour of increasing the appropriation up to the level of the Commission 's proposal .
However , we had been prepared to vote in favour of further funding , but were given no opportunity to do so because the amendment never went to vote .
In the resolution from Mr Virrankoski , we Swedish Social Democrats voted against an amendment which , among other things , called on the Commission to ensure that no farmers would receive more than EUR 50 000 per year in direct aid from the EU .
This is a discussion which is ongoing , so we agree with the spirit of the proposal , but do not consider it appropriate to set either an exact sum or specific conditions right now .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we have pointed out , although it contains aspects that improve the proposal of the Council and the Commission , in the end the draft general budget for 2008 , approved at first reading by the EP , does not comply with what was agreed for 2008 in the Multiannual Financial Framework 2007-2013 .
At the same time as restrictions are imposed on the EU budget , its priorities are defined as competition policy ( an example of which is the gradual distortion of structural policy , placing it at the service of the Lisbon Strategy ) , and the communitisation of ' internal security and immigration control ' and the EU 's external policy , which promotes intervention and the militarisation of international relations .
Hence our vote against .
The approval of proposals we tabled should , however , be noted , such as :
increase in sums for the Structural Funds , POSEI ( Azores and Madeira ) and PROGRESS ( equality between men and women ) ;
support for cooperation among farmers ' associations and other rural activities , and small-scale and family farming ;
an increase of EUR 2 million for the programme to compensate for the additional costs incurred in the marketing of certain fishery products from the outermost regions , which means an increase of EUR 570 000 for the Autonomous Regions of Madeira and the Azores .
in writing . - ( RO ) I support the European Union 's Budget , in its current form , for several reasons .
The 553 million euro cut-back in agriculture , operated by the Council , was mainly reestablished , and the reserve created on the Commission 's administrative funds is justified by the delays recorded in approving the Sectorial Operational Programmes and Rural Development Programmes .
At the second reading of the European budget , the Council of Ministers should not perform additional reductions in the agriculture funds or structural funds .
The amendment submitted in the plenum for limiting the farmers ' income to maximum 50,000 euros per year is unjustified .
Such an artificial barrier would prevent the best farmers from developing their work profitably .
Moreover , this restriction will contribute to breaking down the agricultural works and to the decline of European agricultural competitiveness .
For this reason , I rejected the amendment providing for this measure .
The 2008 budget , in the form we adopt today , is a budget that makes the European Union institutions accountable .
I support the proposal to transfer 49 million euros from the funds allocated to the Commission to reserves until it submits a clear report on its human resources policy , especially as regards the recruitment of new employees from the countries that have recently joined the European Union - Romania and Bulgaria .
in writing . - I voted for this part of the 2008 Budget , while supporting the UK Government 's position on a range of issues .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of Parliament 's 2008 budget motion because it proposes distinct improvements to the draft budget put forward by the Council .
A balance has been struck for 2008 between financing , on the one hand , for external policies such as support for Kosovo and Palestine and , on the other , for Galileo , a project that binds the Member States closer together .
The European Socialists ' priorities are thus well reflected in Parliament 's position on the EU budget for 2008 at first reading .
I would point out , however , what a modest budget this is : it currently represents no more than 0.99 % of the Union 's GDP .
This is the first time that the budget has dropped below 1 % of GDP .
Yet the Union cannot act in the interests of its citizens if it lacks the resources to do so .
It is time that the Member States shouldered their responsibilities here .
Mr President , I just wanted to say that I was very sorry that we have decided again not to receive travel expenses .
I would suggest to Parliament that , possibly , if they split the price of tickets from mileage , there might be more support in the future .
I think citizens will watch this vote and will again be disappointed .
in writing . - ( FR ) The European Parliament has defended its priorities well at this first-reading stage of the 2008 budget , and I support what the two rapporteurs have achieved , particularly in relation to cohesion and sustainable growth .
Let us not forget , however , that because the financial perspective for 2007-2013 was pitched too low it will be a poor annual budget - representing just 0.99 % of gross national income . Like my political group , I deplore this situation , for it will not allow us to meet the expectations of all Parliament 's committees or to devote adequate financing to major forward-looking European Union projects such as Galileo .

We have agreed , however , to support the main thrust of the information and communications policy : we will thus be able to focus on local media , which play such a significant role in conveying information to all the people of Europe .
This is particularly important given the pending question of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and preparations for the European election in 2009 .
As the standing rapporteur on information policy in the Budgets Committee , I welcome the possibilities that the new budget affords in this respect .
in writing . - ( PT ) Of the many aspects of this draft budget for 2008 that could be highlighted , we would like to stress two :
First , how much we regret the inconsistency of this Parliament , which claims that it recognises and preserves the linguistic diversity of Members of the European Parliament , but at the same time refuses to accept the inclusion of a clear reference that it is mandatory for all the official languages of the EU to be available during its meetings , as we have proposed for some years .
Hence the Committee on Budgets ' incomprehensible and unacceptable rejection of our proposal that sought to ensure , for example , that Portuguese should be one of the working languages in EU-ACP Parliamentary Assembly meetings , particularly considering the Members of Parliament of various countries represented on the Committee whose official language is Portuguese .
Secondly , the worrying and growing tendency to reinforce appropriations for a ' strong information policy ' in the context of the ( re ) ' launch ' of the ' reform ' Treaty and the next elections to the EP in 2009 .
To understand what is really going on , it will suffice to follow the discussion in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the review of the European Political Parties Regulation to understand what is really going on .
in writing . - ( RO ) The current system of proceedings for the plenary sessions at the headquarters of the Strasbourg Parliament and the committee or group sessions in Brussels is inefficient and uneconomical .
It is estimated that over 200 million euros would be saved annually from the European tax payer 's money if it was decided to establish the Parliament 's headquarters in Brussels , not only due to the inherent cost reduction , but also by facilitating interinstitutional work .
At the same time , groups from the civil society have drawn attention to the serious environmental consequences of the frequent transportation of the European Members of Parliament and civil servants from city to city for the proceedings of the European legislative activity .
For these reasons , I consider that the idea to maintain two annual plenary sessions at the Strasbourg headquarters is unjustified .
This would aggravate the situation of the administration costs , since payments will be made throughout the entire year to prepare such sessions , as regards costs related both to the premises , and to the personnel .
Numerous civic initiatives , of which at least one benefits from over one million signatures from most Member States , request the elimination of the duality of the European Parliament 's headquarters .
It is time for this situation to be discussed by the management of the Parliament and the Council in order to establish a single headquarters of our institution .
in writing . - ( DA ) We members of the Danish Liberal Party ( Venstre ) in the European Parliament have voted to reject Amendment 8 by Mr Schlyter and Mr Jens-Peter Bonde of the Independence and Democracy Group .

Venstre supports a reform of travel reimbursement so that all reasonable and necessary travel expenses are refunded .
However , this has already been decided by the new Members ' Statute , which will be implemented from 2009 .
Mr Bonde 's proposal has not been thought through and is in breach of the current statute .
in writing . - I voted for these sections of the 2008 Budget .
in writing . - I voted for the reports in respect of the 2008 draft budget , but I did so heavy in heart because it would appear that the expensive circus that is our regular visits to Strasbourg looks set to continue .
It is particularly poignant that we are voting to carry on meeting in Strasbourg on the same day that Air France has decided to leave some of our number stranded , or certainly inconvenienced , because of industrial action by some of its staff .
Martin Luther King once said " I have a dream ” .
I too have a dream ; and that dream is that one day this Parliament has a single seat from which to operate and the Strasbourg circus will come to an end .
in writing . - ( PT ) A joint effort must be made to try to improve quality standards and the effectiveness of justice .
This is a very sensitive and diverse area , however , which highlights the need to reinforce confidence in order to allow mutual recognition of judicial decisions , thereby contributing towards the gradual development of a European judicial culture .
I support Mrs Esteves ' excellent report , the objective of which , in connection with reinforcing the principle of mutual recognition of decisions , is to enhance the prospects of the sentenced person being reintegrated into society , while seeking to improve the protection of victims and prevent recidivism .
This Framework Decision seeks to lay down the rules under which a Member State , within the limits of its competence , must monitor and supervise non-custodial measures ( decisions related to the execution of suspended sentences , alternative sanctions and additional sentences ) imposed by judgments passed in other Member States .
I hope that under the Portuguese Presidency the outstanding questions can be resolved , and that a general agreement can be reached by the end of the year .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which sets out ways to help a sentenced person 's reintegration into society , provide better protection for victims and help with the enforcement of appropriate sentences where offenders are not resident .
in writing . - ( FR ) If ever there was a sensitive subject , it is surely the mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters .
The fact is that criminal law in Europe today is not standard - indeed far from it .
Different countries have not only different legal traditions and values but also different criminal laws .
The Member States ' criminal law systems reflect their respective identities .
Examples of disparity in criminal law at national level are many and varied .
For example , the protection of freedom of expression and the definition of what constitutes a violation of freedom of expression differ markedly from one country to another .
It would therefore be very dangerous to insist that a penalty handed down in one country should automatically be applied in another : dangerous not only for those who come before the law , but also for the rule of law generally .
So we need to tread very warily indeed here , because it is currently impossible to ensure the application of certain common basic standards in the law of criminal procedure .
I am thinking particularly of respect for the principle of double jeopardy , of the right to a genuine , rather than a merely formal , defence and , indeed , of victims ' rights .
There are two fundamental principles that must always be followed and observed - otherwise the rule of law will cease to exist . They are the principles of legality and legal certainty .
in writing . - ( PT ) As the report states , the 1999 Tampere European Council endorsed the principle of mutual recognition as ' the cornerstone of judicial cooperation in both civil and criminal matters within the Union ' .
A year later the Council approved a programme of measures focusing on this principle , so as to adapt the mechanisms of mutual recognition of final sentences and extend the application of the principle of transferring sentenced persons to cover persons resident in a Member State .
The Hague Programme subsequently set new targets , particularly in connection with the ' fight against terrorism ' , to make progress in the communitisation of this area , which lies at the heart of the Member States ' sovereignty .
In the light of this proposal and as our Parliamentary group has stressed , it is worrying that the report establishes that ' notwithstanding the necessity of providing the sentenced person with adequate safeguards , his or her involvement in the proceedings should no longer be dominant by requiring in all cases his or her consent to the forwarding of a judgment to another Member State for the purpose of its recognition and enforcement of the sentence imposed ' , particularly since we fail to see how not ensuring this principle is consistent with the aim of the Framework Decision : to help to rehabilitate the person sentenced .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament voted in favour of the report .
The agreement is a step in the right direction .
Higher demands are placed on monitoring the consequences of the agreement for fish stocks and living conditions for local people .
It is now important to monitor the effects of the agreement properly .
However , we voted against Amendment 7 .
We fully support the intention of contributing to sustainable development of fisheries , which is also the aim of the new fisheries agreement .
The agreement must not entail detrimental consequences for fisheries and the population in Madagascar either .
On the other hand , we cannot support the agreement being immediately repealed if it entails detrimental consequences .
We consider that the joint committee that will be formed to oversee the agreement is a better solution for ensuring that the agreement is complied with and that it benefits both parties and the environment .
The agreement will be renegotiated if it transpires that it entails detrimental consequences .
We are in favour of the fact that a larger proportion of the costs will be financed from the European vessels supported by the agreement .
However , we consider that the aim must be for the whole agreement to be self-financed .
in writing . - I voted for this report , which endorsed the Fisheries Partnership Agreement with Madagascar .
It is a tuna agreement which allocates fishing opportunities , according to three categories of vessel , to Spain , France , Italy , Portugal and the United Kingdom .
It provides fishery resources for EU vessels , whilst enabling Madagascar to receive income for stocks which the country would not have the technical capacity to exploit .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against the report as a protest against the way in which the Commission proposes to share fishing opportunities among the Member States under this agreement .
Contrary to what has always happened in this type of agreement , the Commission is proposing to violate a basic principle that has been a fundamental tool for ensuring justice and equality between Member States and , in practice , a tacit agreement between them .
We consider the failure to apply this principle in this case to be incomprehensible and unacceptable .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats in the European Parliament voted in favour of the report .
The agreement is a step in the right direction .
Higher demands are placed on monitoring the consequences of the agreement for fish stocks and living conditions for local people .
It is now important to monitor the effects of the agreement properly .
However , we voted against Amendment 8 .
We fully support the intention of contributing to sustainable development of fisheries , which is also the aim of the new fisheries agreement .
The agreement must not entail detrimental consequences for the fisheries and the population in Mozambique either .
On the other hand , we cannot support the agreement being immediately repealed if it entails detrimental consequences .
We consider that the joint committee that will be formed to oversee the agreement is a better solution for ensuring that the agreement is complied with and that it benefits both parties and the environment .
The agreement will be renegotiated if it transpires that it entails detrimental consequences .
We are in favour of the fact that a larger proportion of the costs will be financed from the European vessels supported by the agreement .
However , we consider that the aim must be for the whole agreement to be self-financed .
in writing . - ( PT ) I abstained from voting on my report because , although I recognise the urgency of concluding the agreement and consider this proposal to be positive in part as regards the distribution of fishing licences , and given that it is not feasible to amend it , which is the responsibility of the Council and the Commission , I strongly disagree with the failure to observe the principle of relative stability that has always prevailed in previous agreements .
I am also sorry that , owing to possible legal considerations , it is not possible to table various draft legislative amendments to the provisions of the agreement , seeking on the one hand to reinforce civil society in Mozambique , with the fishermen 's active participation in preparing future agreements , and , on the other , to optimise international rules on the occupational categories concerned , namely as regards fixing minimum wage rules for ACP seamen .
I felt that the European Parliament 's political mandate was restricted in this area , and therefore tabled other proposals for amendments - considered legally admissible - seeking to improve the information forwarded to Parliament and requiring Parliament and the Council to submit a report on the application of the agreement during the final year of the protocol 's validity , and before another agreement is concluded on its renewal .
in writing . - ( PT ) We cannot vote in favour of this fishing agreement , because we believe the sharing of fishing opportunities it establishes among the various Member States is disproportionate and inadequate , since it does not safeguard Portugal 's legitimate interests .
This Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique came into force on 1 January 2007 for a period of five years , and , compared with the previous agreement , it provides for an increase of 2 000 tonnes in the Community fishing quota for tuna or tuna-like species .
In the previous agreement , the extent to which Portugal used its entitlement to fishing opportunities ( five ) was rather high , which is why Portugal asked for nine licences for surface longliners , plus continuation of the opportunities in demersal freezer trawlers fishing for deep-water shrimp .
However , it was only awarded seven licences for tuna fishing .
Bearing in mind the previous distribution of licences and ( non- ) respect for the principle of relative stability in the light of the increase in fishing opportunities , this new agreement therefore involves a marked imbalance : Portugal only gains two more licences , while the other Member States gain a further 16 ( France ) and 13 ( Spain ) .
If decisions in the Council required unanimity , that would not happen .
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - I voted for this uncontroversial report , which endorses the proposal for a regulation on the conclusion of a new Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and Mozambique .
The agreement has been signed for a period of five years ( renewable ) from its entry into force , and it grants fishing opportunities to vessels from Spain , France , Italy , Portugal and the United Kingdom .
in writing . - ( PT ) The purpose of the regulation on business registers ( Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2186 / 93 ) , which compiles statistics on businesses operating in the European Union , namely their number , type , size structure and other characteristics , was to provide reliable statistical data for EU policy-makers .
On 1 June 2006 , the European Parliament supported the essential aspects of the Commission 's proposal at first reading , subject to 22 amendments focusing on the issue of the administrative burden , a clarification of the terms and conditions under which confidential data can be transmitted , and , finally , a series of amendments of a technical and editorial nature .
In its Common Position of 21 May 2007 , the Council endorsed all 22 Parliament amendments .
New red tape has subsequently created additional difficulties in the process , however , which has therefore dragged on until this time , involving great cost , something the rapporteur has rightly condemned .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report , which helps improve those parts of the EU 's statistical system that involve registers of information about businesses operating in the Union .
in writing . - ( DA ) The Danish members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have voted in favour of Parliament 's resolution on rising feed and food prices .
It is the delegation 's belief that it is necessary to focus on rising feed and food prices .
However , the delegation does not share the belief that it is a good thing that the EU 's agricultural ministers recently decided to suspend the obligations for removal in 2008 .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to abstain in our vote on Resolution RC B6-400 / 2007 further to Question for Oral Answer B6-0321 / 2007 on rising feed and food prices , as we think that the resolution gives rise to doubts concerning the economic situation for farmers in the EU .
The increased prices for cereals and food benefit farmers and can provide a better opportunity to restructure the agricultural sector in the EU .
Furthermore , agriculture , just like other sectors , must deal with certain changes in demand .
On the other hand , we share the view taken in the resolution on biofuels , the large food price increases in the distribution sector , and food insecurity in the world .
in writing . - ( PT ) The recent rise in food prices is due largely to successive reforms in the CAP , the abandonment of production thereby promoted , and the resulting disappearance of many small and medium-sized farms .
Ignoring the specific reality of Member States to take greater account of the interests of the large agri-industrial enterprises , multinational food distributors and negotiations to liberalise trade within the WTO has helped to change the basis of agricultural activity , leading to a fall in output .
Meanwhile , the use of agricultural products for non-food purposes , particularly for producing biofuels , which they seek to prioritise , will not help to develop agricultural activity and may , on the contrary , replace the production of food products , thereby having a negative impact on the protection of food sovereignty .
We therefore believe it is essential to reappraise the objectives of the common agricultural policy in order to increase food product output , support small and medium-sized agricultural and livestock holdings and moderate consumer prices , reinforcing intervention mechanisms and ensuring appropriate intervention prices .
in writing . - I supported the joint motion for a resolution on rising feed and food prices which addresses the significant shift in commodity prices in the EU and globally .
I also voted in favour of amendments 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 , which deal with the issue of GM in feed ingredients .
These amendments highlight the realities of the marketplace and merely point out the fact that significant quantities of maize and soya , already being used to produce animal feed in the EU , are of GM origin .
The amendments also address the difficulties in relation to the authorisation of GM animal feed ingredients .
This situation is having an impact on the competitiveness of EU livestock farmers and leads to the paradoxical situation where EU consumers buy meat and livestock products from third countries that use GM feed .
These amendments are necessary to highlight the inconsistency of the EU 's attitude to GM and the need for a more open debate about this subject .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favor of this report hoping that it will have a crucial impact on Serbia 's decision to continue the democratic reform and its connection to the European standards , especially in the field of respect for the rights of minorities .
Although the report welcomes the relative improvement of the situation , the latter has still not provided the necessary conditions for true interethnic living together and mutual respect and cases of flagrant infringement of the rights of minorities are still numerous and serious .
Here I refer to a concrete example - that of neglecting the rights of the Romanian community and the Romanian language speakers in Serbia , especially in Valea Timocului and Vojvodina .
Today , I can only find , with regret , that their linguistic rights are refused and ignored , whether we speak of education or religious practice in the Romanian language .
A clear message should be sent to Serbia in this respect : only a truly multiethnic Serbia , which ensures understanding between communities and mutual tolerance , can be considered really European .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Martens report .
I have to admit that there are quite a number of sensible points in the report , but to my mind it does not touch on the main cause of Africa 's problems , and also it does not send the right signals on the problem of the future , the challenge of the future , which is the flood of immigrants .
Why is it not even possible in a European Parliament report to refer to the main cause of the poverty , hunger , lack of security , social and economic problems in Africa ?
The main cause is the bad governments on the continent .
It is the corrupt rulers who do not care about good governance , democracy or human rights , but who in their own countries , with money they steal from their citizens , spend more on arms every year than they receive in development aid .
That is a scandal .
The signal on immigration is also totally inadequate .
Firstly , Europe cannot take any more immigration and , secondly , immigration to Europe by highly educated people from poor countries is a tragedy for the countries of origin themselves .
in writing . ( SV ) - We Swedish Social Democrats supported the report , which is good .
There is a need for a partnership between the EU and Africa in order to meet the challenges of the future .
We voted in favour of paragraph 61 because we support free trade .
However , we wish to point out that we cannot create growth through free trade if we do not at the same time invest in education , health and other long-term investments , which also emerges from other parts of the report .
in writing . - ( SV ) It is clear that sexual and reproductive health is an extremely important issue .
Therefore , the welfare of women and children should not be exploited by the European Parliament in its attempt to expand its authority , as in paragraph 77 of the report .
Moreover , a competent , legitimate UN body is already working on these issues now .
In the light of the unpleasant currents that exist in this Chamber , where many Members actively oppose sexual and reproductive health , both within the Union and elsewhere , it would be a great tragedy if the European Parliament were to be given more power with regard to this issue .
in writing . - ( PT ) Though it includes aspects we consider to be positive , this report fails to examine the real core of EU-Africa relations , omitting or shirking its key responsibilities and strategic objectives .
The most striking example is perhaps its silence on NATO / USA / EU initiatives in relation to Africa , such as the creation of specific military commands ( USA / AFRICOM ) , the holding of military manoeuvres ( NATO ) , or the growing military presence of the major EU powers ( ' peace support mechanisms ' , military missions ) .
The report also contains aspects that open the doors to intervention - disguised as ' humanitarian ' , ' conflict management ' or ' good governance ' - and does not object to the increasing subordination of development policy to ' security ' strategies , favouring ' development aid ' provided by soldiers or the use of its funds for purposes that have nothing to do with such aid , allocating it in accordance with the major powers ' strategic objectives , namely control of Africa 's huge natural resources , including oil .
Finally , ascribing value to the constraints it advocates for the ' Economic Partnership Agreements ' , the report reaffirms the ' dogma ' of trade liberalisation as a basis for development .
In support of the EU / Africa Summit , we reject such policies .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mrs Martens is right to note that the basis for developing cooperation between Africa and Europe should be developing democracy and a partnership based on mutual respect .
It was also right to point out that the partners are equal as regards their rights and responsibilities , but not as regards their level of integration or access to and level of development of financial , technical and human resources .
I would agree that our common responsibility and the primary aim of cooperation between the EU and Africa has to be the elimination of poverty , and that peace is of key significance as a first step towards development .
I believe that , in the spirit of the report , it is important to take into account the real needs of the African population : to ensure proper remuneration for small farmers , increase local production , ensure food safety and the safety of livelihoods , as well as the creation of local and regional markets .
in writing . - ( DE ) Besides the important discussion of unfair trade policies , the report on the state of relations between the EU and Africa also deals with the prevention and resolution of conflicts .
In this context I should like to refer to the last colony in the world , the last colony in Africa , namely the Western Sahara , which has been occupied by Morocco for more than 30 years .
This occupation infringes international law and is accompanied by flagrant violations of human rights .
When we champion the human rights of the Saharawi people and their right of self-determination , we often hear that we are adopting a pro-Saharawi stance .
That is an appalling attitude , for our sole aim is to uphold human rights and international law .
All European institutions should be devoted to this cause and not merely pursue the economic interests of the Member States .
Europe needs to adopt a credible stance against dictatorships .
Wagging our finger at a few selected dictatorships damages the credibility of the Union as a peace broker , and damages those who suffer oppression and are subjected daily to gross violations of their human rights .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to vote in favour of Mrs Martens ' report on EU-Africa relations .
A joint strategy should be developed for cooperation between the European Union and African countries , which should be based on mutual respect and on joint , clearly defined principles and values .
We must take the standpoint of the African party into consideration and focus particularly on the issue of development , as well as achieving the Millennium Development Goals , such as stable growth and development , the eradication of poverty , and assistance in providing access to education and health protection measures .
in writing . ( SV ) - We Swedish Social Democrats supported the report , which is good .
However , we voted against Amendment 1 , which referred to the use of cluster munitions in two specific conflicts .
We chose to vote against it because we condemn the use of cluster munitions in all conflicts , and not just in specific cases .
in writing . - ( SV ) There is no doubt that cluster munitions are very cruel weapons systems which cause great suffering to civilians .
It is therefore distressing that the European Parliament is using such an important issue in its efforts to hasten the creation of a United States of Europe .
A ban on this kind of weapon must be implemented globally , through the UN and on the initiative of the nation states , not by the European Parliament .
We therefore voted against the resolution in the vote today .
in writing . - ( PT ) On 17 September last , the United Nations called on its Member States to take immediate measures to address the dreadful effects of the use of cluster munitions , calling for the conclusion of a legally binding instrument of international humanitarian law that prohibits the use , development , production , stockpiling and transfer of such munitions .
The United Nations requires the destruction of current stockpiles of those munitions , asks for risk mitigation and victim assistance activities , and until such an instrument is adopted , calls on Member States to freeze the use and transfer of such weapons .
As this resolution states , it has been documented that 98 % of the victims of these bombs are civilians , causing a high and brutal rate of fatalities and injuries , especially amongst children .
However , the majority of the EP voted against specifying that cluster munitions have been used by the so-called coalition forces in Afghanistan and Iraq , and by Israeli forces in the Lebanon .
The arms race must be brought to a halt as a matter of urgency .
Weapons of mass destruction , cluster munitions , depleted uranium weapons and phosphorus shells must be prohibited as a matter of urgency .
We therefore support this resolution .
in writing . - I voted for this resolution , which reaffirms the need to strengthen international humanitarian law ( IHL ) as it applies to cluster munitions and speedily to adopt at international level a comprehensive ban on the use , production , transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions .
The House also noted it strongly supports the Oslo Process launched in February 2007 .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to explain my voting on Mr Cappato 's report , and also to clarify why the Union for Europe of the Nations Group abstained from voting .
I voted against , as I believe this to be a very controversial idea .
Narcotics are the principal business in Afghanistan and to try to control even some part of the production for medical purposes seems to be more than questionable .
For this reason I voted against this proposal .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what Mr Cappato has proposed , and achieved , with this report is to make it known that the European Parliament is in favour of experiments to transform the production of opium in Afghanistan for criminal uses into the production of opium for medicinal uses to treat patients .
I have to say that I voted against , because the worker growing poppies in the field is the real starting point for the deaths and crimes brought about by those who have fallen , consciously or unconsciously , into the net of this terrible scourge of humanity .
In my view , those who have voted for this report are deluding themselves that something that is carried on illegally at present , that is opium poppy growing in Afghanistan , can be eradicated simply by allowing and authorising its use for beneficial purposes .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party could not support this resolution , as at its core is a proposal to encourage opium growing in Afghanistan .
This runs contrary to efforts being put in place by the Government of Afghanistan with the support of the international community , and also runs contrary to the wishes of 80 % of the Afghan people - the opium industry feeds the Taliban insurgency .
We note that the number of opium-free provinces in Afghanistan has more than doubled this year .
We voted against the original texts in Paragraph 1 ( a ) and 1 ( b ) as we feel strongly that there is no role for the European Parliament in promoting any projects which encourage the production of opium in Afghanistan .
We voted against the report for the reasons above , and also because this proposal is based on a factually incorrect presumption of a global shortage of opiates for medicinal use .
The International Narcotics Control Board ( INCB ) has stated that an overproduction in licit opiates since 2000 has led to stockpiles in producing countries ' that could cover demand for two years ' .
in writing . - I voted against this report .
There is no shortage of opium available for medical use in the world , and the security situation in Afghanistan does not seem likely to lend itself to secure production and collection of opium for medical purposes .
in writing . - I voted in favour of this report .
Attachment is a process by which a creditor can apply to a court to freeze a bank account in order to prevent someone disposing of claimed monies .
It strikes a balance between the rights of creditors to recover debts and the provision of adequate protection for defendants .
It does not conflict with national laws , and should make a common standard procedure available across the EU .
in writing . - ( PT ) Information from the register of activities shows that the Ombudsman received 3 830 complaints in 2006 .
The Ombudsman , however , felt that only 21.5 % of these cases fell within his remit , of which 258 led to an inquiry .
In 2006 the Ombudsman carried out 582 inquiries in total , of which 315 were already under way in 2005 and nine were launched on the Ombudsman 's own initiative .
Interestingly , as in previous years the institutional body which was the subject of most inquiries was the Commission , which accounted for 66 % of the total ( 387 ) . This was followed by the European Personnel Selection Office ( EPSO ) , which accounted for 13 % , and then the European Parliament , which accounted for 8 % .
The most common complaint was lack of transparency , including refusal of information ( 25 % ) , followed by unfairness or abuse of power and a variety of other types of maladministration .
However , as stated by the Ombudsman himself , there are many cases in which his critical remarks clearly have no effect , but they are without doubt a warning that problems exist , and Parliament should therefore pay them due attention .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
The next item is corrections to votes and voting intentions .
( The sitting was suspended at 1 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Company law ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on company law .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European private company statute has regularly been on the agenda of the European Parliament and also , as you know , on that of its Committee on Legal Affairs .
Various arguments presented during these debates have demonstrated that a statute for European private companies may bring benefits to small and medium-sized companies , and there has also been support for the idea of a stakeholder consultation .
The Commission recognises that the regulatory framework needs to be adapted to allow SMEs to make the most of increasingly integrated European markets .
We need to make it easier and cheaper for small and medium-sized companies to conduct cross-border business .
It is important to take action that will help those firms to fully reap the benefits of the single market .
The growth of small and medium-sized businesses is crucial , as we all know , for the competitiveness of the European economy , and the Commission can see that a European private company statute could facilitate the expansion of small businesses beyond national borders .
Therefore , by providing an option , it would create more choice for companies , without imposing any additional burdens .
It could well reduce the compliance costs for firms that wish to operate in several Member States .
If this can be achieved , SMEs could have easier access to new markets .
The Commission is therefore aware of the importance of the European private company statute to the Member States of the European Union and to European businesses .
I can assure you that my colleague , Commissioner McCreevy , will proceed with a legislative proposal for a European private company statute , as he declared to the Legal Affairs Committee on 3 October 2007 .
This proposal should be ready by mid-2008 at the latest .
As you know , we are currently conducting further consultations on the exact form and content of the proposal , the results of which will then be incorporated into the impact assessment to be completed in the first months of next year .
My colleague Mr McCreevy will be very happy to have a continued dialogue with you once this proposal is on the table .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me begin by thanking you sincerely for your remarks , which bring me neatly to my first point , namely the European private-company statute .
I may say we are delighted that , after protracted difficulties , the Commission has finally been convinced of the need for this legislative draft , and that we can now expect to receive it .
It is to the credit of Parliament that this was made possible by the heavy pressure we exerted .
Be that as it may , we can only rejoice wholeheartedly at the outcome .
I do , however , intend to address a second point to which today 's resolution also refers , and on which we are not satisfied with the way things have developed .
I refer here to the 14th Company Law Directive on the transfer of the company 's registered office , the place where companies are registered .
For many years the European Commission has had plans to close this loophole in company law .
We have now learned that this has been more or less deleted from the legislative programme , at least as far as the European Commission is concerned , and that the loophole will therefore remain open .
May I emphasise at this point that my political group at least - and , I believe , an overwhelming majority of the Legal Affairs Committee , to judge by the tenor of its deliberations in recent years , and of this House as a whole - has always taken the view that this loophole needs to be closed and that the 14th Company Law Directive is a necessity .
This is not a matter of additional bureaucracy and new corporate obligations . It is simply about giving companies the opportunity promised them in the Treaty to move freely within the European Union and establish themselves in any Member State .
We have heard that one of the reasons why the European Commission felt unable to move forward on this issue and to present a proposal was its view that the existing merger regulations and other provisions were adequate to guarantee corporate mobility .
I can only say that , if a company cannot move its registered office within the single market unless it founds a new company in another country and then merges with it , the present rules are scarcely exemplary as a means of avoiding red tape or minimising costs .
The ideal would be a sound piece of secondary legislation that guaranteed the right of companies to exercise in practice the freedom that the single market offers them in theory .
One of the arguments advanced for the status quo is that past rulings of the European Court of Justice have greatly liberalised company law in any case .
That is undoubtedly true , but the European Court delivers these rulings for the sole purpose of promoting the full application of primary law , simply because the legislative bodies responsible for the adoption of secondary law , namely Parliament and the Council - though we depend on the European Commission - are not able to enact sound secondary legislation that would actually guarantee the freedoms enshrined in the Treaty provisions establishing the single market .
That is why Parliament is adhering to its position that the Commission 's monopoly on the right of initiative binds it to present a proposal for a 14th Company Law Directive in due course .
We ask the Commission to reconsider whether the 14th Directive , which is already on file in the Commission 's offices , can be incorporated into the legislative programme in the coming years .
If that does not happen , Parliament reserves the right - as our resolution expressly states - to invoke Article 192 of the Treaty and table a report on its own initiative with a view to requesting a legislative proposal .
And while we are on the subject of company law , let me take this convenient opportunity to say a brief word about the Commission 's latest communication on the simplification of company law .
The resolution does not deal directly with that communication , but there is a thematic connection between the two .
I believe we in Parliament agree that we do not support any erosion of the substance of established Community law and practice - the acquis communautaire - as a consequence of simplification measures .
In other words , there can be no question , in my view , of deleting entire directives .
What we can support are measures designed to unburden companies , to minimise bureaucratic and statistical obligations , to relieve companies of the requirement to publish all the bits and pieces which appear in their balance sheets but which may actually be quite unimportant .
I believe there is scope here to cooperate closely with the Commission in order to improve company law .
One other thing that struck me when I read the Commission 's documentation on this subject was that there are certain laws we have enacted - one example being the Transparency Directive , adopted in the wake of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act - which contain some provisions that now beg the question of why they are not being reviewed as part of a simplification drive .
I should also welcome further consideration of this matter by the Commission , since such a review would likewise help to improve company law .
on behalf of the PSE . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Lehne has in essence given the view held by the members of the Committee on Legal Affairs .
He has done so on behalf of the European People 's Party Group , and I shall do so on behalf of the Party of European Socialists .
Our concern at present is , as Mr Lehne has said , that we are relying too heavily on judicial development of the law , in other words , on development through the case-law of the Court of Justice .
The case-law of the Court of Justice fills in the gaps left by the secondary law of the European Union , but we do not have secondary law .
The Treaties are very general in nature and provide for certain fields and give rise to various interpretations and do not at present facilitate the establishment of the internal market .
Our proposals are bi-directional , as Mr Lehne has pointed out , firstly they support the offer made by the Commission to submit a proposal for a directive on the European private company which would clearly do a great deal to help establish free movement within the European Union , and secondly to try to continue pushing in the field of company law by pressing for a new directive , the fourteenth , which could ultimately supplement those provisions .
I share Mr Lehne 's concern that , if we do not adopt provisions on the transfer of company head offices , then we would in fact be leaving a legal loophole open because mergers are a different matter and do not fall fully into this category .
We hope the Commission can include this type of activities in its work programme .
First , I hope that during 2008 and , if possible , before 30 June , the proposal for a directive , the Directive on the European private company statute , will be on the table , and , secondly , it is to be hoped that the Commission does not give up on the idea of continuing to develop company law in fields such as freedom of establishment and change of domicile for companies .
That is the end of my speech .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me answer both questions .
In answer to the first , I think it is clear .
In answer to the second , concerning the 14th company law directive , we had suggested that a further means of improving mobility might be a directive stipulating the conditions for the transfer of registered offices in the European Union .
The results of the economic analysis of the possible added value of a directive were inconclusive ; companies already have the legal means to effect cross-border transfer .
Several companies have already transferred their registered office using the possibilities offered by the European Company Statute .
Soon , the Cross-Border Mergers Directive , which will enter into force in December , will give all limited liability companies , including SMEs , the option to transfer their registered office .
They could do so by setting up a subsidiary in the Member State to which they want to move and then merging the existing company into this subsidiary .
In the Commission 's view , it is only if this framework is found wanting that future legislative action in the shape of a 14th company law directive can be justified .
Therefore , Mr McCreevy has decided for the moment not to proceed with this 14th company law directive , but I will certainly communicate your concerns again .
I have received a motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly , during voting time .
1 .
Iran
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on Iran .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , once again we are talking about Iran .
I am the co-author of a resolution prepared by the Union for Europe of the Nations Group .
The situation in Iran is a never-ending story of breaches of human rights .
The European Parliament returns to this issue very regularly , giving the names of more victims and more examples of breaches of human rights .
I have to say with some regret that some of the politicians in the European Union and some governments apply double standards , in that much more is said about human rights in the countries with which there is no trade , where one cannot do business .
In the case of countries with which economic ties are maintained , even unofficially , without saying anything , but making money , people seem to speak about human rights more quietly , in a whisper .
It is very good that the European Parliament is not whispering when it comes to Iran .
In the joint resolution that we are proposing , what I would like to emphasise over and above political divisions , is that we list new , specific and tragic facts that illustrate the drama that is taking place before our eyes in that country .
The attention of the world 's public opinion is focused on something else , on certain attempts to create a nuclear power in that country or on the clearly anti-Semitic statements of the President of Iran .
Unfortunately we do not notice the breaches of human rights in that country , so it is good that the European Parliament is considering this issue today .
author . - Mr President , this is not the first time , and I fear that it will not be the last , that this House is called upon to deal with the situation in Iran .
That country , which has all the natural resources for achieving an envious standard of living for its people , is unfortunately sinking deeper into the abyss of dark ages-like totalitarian governance , with the resulting gross violations of the human rights of its citizens , and with Iran becoming more and more isolated from the rest of the world .
The continued practice of barbaric acts such as the stoning to death of citizens , including women and children , and the non-recognition of the quality of the rights of women and of political opponents , is a stigma to civilised living .
Every day , reports reach us of even more cases of arrests , torture and killings of innocent civilians by the authorities of Iran .
( The President asked the speaker to slow down )
I hope that will not cost me time , Mr President .
Incidentally , that is why I speak in English - so that people can understand me without the need for interpretation .
( Applause from certain quarters )
Thank you , Mr Tannock .
Freedom of speech and freedom of the press is pretty much non-existent in that country , and all this at the same time as the secretive work to produce nuclear weapons is going ahead against all common sense and in spite of international outcry .
The Iranian regime , blinded by short-sighted nationalism and extreme religious fanaticism , is following a road that can only lead to confrontation and consequent suffering , mainly to its own people .
Let us once again , on the occasion of voting for this resolution , send a message of support to those Iranians fighting for freedom and democracy , and let us again make clear to the extremist rulers of Iran that our patience is running out fast owing to their foolishly dangerous behaviour .
Can I conclude by informing colleagues of some good news from the United States which I have just received , which is that the US Administration has decided to put the Revolutionary Guards on the terrorist list .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this week we had the pleasure of hearing the winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature , Doris Lessing , who as we know is of Iranian descent , saying what we all think : ' I hate the Iranian government .
It 's a cruel and evil government ' .
Doris Lessing also said that the reason nobody dares to criticise the Iranian government is because of oil .
I think she could not have been more accurate and could not have put it better .
This policy of appeasement is lethal , not only for the interests of the Iranian people , but also for everyone who wants peace .
The continuation of this policy and the fuelling of the Iranian regime 's expansionist and fanatical instincts will be the greatest tragedy we will face in the near future . I believe we must all be aware of that fact and must reverse this policy .
If we do not , the future will be very bleak , and I would just like to say , Mr President , that this House should send a very special greeting to the Nobel Prize winner for her very judicious words .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , in assessing what is happening in and around Iran at the moment , there are four issues to be considered .
Firstly , the appalling human rights situation that has developed as a result of a regime based not on democracy and human equality , but on its own interpretation of the will of God , which gives it the right to imprison , torture and murder others .
Secondly , the attempt by the regime to win mass support , despite its role as a violent minority .
It is artificially attempting to appeal to national pride .
The reason for that pride is the possession of nuclear energy and possibly even nuclear weapons , just like India , Pakistan and Israel , which have not signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty .
Thirdly , opposition to the regime .
Both the moderate opposition , which wants a slightly less strict system , as was the case under the previous president , and the real democratic opposition amongst workers and students in Iran , and also amongst intellectuals who have fled abroad .
Fourthly , the American threat to use the same model in Iran as in Iraq and Afghanistan , with a military invasion or at least bombing .
Such an attack by foreign opponents would be counter-productive .
That would encourage patriotic feeling on the part of the Iranians , and they would rally to the support of the hated regime and its nuclear weapons , if any .
My group is not in favour of a military invasion against the regime , or of seeking friendship with that regime out of self-interest .
We should show solidarity with the victims and the opposition .
The regime must not in any way be given the impression that it is possible to negotiate restrictions on the rights of the opposition in exile in Europe , and must not be allowed to spread propaganda by claiming that democratic countries support its misrule .
The European Court of Justice 's decision to remove the People 's Mujahidin organisation from the list of terrorist organisations should be fully complied with , so that that organisation and other opposition groups do not face any legal or financial obstacles .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I believe there are three elements - at least three - justifying this urgency .
First , as has already been noted , the growing deterioration in the human rights situation .
Secondly , the record figures for executions , not only in numerical terms but also in the brutality with which they are being carried out .
Today we have more executions than there were in the whole of 2007 - 244 in 2007 and 177 in 2006 .
The third element is the persecution to which organisations for human rights activists are being subjected , especially those organisations which defend women 's rights .
I believe that all this justifies not only this resolution but also , as the resolution states , urging the United Nations General Assembly to vote on a resolution explicitly and unreservedly condemning the violation of fundamental rights in Iran .
This is something we have been asking for for a long time .
We do not understand why there is this reticence about it and I hope that this resolution will at least help to change some minds .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Koran , the sacred book of Muslims , is considered by outstanding specialists to be a book of love .
But what is happening in those countries that call themselves Islamic countries ?
They are governed by extreme radicals .
The only message that comes out of these countries is one of hatred of the outside world , of fellow Muslims and of their own citizens .
What is happening in present-day Iran is absolutely unacceptable .
On many occasions we have already talked in this Chamber of the need to apply radical measures in order to prevent various types of breaches of human rights in Iran .
What is particularly horrifying is the way that the death penalty is carried out .
Carrying out the death penalty by stoning is uncivilised , inhumane , and completely unacceptable to any democracy .
Carrying out the death penalty on minors , which is prohibited in the whole of the democratic and civilised world , continues in Iran , despite the promises of the Iranian government and parliament .
Further acts of hatred are aimed at any opposition - both the very small internal opposition from individual citizens , and the much larger and more organised opposition both within the country and from beyond its borders .
Arrests of journalists , lack of freedom of speech , bans on printing or even speaking under threat of imprisonment or even death , this is a situation that we cannot in any way accept .
Today , any appeals seem almost to be too late .
We should think about more specific restrictions that would force the Iranian government to change its behaviour .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , we in the Commission welcome this new joint motion for a resolution by the European Parliament .
I can tell you that we have all repeatedly expressed our great concerns about the human rights situation in Iran - I , myself , very recently during the UN General Assembly , on the margins of which I met the Iranian Foreign Minister , where , again , I very strongly emphasised all the facts that are there .
I must say that the respect for basic human rights in Iran has continued to deteriorate seriously over the past year and , for this reason , we will also support the new UN General Assembly resolution on the human rights situation in Iran , as we do each year , which Canada is likely to table .
There is a continuous clampdown on freedom of expression , peaceful assembly and political dissent .
There have been new cases of torture and executions of people who were minors at the time of the alleged crime .
There has also been an increasing number of public executions , as Mr Romeva i Rueda said , including in one case through stoning , despite assurances by the Iranian side that stoning was forbidden under existing decrees .
I also very specifically mentioned this case when I met the Iranian Foreign Minister .
Iran has carried out at least 250 executions so far this year - the second highest number of executions worldwide .
We also note , of course , the continuous discrimination against minorities , increasing harassment and the closure of independent non-governmental organisations .
The documented intimidation and persecution of human rights defenders from all sectors of Iranian society has grown , as has the repression of intellectuals , teachers , students , women activists and trade unions .
Only recently , one of Iran 's best-known human rights defenders , Mr Emaddedin Baghi , was once again imprisoned under the charge of propaganda against the Government .
And , since July , Mr Mansour Osanlou , President of the Iranian Bus Drivers ' Union and the embodiment of an independent trade union movement in Iran , has been under arrest .
Mr Osanlou is in need of urgent medical treatment , which , we have reason to believe , he has still not received .
But we are not remaining silent about such developments .
We have taken numerous steps and repeatedly issued public statements denouncing the ongoing violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Iran , as well as the country 's persistent failure to uphold international standards on the administration of justice .
Once more , I call upon the Iranian Government to fully respect all human rights and fundamental freedoms , in line with Iran 's obligations under international law and the conventions it has ratified .
I would also like to reiterate our concern about Iran 's refusal to resume the bilateral dialogue on human rights it suspended in 2004 , which the European Union continues to ask for .
For our part , we remain ready to do so , as we believe in the importance of such a dialogue and engagement .
In conclusion , the Commission is , speaking quite unequivocally , in full agreement with Parliament , whatever the developments on the nuclear issue or on other issues of concern to the European Union .
And we have this double-track approach , which , at this moment , Javier Solana and his new counterpart are working on , and , at the same time , we are also working in the United Nations Security Council with regard to maybe a further strengthening of sanctions .
At this moment , there can be no real progress in the relationship with Iran without a serious improvement in the human rights situation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place shortly , during voting time .
2 .
Pakistan
The next item is four motions for resolutions on Pakistan .
author . - Mr President , let me start by expressing my sympathy to the victims of the horrific bomb attack in Karachi .
Our thoughts go out to all of those who were affected by that dramatic action .
Pakistan is a nation which we in Europe should care deeply about .
It is a great trading nation , it is an exporter of people , not least to this continent , and it is a vital ally in the fight against terrorism .
It is a matter , therefore , of great sadness that , in its 60-year history , Pakistan has failed to become a true democracy ; but , on the other hand , we should be encouraged by the fact that it has not become a theocracy or even a permanent military dictatorship .
Once again in Pakistan , the window is opening for democracy .
We await the outcome of the court ruling on the legality of the President 's election .
We call on President Musharraf to accept the outcome if it goes against him , but I also call on people in Pakistan and throughout the world to accept the ruling of the Court if it rules in favour of the President .
I think it is the only basis on which we can move forward in the country .
In relation to the election in January , I hope that the Government will pursue and continue to prepare for that election , and will make it possible for Ms Benazir Bhutto to campaign in a secure fashion .
In saying that , I know we imply that the Government was behind the bombing ; I do not believe that , but we need to make sure that the security of all the candidates is guaranteed and the Government does its best to protect Ms Benazir Bhutto .
I also believe that Mr Sharif should be allowed to return to the country and campaign if he so wishes , and again have his security guaranteed .
The military should stand back during the whole period of the election campaign , and I hope , before January - and , indeed , before campaigning begins - that the President will get himself out of uniform and turn his country into a true civilian government .
That is the best hope for the future of Pakistan , and it is the best hope for relations between Europe and Pakistan : that we get a democratically elected parliament in January , with the President out of uniform , in ' civvies ' .
author . - ( SV ) Thank you Mr President .
First of all , I must say with a heavy heart that month after month here in Parliament we have to decide on different resolutions because such large parts of the world around us fail to respect civil liberties and rights and violate fundamental human rights .
I must say this because I think it is so terrible that it just goes on and on .
We talk about it here in Parliament , we talk about it in so many different contexts , and still it goes on .
As regards Pakistan , which is the subject of the resolution we are now discussing , I want to say that the GUE / NGL Group supports the resolution in its entirety .
The resolution makes a large number of very justified demands on the government in Pakistan .
We in the world around it cannot keep silent about the influence and decision-making power of the military regime in all areas of society .
Power must be transferred to a civilian democratic government .
We must support all voluntary organisations , everyone working for democratic liberties and rights .
I particularly want to stress the importance of paragraph 16 of the resolution .
In that point Parliament expresses its great concern at the fact that a large proportion of Pakistani women are not able to participate in the democratic process .
People are being oppressed in Pakistan by the military regime on the grounds of religion , but we must not forget the oppression to which a large proportion of Pakistani women are exposed .
Our Group wishes strongly to support the entire resolution . Thank you .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I also wish to say that despite the fact that logically the main responsibility for resolving the situation lies with the Pakistani authorities , that should not allow us forget that the European Union has , and we member countries above all , we Member States , have an enormous responsibility at least not to aggravate the situation .
It is related to the practice , which is also incomprehensible because of its incompatibility with the will to resolve the situation , of continuing to export or seeking to export arms to Pakistan .
To give but three examples : in 2006 the Government of the United Kingdom authorised the export of 15 000 rifles to the region , including Pakistan ; France continues to seek to sell Pakistan missiles and radars to build a combat aircraft which Pakistan is allegedly developing with China ; and Germany has also been responsible for exporting significant quantities of munitions , arms and other types of military equipment .
I believe that to that end the desire to resolve the situation in Pakistan is incompatible with supplying it under those policies .
I therefore suggest and ask my colleagues to support the amendment seeking the suspension of all types of exports of arms and military equipment until such time as it can be guaranteed that they will not be used to violate human rights .
author . - Mr President , last week 's suicide bomb blast in Karachi reminded us of just how perilously close Pakistan has come to anarchy .
The prospect of a nuclear-armed Pakistan becoming a rogue state controlled by Islamist fanatics is , quite frankly , terrifying .
I am not especially a fan of Benazir Bhutto , whose period in office as Prime Minister was marked by widespread corruption , but , ultimately , a democratic and secular-leaning government under civilian control is always preferable to a military dictatorship , compromised in this case by its links to Islamist parties and the Afghan Taliban .
President Musharraf is supposed to be our ally in the war on terror ; sometimes I wonder how committed he is to rooting out terrorism in his own country .
Hopefully , Ms Bhutto 's return to Pakistan may be a fillip for human rights now .
One major concern is the ongoing repression of religious minorities , including Christians , Hindus and Ahmadi Muslims .
If she is to be taken seriously as a progressive leader of a more modern Pakistan , she must make sure that Pakistan respects its international obligations under human rights conventions .
But , while Pakistan faces many challenges , we should recognise that some progress is being made in some areas .
The economy continues to grow , and Pakistan has also engaged in confidence-building measures with India with regard to the dispute over Jammu and Kashmir .
One question which remains totally unanswered is how , legally , the Pakistani Government , in spite of a Supreme Court judgment permitting former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to return from exile to Pakistan , deported him immediately to Saudi Arabia .
How , in international law , can a government deport one of its own citizens ?
Nawaz Sharif may yet have a vital role to play in re-establishing multiparty civilian democratic politics in Pakistan .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , we must take a very discerning view of Pakistan .
It is a large and important country with a troubled history .
The State of Pakistan was artificially created as a home for the Muslim inhabitants of India , and it therefore has an Islamic identity , which is something we cannot now hold against it .
That was more or less its original raison d 'être .
This does not mean that we should not battle against Islamic extremism , and indeed the Pakistanis themselves are devoting considerable efforts to that very struggle .
Pakistan was an important ally in the face of the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan , in dealings with Communist China , and in the context of long-running Soviet attempts to gain influence in India .
It was an important strategic factor for the West .
On the other hand , it goes without saying that Pakistan has internal difficulties , of which we must be aware : a complex and heterogeneous population structure in ethnic and religious terms , widespread poverty and , of course , the need to strengthen democracy and the rule of law .
We must clearly lend the country a very great deal of support in establishing free elections and a stronger independent judiciary , and must encourage the military command to hand over power gradually to elected politicians . Above all , as Charles Tannock said , we must encourage Pakistan to keep pursuing the confidence-building process with neighbouring India .
In this respect there have been encouraging signs , and the purpose of a balanced policy on Pakistan is to reinforce those signs while expressing any necessary criticism .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the Pakistani people do not deserve military dictatorship , violence and lawlessness .
Therefore , one of key articles in this resolution is the one which reaffirms our solidarity with the people of Pakistan , who share the objectives of democratic governance and transparent , accountable rule , and who act with courage and determination in the face of terrorist and criminal violence .
That is , of course , why we put the stress on the need for a return to democracy and civilian government with free and fair elections in January as being the only way to answer the challenges of Pakistani society .
At the same time , we also stress the need to remove the militarisation of Pakistani society and deplore the failure of President Musharraf to stand down as army chief , as he promised he would .
The rule of law is extremely uneven in Pakistan .
There have been some encouraging developments at times , but these are also accompanied by some very repressive judgments .
This falls particularly hard on minorities , religious and otherwise , as well as on women .
We rightly call for improvement in that area .
This as well , of course , as deploring the suicide bombing and the 140 victims and 500 injured last week . I fear that these could become a pretext for restricting political activity , because already there has been an announcement by the Government that political parties will only be allowed to hold meetings in well-secured parks and public grounds rather than organise processions .
One could see how that might be made a pretext .
Finally , one of the more close-to-home reasons for my wanting Pakistan to fight both extremism and militarisation , and to return to the rule of law , is the impact on British people of Pakistani origin , with the calls , for instance , for profiling or for visa requirements for the United States .
It would remove that threat to people like my constituents if Pakistan were to be a democratic society .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today on the television yet another bulletin about yet another attack in Pakistan , about fatalities .
This , too , is a never-ending story .
Why do we spend time on this , especially as we are acting on behalf of European taxpayers ?
We should remember that the European Union sends significant amounts of money to Pakistan for health care , for the eradication of poverty and for education .
For this reason we have a right to be interested in what is happening in that country , which is , in part , supported by money from our electors .
I would like to draw your attention to issues that have not been discussed here .
First of all to the fact that religious minorities are persecuted and discriminated against in Pakistan . This applies to Christians , but also to Hindus , Sikhs and Buddhists .
I believe that it is worth focusing on this issue . It is something that disappears from view in the light of these attacks and tragic deaths , but it is a constant feature .
I would also like to point out , and this issue has already been raised , that there is discrimination against women .
There are special hudud decrees for this purpose .
This too should be condemned and I am pleased that we are doing so quite independently of our political divisions .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , we have , of course , all expressed our horror at the shocking attacks in Pakistan last week , which , as the previous speaker said , are a never-ending story .
That should not , however , prevent us from pointing out the essential fact that Pakistan is of course a military dictatorship , that in the official Pakistan there are large-scale violations of human rights and the leader is still above the law .
Pakistan is also , however , a strict Islamic state in which there is no place for people of other faiths or religious minorities and , as has been said , the country has nuclear weapons .
Perhaps - but perhaps this cannot be said - Islamabad is in fact a greater threat than Teheran .
I do not know .
I also have a slight feeling of déjà vu with Pakistan , because just as in other Islamic countries , for instance Algeria at the time , military dictatorships or regimes where the army plays a dominant role prevent Islamic fundamentalists from taking power .
Unfortunately , more democracy often means more Islamic fundamentalism and , paradoxically , less democracy .
This is a dilemma that we cannot solve just like that .
Mr President , the murderous attack on unsuspecting supporters welcoming back Ms Benazir Bhutto in Karachi on 18 October has been another callous terrorist act against the prospects of bringing about democratic change in Pakistan .
The international community watched in horror as more innocent civilians were sacrificed in a nation where the dictatorial regime of General Musharraf is dragging the country into a state of fear and breakdown of law and order .
This brutal individual , with his corrupt governing group of associates , is a cancerous infliction on the people of Pakistan .
Regrettably , he is still in power , largely because he is supported by the West , especially the USA , but certainly also by one or two EU Member States .
The time has now come when the West must immediately pull the carpet from under Mr Musharraf 's feet and provide support , not for him , but for the democratic reform forces in Pakistan .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , as Pakistan prepares for important parliamentary elections , the situation is , as we all know , very difficult and preoccupying , and I , also , like many of you , have to express that I was deeply shocked by the heinous bomb attack and assassination attempt in Karachi , when Ms Benazir Bhutto returned to the country last week , and also by the terrible loss of life , which has affected so many innocent people .
We would like to extend our full sympathy to the families of the victims , and we also appeal to the Pakistani authorities to bring those responsible to justice .
This attack on a peaceful gathering has clearly demonstrated , once again , all the dangers of terrorism and fundamentalism to the people of Pakistan .
Ms Bhutto was right in describing this horrible event as a blow against democracy , particularly in the present electoral context of the country .
Parliament 's wish to express solidarity with the people of Pakistan is both very relevant and timely .
We in Europe should encourage a more open , democratic society and , of course , a strong civil society in Pakistan .
It is also of fundamental importance that the elections should then provide maximum democratic legitimacy to the incoming assemblies , and the vote must be democratic , transparent and giving equal opportunities to all the political contestants .
As you are well aware , it is one of those countries where we might envisage a possible election observation mission .
In this context , my services carried out an exploratory mission in June , and they identified , I have to say , important shortcomings in the framework and the conditions for elections , including concerns about the independence of the Election Commission , the completeness and the accuracy of the voter register , restrictive candidature provisions , as well as lack of transparency in the results process .
However , with urgent political will , there is still time to improve a number of these problematic areas and , therefore , I have not yet taken a full decision on whether we will deploy a fully-fledged election observation mission .
I really have to see the aforementioned elements .
I believe that the majority of people in Pakistan would like to see a moderate , stable and democratic Pakistan , and we should support them in achieving this aim .
We are doing a lot , for instance , on the trade side , in order to help people to get out of poverty , but we also do a lot on the education side , in order not to have pupils and young children being educated in the madrasahs and being educated towards extremism and fundamentalism .
But we should also support this because it is of crucial importance , as has been said , for the whole region , including neighbouring countries like important Afghanistan .
Therefore , we have every reason to stay engaged .
This is what we are trying to do and , therefore , this debate is a very timely one .
The debate is closed .
We will vote on this subject shortly , after the debates .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would like first to thank everyone for their support in making Pakistan the subject of a written resolution .
A show of popularity for democratic forces and a clear emphasis on human rights , and not an army , are the biggest barriers to the rise to power of radical groups .
That is why these are things which now require our support , as do religious minorities .
Experience of human rights work shows that freedom of religion is an important indicator of the situation with respect to human rights ; it is a kind of litmus test .
The problems are visible first in the status of religious groups and as flaws in the system of freedom of speech and right of assembly .
There is a correlation between the state of play of democracy and the status of minorities : wherever the opportunities the people have to participate are poor , minorities also suffer .
We might say that Pakistan 's particular problem is the misuse of the law on blasphemy with regard to religious minorities .
There should be a system of the protection of religious values , not active persecution of people of other faiths .
Although the law is not targeted at any particular religious groups in terms of its content , the everyday reality is otherwise .
Death sentences are handed down mainly in respect of minorities .
Legal reform is crucial .
Only democracy will make this possible .
The unfortunate decision by Musharraf to keep his position as army chief has had an impact on Pakistan 's social development these last few years , and has weakened it .
The gradual militarisation of society has been regrettable .
On the other hand , we express our support for Pakistan in its fight against Talibanisation .
We feel solidarity with those Pakistanis who are affected by last week 's devastating bomb attack .
Last month I had the chance to familiarise myself personally with the political situation in Pakistan .
I had the honour of meeting representatives of different political parties , senators and members of parliament .
I especially want to mention , however , the All Pakistan Minorities Alliance , whose important work as the representative of many minority groups deserves the attention and support of the outside world .
3 .
Sudan : Killing of African Union peace-keeping soldiers
The next item is six motions for resolutions on Sudan and particularly the killing of African Union peacekeeping soldiers .
author . - Mr President , this House has repeatedly been dealing with the dire situation in Darfur , the last resolution having been adopted only in mid-September this year .
The news that , at the end of September , a murderous attack took place against an African Union base in south Darfur , resulting in the death of 10 peacekeepers , the serious injury of eight other personnel , and the apparent taking hostage of approximately 40 people more , has come as a grim reminder that , despite our efforts , much remains to be done in order to secure peace and stability in this sad corner of the world .
We should , of course , recollect that at least 200 000 people have died in Darfur during the four-year conflict , and more than two million people have been forced from their homes .
The September attack on African Union peacekeepers must force the EU and the UN to make sure that peacekeepers in Darfur are adequate in numbers and training , that they are properly and fully equipped and that they are given adequate logistical and other necessary support in order to fulfil their task safely and effectively .
Merely sending poorly trained and ill-equipped AU civilians into highly hazardous situations does not , as has been demonstrated in this case , serve any useful purpose other than to reduce the cost in terms of money but increase the cost in terms of human lives .
An urgent rethink and replanning by the international community is essential .
Last but not least , we must not forget those 40 people still missing and thought to have been taken hostage .
Every effort must be made to establish their fate and help bring them safely back to their loved ones .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , colleagues , after losing ten men in the raid at Haskanita , the head of the African Union mission in Darfur , General Martin Luther Agwai , sounded an alarm call , highlighting the fact that his forces were ill-equipped and too few in number , and that they could be defeated in a very short time .
There has , as yet , been no change in the situation , and further attacks like that of 29 September remain possible .
The General 's alarm call must be heeded by the international community and particularly by the European Union , which could surely issue a powerful appeal for effective joint action by all the Member States involved in providing the promised EU support .
In two days ' time , important talks are to take place in Libya between the Sudanese Government and various rebel forces .
It is still unclear whether Abdel el-Nur - the founder of the Sudan Liberation Army , now exiled in France - will take part in these talks .
Indeed , there is just as much uncertainty about other figures representing the array of rebel forces , for their numbers change from one day to the next .
Be that as it may , we have to prioritise these discussions , which have the potential to produce a ceasefire .
So once again we would ask the European Union authorities to spread the word as widely as possible about the importance of the meeting and about Europe 's intention to support any positive developments that may come out of it , both militarily and in relation to improving conditions for aid workers , who are operating in a particularly difficult situation .
I would also remind you that the Government in Khartoum , through its actions thus far , bears a huge share of responsibility for today 's tragic situation - and not only because it has supported the Janjaweed militias bringing death and terror to black African communities .
It was also the Government that categorically refused , for months , to accept the presence of a Western force in Sudan .
It was also the Government that made it impossible for journalists and foreign observers to gain access to the most troubled regions , even though their work there could make a major contribution to the ongoing mobilisation of international public opinion .
That mobilisation is clearly needed if we are to ensure that all of us in Europe shoulder our responsibilities in combating what must be recognised as nothing short of genocide .
Another important point is that the new European force , due to deploy in eastern Chad and the north of the Central African Republic , will make it harder for the rebels to move freely across the borders with those countries and to pursue their policy of recruiting fighters , willing or otherwise , from refugees ' and displaced persons ' camps .
Anticipating this obstacle to their activities , some armed groups are already turning their attention to the other side of Darfur , to the neighbouring region of Kordofan , to which Haskanita is a gateway .
Here too , the support the European Union has undertaken to provide may prove very useful , although within a short time it may also prove quite inadequate .
It is thus part of our task to continue doggedly doing what we can to bring about political conditions in which European intervention will be effective .
Surely we have seen enough violence and heartbreak in this region of the world ?
Not only have hundreds of thousands of lives already been lost , but the social fabric of Darfur is also being utterly devastated , so the task of reconstruction becomes more problematic from day to day .
I do realise that we have a little more time this afternoon , but let us not get entirely carried away , please !
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , the attack to which this resolution relates was targeted against a diplomatic solution to the situation in Sudan .
The context is quite important , because the attack occurred shortly before Desmond Tutu was due to conduct meaningful talks in Darfur .
It seems obvious that the attack was deliberately timed to thwart the quest for a diplomatic solution , which is so desperately needed in that region .
There followed lengthy speculation , of course , as to the identity of the rebel group that had carried out the attack , which claimed the lives of ten soldiers from the AU peacekeeping force .
The signs seem to indicate that the most likely perpetrators were a pro-Western rebel group .
When we deal with the Darfur issue , it is important not to focus too narrowly , but to remember that the most widely diverse rebel groups from the Sudan , Chad and the Central African Republic are operating there in addition to the local armed forces on both sides .
I find it very revealing that the attempt made by the European Union to act on the Darfur conflict through the Chad mission is effectively in a sorry state at the present time .
At the start , the talk was about sending an EU force there .
In fact , a French force with a few additional troops has been sent there under the EU banner .
I have not yet been able to obtain any proper information about that force 's actual area of operation .
Although we are still being told that the force is essentially there to protect refugees , most of the refugees are to be found in the border area , which is precisely where the Government of Chad does not want the EU force deployed .
Perhaps the Commissioner can assist again with some information .
What the EU is doing at the moment is definitely not what is needed to defuse the present situation We have to say very clearly that the very thing Desmond Tutu wanted , namely a diplomatic solution , is what we ought to be supporting here .
author . - ( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , following its independence in 1956 , Sudan , which is the largest country in Africa in terms of surface area , was supposed to be a home for everyone , for the Arab north and the Black south , for Muslims , Christians and animists .
However , the civil war that has continued for almost 50 years has claimed at least two million victims in that country .
Over 4.5 million people have been forced to leave their homes .
In Darfur , where the conflict broke out at the beginning of 2003 , about 200 000 have died and nearly two million have been driven from their homes .
This is the result of terrible battles , purges and terror .
This is currently the most tragic humanitarian crisis in the world , and it is further aggravated by hunger and the lack of water .
One should therefore be grateful to all those who undertake peace initiatives in this tortured land .
We should address such thanks to the African Union , which sent a 7 000-strong peace mission there .
The most recent attack on this mission , which took place in Haskanita , aroused strong objections .
At least ten dead and about 50 lost or kidnapped .
This is a clear breach of existing agreements as well as of United Nations resolutions .
I would like to express my sympathy to the families of these persons .
We should , acting as the European Union , demand that those responsible be punished and that the peace process be reinstated .
The planned forces of the UN mission together with the African Union will number about twenty thousand more soldiers .
However , they must have some possibility to neutralise the armed conflict and help bring stability to this explosive corner of Africa .
I hope that the European Parliament 's decision to award the Sakharov prize to the Sudanese lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman will be helpful in making a breakthrough in the Sudanese drama .
author . - ( ES ) Madam President , I naturally wish to add my voice to the vigorous condemnation of the killing of the members of the peace-keeping forces .
At the same time , however , I also wish to remember all the civilians who were victims , and who are victims in the situation in Darfur , with particular reference to the brutality with which certain assaults with clear sexual overtones are being carried out and serious violations are taking place in terms of the way women are used on a variety of fronts , including sexually .
I believe that all of this requires not only actions and declarations but a solid investigation which should be carried out not only by the people on the ground but also by the International Criminal Court .
That , for me , is one of the fundamental aspects of this debate .
Secondly , I also wish to note that we should welcome the fact that there is currently permission - to give it some kind of name , from the Government of Sudan to accept UNAMID troops but at the same time we should also note that on other occasions they have broken this commitment , broken this promise and therefore we should maintain a degree of caution .
I believe , naturally , that it is necessary to continue to insist , while at the same time , as Mr Pflüger said , ensuring that the forces which go , go with a broad United Nations mandate , and not only to back the interests of one country in particular .
Thirdly , I believe it is also essential and necessary to recall that all aid must be made available , whether political , financial or technical as may be required to perform the duties that that mission will have to face on the ground .
It is not possible to send a mission into the field without its having guarantees that it will be able to fulfil its mandate .
Finally , and again very significantly , I would like to note , and here I undoubtedly go beyond the words of the Resolution , which urges the government of Sudan to follow the demands of the Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court , Luis Moreno-Ocampo , to arrest Ahmed Haroun , Sudan 's Minister of Humanitarian Affairs , specifically so that he can be held accountable for the displacement of two million people in Darfur , thereby instigating an international trial which should have begun some time ago .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the facts are known : there was an attack on the AU peacekeeping force on 30 September ; ten soldiers lost their lives , eight were seriously injured , and forty are still missing .

I was in Darfur with a delegation from our Parliament in July .
During our visit we met representatives of AMIS , the African Union Mission in Sudan .
It was , and still is , an incredibly difficult mission , as we heard from some of these AMIS representatives .
For example , one of the commanders , a Nigerian general , told us that he felt as though he were a priest rather than a soldier .
All he could do , he said , was appeal to people to refrain from evil acts ; he had no real mandate to act , and so it is hardly surprising that rebel factions have exploited this weakness .
The West is not focusing sharply enough on Africa .
There is an imbalance between the extent of the tragedy in Darfur and the level of attention we devote to it .
Military operations in Africa are all very well , but there is a danger of Africa becoming a testing ground for that type of mission .
When the EU conducts operations there , its forces must be armed with a robust mandate , appropriate equipment and sufficient manpower .
The duration of the mission must also depend on its objectives .
We must not hide behind others , but must fulfil our own obligations .
This applies to the funding of AMIS and to support ranging from logistics and military equipment to personnel .
Above all , however , we need the political will of everyone , and it is my opinion that peace in Darfur and the whole of Sudan can be achieved only in cooperation with China .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I will read from the press : ' Just after the evening meal to break the Ramadan fast on 29 September , around 30 vehicles loaded with several hundred Sudanese rebels ripped through the perimeter of an African Union peacekeepers ' base on the edge of Haskanita , a small town in southern Darfur , the embattled province in western Sudan where at least 200 000 people and perhaps as many as 300 000 have been killed since the rebellion began in 2003 . '
The units of about 100 troops , most of them Nigerian , fought off the first attack before falling back to trenches , firing through the night until their ammunition ran out .
Then , ten were killed .
At least 40 fled into the bush .
The attackers looted the compound before Sudanese troops rescued the survivors .
A week later , Haskanita itself was razed .
When the UN inspected the damage , only the school and the mosque were still standing .
About 7 000 people are thought to have fled .
Then , on 8 October , fighting erupted in the town of Muhajiriya , controlled by a Darfuri rebel faction .
Scores were killed .
No one is sure who the attackers were .
Even the Government of Omar El Bashir came under suspicion .
But it could be the rebels .
What we know is that these things will continue to go on until there are international forces with an effective mandate and with effective means there .
Everybody knows that , and it is time to stop this game of hide-and-seek with the Government of Khartoum .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , the appalling attack by rebel forces in Haskanita against the African Union Mission in the Sudan ( AMIS ) was followed by a series of other revenge attacks by Government forces against all villages supposed to shelter rebels with tremendous civilian casualties .
We must realise that this suits the genocidal strategy of the Bashir clique in Khartoum to divide and destroy the Darfur communities and the rebel groups in order to make peace negotiations , such as the ones that are supposed to start this weekend in Libya , go nowhere .
That appalling attack and the violence which followed also demonstrate the fundamental limitations of an all-African force in Darfur such as AMIS .
It is , therefore , crucial that the African Union / United Nations Hybrid operation in Darfur ( UNAMID ) , which is to be deployed by early January , will actually be duly equipped in full force and capacity to operate by then .
In this context , it is very disturbing that the Chairman of the African Union Commission , Mr Konaré , has been insisting on an all-African force , even rejecting the integration of units offered by Uruguay , Thailand and Norway into UNAMID , in contradiction with the UN Security Council decision and , in this way , echoing the manoeuvres of the clique in Khartoum .
It is also disturbing that the European Union , the US and other rich countries have been failing to provide the speedy and full support that they should give to the deployment of that mission , namely by not providing it with a financial airlift and other logistical and military capacities that it needs to operate .
Even the Chad mission is very much delayed , and that was supposed to be ' urgent ' .
Finally , Mr Bashir is going to be given a red carpet welcome in Lisbon : it is not only Mr Mugabe .
I hope that the European Union authorities , the Commission and the Presidency and the Member States will not fail to take that opportunity to actually confront him with this tremendous responsibility that , one day , will bring him to The Hague .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) First of all , our thoughts go out to the sons , brothers and loved ones who are now missing following the brutal attack on the AMIS force .
These people died trying to help their fellow humans in a neighbouring country .
Many have been affected by violence , rape , murder and extreme poverty here .
How many times have we stood here and talked about it ?
How many times have we demanded that the government or others take action ?
Let me remind you that the central task of any government is to protect the human rights of its civilian population .
This government has never attempted or tried to do this in its entire career .
However , we must still be patient in our frustration , as it is only through long-term economic and political support for those who are endeavouring to resolve the conflict that we can do it .
We must not altogether ignore our own economic interests .
Sometimes it is our own oil companies that are actually supporting certain groups , indirectly or directly .
We must address this too .
A heavy responsibility rests with the government , and we must make further demands .
I agree completely with my colleague Raül Romeva that the International Criminal Court must be given full access rights and a full right to investigate , so that the people in this stricken country can see justice in due course . Thank you .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , as Irish soldiers leave for Chad to protect refugees from neighbouring Sudan , I am again painfully reminded that this tragedy of genocide in Sudan continues day in and day out , without any end in sight .
I congratulate this motion for deploring violence , for its support of the UN and AU missions to Sudan .
' We must show a united front ' , the motion suggests ; and , whilst I applaud the notion , I fail to see how this can come to pass . You see , the UN itself is implicitly divided on the issue .
Efforts can only go so far while China , a deciding member , continues to sustain and prolong the conflict by supplying the region with arms .
Once again , we must point the finger at China as the main supporter of the Government in Khartoum .
China exchanges Chinese weapons for Sudanese oil , and it is not rocket science to see that this is one of the most important ways in which the ongoing conflict is being sustained .
We should not accept that the Chinese policy of exporting arms remain shrouded in secrecy .
Beijing does not publish any information about arms transfers abroad and has not submitted any data to the UN Register on Conventional Arms in the last eight years .
With Chinese arms exports - some of them in the attack that was described a minute ago - estimated to be in excess of USD 2 billion a year , the irresponsibility with which they act has to be called into question .
If this issue remains unaddressed , it is not just Sudan that will suffer .
Weapons from China can be found as far as Australia , Malaysia , Thailand , South Africa ; regular shipments are sent to Burma and Nepal .
So , finally , I implore Parliament to act to condemn China for its role in underwriting the genocide of the Sudanese people .
For it is all very well to support peace and the role of the UN , but we must do this actively - if not , we risk contributing to the suffering of the Sudanese people .
on behalf of the ITS Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , of course the death of ten soldiers in the African Union peacekeeping force in Darfur is yet another tragic event .
For years this Parliament has been expressing concern about the region .
I do regret , though , that once more we have missed an opportunity to raise the matter of the responsibility and disastrous role of China in this conflict , because it has to be said again that , in seeking influence in Africa , China is playing a pernicious role in war-ravaged Sudan .
It is doing so on the backs of the victims killed in Darfur , and now indirectly too , with the blood of soldiers who are helping to stabilise the situation .
With their dubious investments , the Chinese have made an enormous contribution to the war efforts of the regime there .
Europe just has to realise that the stronger the Chinese become in Africa , the less powerful is our Western message of democracy , freedom and good governance .
However , China is too important a trading partner for Europe , and talk of human rights and democracy is all too often pushed into the background when Realpolitik comes into the picture .
Madam President , I strongly deplore the killing of 10 African Union peacekeepers on 30 September 2007 by unidentified forces in Haskanita in south Darfur .
At least eight other personnel from the African Union Mission in Sudan ( AMIS ) were also seriously injured and another 40 remain missing .
I urge the Sudanese Government to cooperate fully with an independent investigation into the attack and to bring all those responsible to justice .
These deaths are a reminder of the gravity of the security situation in this region .
Unfortunately , there is no peace to keep at the moment but , nevertheless , the international community , including the UN and the European Union , have a responsibility to try to help secure this region as soon as possible so that peace can be realised in the future .
The European Union mission to the Chad , Central African Republic and Darfur border must also be mindful of the danger of incurring casualties .
No one said this was going to be an easy undertaking .
It is crucial that EU Member States mobilise political , financial , logistical and technical support for the Irish , French , Belgian , Polish and other troops forming part of this mission .
We cannot have our troops ill-equipped , like the beleaguered AMIS .
If we are putting our troops in a volatile environment , we must give them the means to protect themselves .
This EU mission will have a robust use-of-force mandate , with reference to Chapter VII of the UN Charter , and troops should be encouraged to invoke it .
Peacekeeping is one of the noblest professions and it is tragic when a peacekeeper loses his or her life whilst protecting the lives of others .
That is why we need to maintain pressure on the various parties involved ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) The conflict that has been ongoing in Darfur since 2003 is acknowledged as the greatest humanitarian catastrophe of our time .
Two hundred thousand people have lost their lives as a result of ethnic cleansing and pogroms , and a further two and a half million have been displaced .
Millions of refugees live in fear of what the next day will bring , and they have a force of just seven thousand poorly equipped soldiers from the Afri