Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Tuesday 24 June 2008 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , after many requests to do so , I should like to make a short statement about the release of Ingrid Betancourt and other hostages .
Ingrid Betancourt , Keith Stansell , Thomas Howes , Marc Gonsalves , Juan Carlos Bermeo , Raimundo Malagón , José Ricardo Marulanda , William Pérez , Erasmo Romero , José Miguel Arteaga , Armando Florez , Julio Buitrago , Armando Castellanos , Vianey Rodríguez and John Jairo Duran were abducted and held hostage for many years by the Colombian terrorist organisation FARC .
They were finally released on Wednesday , 2 July 2008 , thanks to a successful military operation by the Colombian army .
The European Parliament is delighted for Mrs Betancourt and all the others who were released , and for their families .
The release means the end of a very harrowing time and is a reminder that we must never give up hope .
I spoke to President Uribe last Thursday and congratulated his government and army and the Colombian people on this successful operation .
Again I should like to emphasise that democracy must never give in to terrorism and that enforcing the law is a political and moral obligation .
We must continue to make every possible effort to secure the release of all the hostages .
Mrs Betancourt was abducted on 23 February 2002 .
Since that time , the European Parliament has taken part in repeated initiatives with a view to her release .
In 2006 , together with the País Libre Foundation , she was one of the three finalists for the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought .
Ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament believes that Ingrid Betancourt 's commitment has been and remains essential to lasting peace in Colombia .
Now we have an ongoing obligation to keep before the public the dramatic situation of the hostages still being held in Colombia and to work towards their release .
Last week , I invited Mrs Betancourt to visit the European Parliament - at a time to suit her and after she has recovered .
I should like , at this point , to urge FARC and all other terrorist organisations to lay down their arms and abandon irrational and meaningless violence .
We shall never submit to terrorism !
I call for all hostages to be released and for those involved to accept the Colombian Government 's offer of working together to find a peaceful settlement .
( Applause )
* * *
Ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome the French Minister of State for European Affairs and representative of the new Presidency , Jean-Pierre Jouyet , most warmly to this House .
This is the first time that the representative of a government has been present right at the start of our work .
I hope that we can continue our work , which has commenced exceptionally well , equally successfully .
( Applause )
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of Parliament : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Verification of credentials : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Order of business
The final draft agenda for this part-session , as laid down by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 3 June 2008 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been requested to this draft .
Monday / Tuesday / Wednesday : No change .
Thursday : The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has requested that the first sub-item of the debate on human rights in the afternoon , ' Allegation of mass graves in Indian-administered Kashmir ' , be deleted from the agenda .
The Chair of the PSE Group , Mr Schulz , has the floor to explain the request .
Mr President , I had already tried at the Conference of Presidents to convince the chairs of the groups that this agenda item is totally inappropriate at this particular time .
It is based on mere supposition by Amnesty International .
According to Amnesty International itself , there is a suspicion , but no tangible proof of the existence of these mass graves as yet .
The Chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , Mrs Flautre , responded to this very intelligently .
She invited representatives of Amnesty International to visit the committee on 16 July to substantiate and define the accusations .
Therefore we believe that it makes a lot of sense to wait until this hearing has taken place before we decide what to do about this agenda item .
In addition , I should like to point out that this is not just any old region but a part of the world in which the European Parliament too , as an international political entity , must proceed with scrupulous care , and not make decisions based on assumptions that could perhaps trigger the opposite of what we intend , which is to achieve more stability in the region .
Therefore , we request that this item be removed from the agenda .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , in the debate that we are going to have - I hope - we will be asking for an independent inquiry into the mass graves , for those sites to be protected and for an end to the harassment of the people carrying out this inquiry .
I think there is absolutely no contradiction between this request for an urgent debate on the issue and the hearing that Mrs Flautre is organising for 16 July .
( DE ) Mr President , how can a roll-call vote be requested on a motion I have tabled , when I have only just tabled the motion ?
Mr Schulz , when you are planning something , word gets around fast , so I assume that everyone got to know about it quickly .
However , I believe that , if the motion is before me , I must hold a vote on it .
( DE ) Mr President , based on the Rules of Procedure , I think that is impossible .
My group decided , about 25 minutes ago , to assign me the task of tabling the motion .
Therefore , I think it is utterly impossible for a request for a roll-call vote on the motion I have only just tabled to have been submitted in the meantime .
If it has been submitted , then it was not submitted within the deadline , and it is within your discretion to reject it .
Mr Schulz , I have been informed that this motion was tabled an hour earlier , from which I conclude that it was done as a preventive measure .
That is my hunch , anyway , Mr Schulz .
Why is it such a problem ?
You have your conviction , others have theirs .
Let us all have our own convictions .
According to my information , an hour ago - on time , in other words - a proper request was made for a roll-call vote , should it come to a decision .
( Heckling )
You can each decide whether to bring your documents or not - it is up to the individual to choose .
( DE ) Mr President , I request that the sitting be adjourned for two minutes until all the Members have obtained their voting cards .
We shall have a short break so that everyone can get a card .
( The sitting was adjourned for a few minutes )
( Parliament rejected the motion by roll-call vote )
( DE ) Mr President , you mentioned first that it is very pleasing that Minister Jean-Pierre Jouyet is present - as indeed it is .
Will you be calling on future presidencies to follow Mr Jouyet 's example and attend Parliament from the Monday ?

( EL ) Mr President , a very brief comment about our programme for Thursday : the French President , Mr Sarkozy , is coming here to present the issue of Europe 's future , in view of a very serious crisis in Europe .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament , as far as I know , has only 18 minutes to speak .
I imagine the President will be given only a very few minutes , and the other speakers even less .
The European Parliament is the place par excellence where MEPs should speak and national leaders should hear them .
With the time allocation as it stands , I think we have lost a very important opportunity in this discussion .
Mr Lambrinidis , there is a proper procedure for distributing the Minutes .
It is no different on a Thursday from any other day , and it is your group 's task to allocate the group 's speaking time as it sees fit .
Everything else is done according to the d 'Hondt system , and nothing out of the ordinary is planned for Thursday .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( EL ) Mr President , competition policy is exclusively the responsibility of the European Commission .
One may well wonder , then , why the Commission does not exercise this exclusive responsibility , when the price of oil has risen by 50 % since the beginning of the year .
There is all the more reason for concern when the Commission is failing to exercise this responsibility on two fronts : externally , where an oil cartel is obviously playing a part in setting prices that are such a burden to the more vulnerable sections of the European population , and also internally , where another oil cartel is likewise maintaining excessively high prices , since the oil companies ' profits remain over-inflated .
I therefore call on the Commissioner for Competition to exercise her responsibilities in those specific areas where citizens expect it of her : in matters that affect their everyday lives .
( Applause )
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Allergies are the epidemic of today , and have typically spread throughout Europe since the Second World War .
Today , one third of children have an allergy and , if we do not do something about it , in time half the European population will suffer from this illness .
Foods containing chemicals and the polluted environment are to blame for allergies .
Allergic symptoms can , however , be triggered by natural and artificial food additives , spices , pollens and other natural substances .
In Hungary ragweed is the biggest problem .
Unfortunately , the European Union does not currently have an allergy strategy , as the Commission has confirmed at my request .
Civil society organisations for allergic illnesses and many millions of European citizens who are affected expect us to act against allergies at European level too , and for us to do something towards prevention , stopping the triggers and ensuring that such illnesses are symptom-free .
Action against allergies would also prove that the European Union cares about the health and everyday concerns of its citizens .
Thank you very much .
Mr President , last week the EU-Russia Summit was held in Khanty-Mansiysk and gave an impulse to start talks on a new partnership and cooperation agreement .
Apart from this important development , President Toomas Hendrik Ilves and President Dmitri Medvedev held the first official meeting of Heads of State of the two countries in over 14 years .
The Border Treaty between the Republic of Estonia and the Russian Federation was among several issues discussed .
President Ilves stated that the preamble that the Estonian Parliament decided to add to the document , which the State Duma subsequently did not ratify , was unnecessary .
Commissioner Siim Kallas reminded us that the additional preamble referring to the Tartu Peace Treaty was simply a domestic political provocation during the actual events .
I see no reason why this preamble should not be removed from the Border Treaty as the Tartu Peace Treaty is still a valid international treaty and the new Border Treaty only acknowledges the control line between Estonia and Russia , their border , and the external border of the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , last week the German Freie Demokratische Partei MEP Mrs Koch-Mehrin suggested that if Poland decided not to ratify the Treaty of Lisbon , it should be excluded from the Union .
This scandalous utterance was a comment on the statement made by the Polish President relating to not signing the Treaty after the Irish referendum fiasco , as this would be irrelevant .
Under EU law , unanimity in this regard is essential .
This preposterous utterance by a fellow Member is part of a dishonourable tradition in this House of disregard for the will of European peoples , which constitutes a major threat to the foundations of democracy .
Lack of respect for the result of the Irish referendum , along with the call for Poland to be excluded from the EU , are proof of this .
Countries that base themselves on Community law are to be punished simply for observing that law .
This is the true face of today 's EU .
It is but one step away from totalitarianism .
I want to call on all my fellow Members to have more respect for those who have elected us .
It is we who are supposed to be putting their will into action , not the other way around .
We must not forget this !
Mr Rogalski , we were delighted to hear that your president has declared that Poland will ratify the Treaty of Lisbon .
Indeed , that is what the parliaments agreed to do .
( HU ) Mr President , in May this year the leaders of the Romanian community in Ukraine sent an open letter to the President of Romania , and raised their voices in a separate statement against the Ukrainian education policy , which is discriminatory and aims to abolish teaching in Romanian completely and to assimilate the Romanian community by force .
Hungarians living in Ukrainian Subcarpathia are afflicted by the same anti-minority policy .
Decree No 461 / 2008 of the Ministry of Education stipulates that the school education of national minorities be switched over to the official language of Ukraine and that education be completely Ukrainianised .
The European Parliament and the Member States of the Union , including Romania and Hungary , condemn Ukraine 's systematic attempts to assimilate national minorities , and call upon it to comply in full with the international obligations it has assumed in the area of human and minority rights and the provisions of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages , which it has also signed . Thank you .
( PT ) Mr President , I would like to take this opportunity to express our solidarity with the workers of the Fapobol company , against whom disciplinary proceedings have been launched with the intention of dismissing them for having demanded payment of their outstanding wages .
Following disciplinary proceedings , the Fapobol management has unacceptably sent out dismissal notices to workers , some of whom have worked at the company for more than 35 years .
The entire company structure is affected , including management and trade union representatives who had taken part in a demonstration calling for the payment of outstanding wages .
Expressing our solidarity with all the workers and trade unionists who have fallen foul of this repressive action , as well as with the Union of Workers in the Chemical , Pharmaceutical , Petrol and Gas Industries in Northern Portugal , we believe that this company 's stance deserves to be condemned here in the strongest terms possible , as it seeks to intimidate workers and trade unionists through an attitude akin to a witch hunt that flies in the face of democracy and freedom .
( BG ) Respected colleagues , I would like to acquaint you with a case of violation of the rights of two Bulgarian children and their parents in the Netherlands .
In June 2006 the social bureau took away the children of Bulgarian citizen Roumyana Ivanova , residing in the Netherlands .
The children are aged four and fourteen .
The only meeting with them that was permitted was terminated because the mother spoke in Bulgarian .
After this date , the parents haven 't seen their children for a year , in spite of the numerous appeals .
Contrary to the law , the children are separated from one another .
The girl is at a juvenile detention facility for problem children and the authorities do not give information about the whereabouts of the boy .
Even the ambassador is refused a meeting and is not given information .
The Bulgarian State Agency for Child Protection and other organizations are continuing to send requests for the children to be accepted for raising in Bulgaria pursuant to Article 5 , 9 and 20 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child in respect to contact with the parents , fostering and care for them in their homeland .
The Dutch authorities have not expressed a position to date .
I am convinced that the Bulgarian public , the European public , should not remain uninvolved in the violation of international conventions and should not allow a second Libya case , only this time in the heart of Europe .
I ask you , respected colleagues , to please express your categorical opinion on the matter before the Dutch authorities .
( BG ) Mr. President , colleagues , the bridge is a symbol of unification , it is carried by every banknote from EUR 50 to 5 .
There is , however , a bridge in Europe which , although it is called Bridge of Friendship , still divides people .
It is the only bridge between Bulgaria and Romania along the 350 km river border on the Danube .
To cross it both ways costs nearly EUR 17 .
The fee is illegitimate and hinders both business and the free movement of people .
It does not reflect the real costs for maintenance of the bridge .
In 2007 , EUR 12 million were collected on the Bulgarian side while only EUR 17,000 were invested in the maintenance of the bridge .
I am convinced that if the European Court is notified it will rule against this fee .
But why should the citizens of Rousse and Giurgiu wait for that ?
I appeal to the Bulgarian and the Romanian authorities to respond to the expectations of the citizens by waiving the fee for crossing the bridge between Rousse and Giurgiu .
I am also turning to the Commission to encourage the finding of a solution to this pressing public problem .

( ET ) My fellow Member Toomas Savi has already mentioned Khanty-Mansiysk , a small town in Siberia where the European Union-Russia summit was held at the end of last month ; it was also the venue for another very important event , namely the Fifth Finno-Ugric World Congress in which the Presidents of four countries participated - Russia , Hungary , Finland and Estonia .
A five-member European Parliament delegation also attended the Congress and our main objective was to focus attention on the small Finno-Ugric peoples , 19 of which live in the Russian Federation , and to draw attention to the fact that their languages and cultures run the risk of destruction .
Hopefully the agreement for which the foundations were laid at the EU-Russia summit in Khanty-Mansiysk will also draw attention to the human rights situation , which is , in fact , deplorable .
( SK ) I welcome the fact that the theme of the June EU Council of Health Ministers was an initiative entitled ' European Antibiotic Awareness Day ' .
The aim is to raise citizens ' awareness that antibiotics need to be used responsibly and only in indicated cases .
Incorrect usage is becoming a serious threat to public health .
Bacteria are becoming more and more resistant , with the result that antibiotics will be of very limited use in the future .
The campaign is being run by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control ( ECDC ) , the European Union institutions and the World Health Organization .
It should be supplemented by national strategies .
A workshop on anti-microbiological resistance is to be held in Paris and the Czech Presidency is preparing a conference on this subject .
A logo has also been produced for the campaign .
( RO ) Mr. President , dear colleagues , I welcome the initiative of the European Commission , which adopted the directive on cross-border healthcare services last week .
This proposal has the advantage of creating a clear legislative framework , which establishes the rules according to which the European citizens can resort to healthcare services in the European Union area , in another Member State than the one where they contribute to the health system , as well as the way of reimbursing expenses to the patients .
The proposal , which should have been submitted for adoption to the European Parliament and the Council a long time ago , is a long-waited and opportune proposal , especially in the context in which healthcare was excluded from the directive on liberalization of commercial services .
Until now , European citizens had to refer to the European Court of Justice , which acknowledged the citizens ' right to medical treatment in all cases and obliged Member States to reimburse their expenses .
I strongly believe that this initiative will have a positive effect on improving the health condition of the European citizens who , for various reasons , cannot request such services in their country of origin , as well as on increasing the quality of medical procedures in the European area .
( PL ) Mr President , we Polish MEPs have become very disturbed by the situation in Belarus , a country that borders the European Union .
Recently that country 's parliament passed a very restrictive act on freedom of speech , which may result in even further constriction of the already narrow margin of freedom of speech in Belarus .
Its entry into force depends only on the signature of the dictator , Mr Lukashenko , and that is no more than a formality .
The highly repressive nature of this act will above all impact on independent journalists and publishers .
This is quite clearly a gag on the free media in Belarus , on independent public opinion and on a nascent civil society .
In view of this situation , the European Parliament must provide a reminder of the basic standards that apply in our continent , of which the Republic of Belarus is a part .
The award by our Parliament of the Sakharov Prize to the Belarusian Association of Journalists three years ago is all the more reason why we should take this step .
( DE ) Mr President , the location for the EU-Russia Summit was not chosen at random .
Khanty-Mansiysk is the centre of Russian oil extraction .
In the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , Russia puts the focus on the economy .
From the point of view of the EU , there should be a closer focus on human rights .
Under Dmitry Medvedev , Alexander Lebedev and Mikhail Khodorkovsky are still in prison .
For the last week , both have been under the threat of new charges with a potential prison term of up to 20 years .
The Russian authorities are playing for time until Mr Medvedev takes a clear position .
Progress and binding commitments by Moscow are needed urgently on this matter , including in terms of solving political murders and clarifying the situation regarding restrictions on freedom of the press and of opinion .
In the future , the EU must present a united front and speak with one voice to Moscow so as to build up the political pressure .
This is about nothing less than the credibility of the EU .
( BG ) Mr. President , in recent weeks the press has begun to feature comments about the attitude of the European Commission to the various member-states as an example of double standard .
Obviously , every subsequent expansion will encounter an increasingly strict application of the criteria .
Bulgaria and Romania , for example , are subjected to an unprecedented mechanism of cooperation and verification in the field of justice and home affairs .
There is no doubt there are serious problems and the two countries have to maintain a high rate of reform .
But is the approach of the European Commission identical to all ?
There are countries where organized crime has penetrated deeply and the consequences are visible : misuse of European funds , backwardness and street crime , xenophobia .
I have not , however , encountered an official comment or motion for respective measures from the Commission .
When speaking of corruption in the corridors of power , I can imagine what the reaction of the Commission would be if a Bulgarian prime minister introduces a law that would save him from prosecution .
Such actions , however , are passed over with silence when it comes to the country of the former Commissioner for Justice and Home Affairs .
I could quote a number of other examples .
I would like to be clear - I am not asking for compromises for Bulgaria or Romania , I am asking for fair and equal treatment of each member-state .
( SK ) In March 2003 , when Castro 's regime unjustly convicted and imprisoned 75 Cuban dissidents , the European Union introduced sanctions against Cuba .
More than 50 political prisoners , whose families we have long been supporting through a form of ' adoption ' , are also being held under inhumane conditions in Cuban prisons .
We are concerned about their poor state of health .
Before removing the EU sanctions on Cuba , have those involved asked the 2005 Andrei Sakharov laureates , the ' Ladies in White ' , whether the situation in the sphere of human rights and civil liberties in Cuba has changed since the accession of Raul Castro ?
Mr President , thank you for your personal involvement in the issue of the release of political prisoners in Cuba and may I ask you once again to urge the Cuban President , on behalf of the European Parliament , to immediately release all Cuban dissidents .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , one of the key common values of the European Union is its linguistic and cultural diversity .
A whole raft of states have adopted the Minority Languages Charter alongside their own legislation in support of this diversity .
Such states include the Federal Republic of Germany .
I should like to point out that the obligations thereby accepted require financial support for minority cultural institutions .
In the case of Załožby za serbski lud ( Foundation for the Sorbian People ) , resources have been gradually cut back over the years .
This is not a good example of meeting obligations under the Charter .
We call upon the German Government to keep its promises .
Let us not allow yet another nation to disappear from the map of Europe .
Mr President , last month a young Palestinian journalist from Gaza , Mohammed Omer , a man in favour of reconciliation and peace with the Israelis , was able , with the assistance of the Dutch Government , to travel to the European Union to be presented with an award for his journalism .
On his return , he was detained , humiliated , beaten and tortured by the Israeli secret service .
The Dutch Government has expressed its shock , I am told , but this behaviour by Israel is part of a pattern .
Why are we considering closer relations with Israel when agents of that government perform such acts of violence against the very people whose advocacy of peace and reconciliation will command the support of the vast majority of Members here ?
Why are we supporting such moves when we know that that government will do absolutely nothing to criticise or condemn their behaviour ?
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the free movement of people within the Schengen Area is undoubtedly a positive European value .
It means , however , free movement for many and varied enemies of society .
Thanks to information systems and the efforts of Europol and Interpol , the hunt for criminals and escapees operates reasonably well , but we are repeatedly encountering problems in enforcing remedial measures imposed as punishment by the courts .
I am thinking of measures like bans on pursuing certain occupations , compulsory psychiatric or sexological treatment and the whole area of supervision of people released from prison on parole .
There is undoubtedly a need to speed up work on a European information system and above all to ensure that national institutions are obliged not only to contribute to such a system , but also to draw the appropriate data from it .
( RO ) Prior to Romania 's accession to the European Union , there were many voices in this Parliament claiming that the Roma people are discriminated against in Romania .
For this reason , several NGOs have published various studies in this field .
Romania has continually stated that the Roma people are a major concern for the authorities , but one cannot say that there is discrimination .
Romania has implemented programmes for the integration of Roma in the society , including measures mainly related to education and even positive discrimination actions .
After 2007 , the Roma people , not only from Romania , but also from Eastern countries , spread to Europe for economic reasons , but especially for reasons related to the nomadic tradition of these people .
This was an opportunity for those who gave advice to implement it .
Unfortunately , what has happened in Italy is not a European lesson .
It is inadmissible to fingerprint European citizens and , especially , children , it is not normal to set fire to camps installed , with the tacit consent of the authorities .
I believe the situation of the Roma people are European Community subjects and I ask all those with responsibilities - European institutions , governments , NGOs - to contribute to drawing up a common , coherent policy for the integration of these people , but entirely based on European principles .
Mr President , I want to demonstrate our solidarity with Fujitsu workers in Birmingham who are threatened with redundancy .
There are plans to relocate part of the Fujitsu activities to the US , and this may mean up to 140 people losing their jobs .
The union involved in this case is the Communication Workers Union , and it has been admirably flexible in its dealings with Fujitsu management .
The single-shift system they proposed to Fujitsu would have saved 60 jobs , yet in the final board decision on 30 June , with no prior indication from the board that a decision would be reached so quickly , alternative proposals were rejected out of hand .
I would ask Fujitsu to reconsider the relocation , or at the very least to ensure that the only jobs lost are on a voluntary basis and that those who want to continue to work should be able to do so .
EU legislation clearly states that a company must conduct a consultation procedure with its employees , yet again and again employers are doing too little , too late to abide by this legislation .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to ask an administrative question concerning Parliament .
For over two years , the post of head of the European Parliament Office in Luxembourg has been vacant .
The post has been advertised once , six months ago .
Candidates were selected but no decision was made after I put questions to the administration .
Your office , Mr President , has not been able to give me an answer either .
I would like to know whether there are specific reasons why this post has not been filled and why the chosen candidates have not been appointed .
( RO ) The Commission 's Work Programme for 2008 includes , among strategic initiatives , the adoption of a package regarding the development of ecological transport .
This autumn , the Commission shall present a legislative proposal for revision of the Eurovignette Directive 2006 / 38 .
The objective of this revision is to ensure more efficient use of the transport infrastructure , as well as the reduction of negative effects of transports on the environment , based on the principle of " polluter pays ” .
In the context of ever more expensive fuels , the importance of this directive is increasing .
The sustainable economic development of the Union also depends on the development of a more ecological and efficient transport from the energy point of view .
I request the European Commission that the internalization of external costs , generated by transport , take place in a larger context , namely to also review the low VAT rates applicable in the Union , as well as Directive 14 of 2001 on taxation and levying of charges for access to railway infrastructures and Directive 96 / 2003 on energy taxation .
( NL ) Mr President , 10 days ago we launched our campaign against child sex tourism at www.sayno.eu.
Every year , thousands of men from Europe , the United States , Australia and Korea travel to poor countries in South-East Asia , Africa and Latin America to take part in this sickening form of tourism , and this almost always goes unpunished .
The message we want to convey with this citizens ' initiative is that this is no longer acceptable .
The European Union , too , can no longer turn a bind eye to this , and we must strengthen the role of Europol , for example .
I am delighted to be able to tell you that , in this very short time , we have already collected 14 000 signatures .
The campaign is of course continuing .
I should also like to express my thanks for the broad support it has received , including from Members of this Parliament .
Not only members of my own group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , have signed ; I have also seen the names of fellow Members from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and others on the list - which is of course most welcome .
I should like to take advantage of the presence of the French Presidency here to thank the French Government for the initiatives it has taken in this regard in the past , often in the face of opposition from other Member States .
I hope , however , that you are not discouraged by this and will develop further initiatives in these six months , too .
( PL ) Mr President , several months ago we held a debate in this Chamber on the situation at Gdańsk Shipyard .
Representatives of all the groups drew attention to the need for effective competition between European shipyards and other shipyards in the world market , especially the Korean shipbuilding industry .
They emphasised that closure of two of the three slipways at Gdańsk Shipyard would rule it out of this competition and take away its chance of survival .
We meet in Strasbourg , a city that symbolises European integration .
Maintaining this symbol as the headquarters of the European Parliament costs hundreds of millions of euros each year , but we have respect for this symbol .
Gdańsk Shipyard is a symbol of the fall of communism and integration between Western Europe and Central and Eastern Europe .
It would be worthwhile allowing this symbol to remain a living economic entity , a place of work for thousands of employees .
This was the appeal that shipyard workers who demonstrated recently in Brussels were making to the European Commission .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the events currently unfolding in Tunisia , in the Gafsa mining basin .
For several weeks , rallies have been organised against the poverty in this basin , which is rich because it contains many phosphates .
It has to be said that the local population is not profiting from the profits , and we are now seeing extremely serious police and military repression , with harassment , imprisonments , arrests , and the sealing off of towns , particularly Redeyef .
I am asking the EU head of mission - through you , because I believe the European Parliament 's intervention is necessary - for this matter to be raised for discussion with the Tunisian authorities , for the Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders to be followed , since trade unionists are being imprisoned and we have several accounts of torture , and for the heads of mission to attend trials , meet families and ask for an explanation from the Tunisian authorities of the repression taking place there .
( RO ) The freedom of expression is a basic principle in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Every country must guarantee the freedom of expression , including for ensuring the conditions for independent media .
Unfortunately , in the Republic of Moldova , the Union of Journalists complains about anti-media actions committed during 2001 - 2008 by the Chisinau Government .
The actions invoked by the journalists and that the government uses in the attempt to politically control the public media are : information censorship , criminal investigation of journalists for dispersing opinions contrary to the state policy , forms of calumny , promotion of unfair competition in the press , maximum restriction of the space for debate in the public audio-visual media - which , in the end , affects the final political pluralism and , implicitly , the democracy .
Taking into consideration these actions , I consider that the European Union should monitor compliance with the freedom of expression in this country more carefully .
( HU ) I would like to interpret the words of András Léderer , president of the Hungarian liberal party New Generation .
On Saturday the Hungarian March for Dignity started in Budapest .
As in previous years , this year attention was drawn to reducing prejudice against homosexuals , even if only for one day .
Following the attacks with Molotov cocktails in recent weeks , several hundred citizens who sympathise with homosexuals participated in the procession .
The procession was accompanied by unprecedented violence .
Many civilians , police officers and demonstrators were injured , including the administrative director of the Hungarian liberal party , Gábor Horn , and a Socialist Member of the European Parliament , Katalin Lévai .
Since the formation of the Hungarian Guard , several extreme right-wing , neo-Nazi portals have continuously organised aggressive attacks , whether against a Jewish ticket office or against Roma settlements , and now against homosexuals , while the government is visibly impotent and the criminal investigation authorities are incapable of producing results . Thank you very much .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to draw your attention and that of the French Presidency to the matter of the European Schools , which , while serving as benchmarks and models for European education , do not take any account of students ' learning difficulties ( dyslexia , stammering ) , so that many children are held back in their school progress and subsequent careers as a result of such difficulties .
We have seen failures , then , and pupils dropping out of school , causing considerable difficulty for their parents , who are our fellow Members and EU officials ; they are forced to move , so that their children can go to ordinary Member-State schools that have the sensitivity to meet the special needs of children with learning difficulties , as the law and human dignity demand , especially in view of the need to protect children .
Parliament will have further occasion to consider the problems faced by these children .
Mr President , what is happening in Zimbabwe is remarkably sad and overwhelmingly atrocious .
Mr Mugabe , a former fighter for freedom from colonial slavery , has now turned into a ruthless dictator and a barbaric suppressor of justice and the human rights of millions of his countrymen .
The international community - the EU included - has exhausted itself with its rhetoric , statements of condemnation and largely ineffective sanctions .
The time has come for re-election .
To this end , I believe that Mr Mugabe should be brought before an international criminal court , charged with crimes against humanity .
I strongly believe that such a measure is fully justified and realistic and will , I am sure , bring about the desired and urgently needed effect , which is to help the people of Zimbabwe get rid of a totalitarian regime that is fast leading the country into self-destruction .
I believe the EU needs to be a protagonist in the move to bring Mugabe to face international justice .
( EL ) Mr President , once again , here in the European Parliament , I would like to raise an issue that concerns the fishermen of my country , the fishermen of the Mediterranean and everyone who cares about the environment .
The Greeks , and European fishermen generally , are subject to stringent restrictions - and rightly so - regarding fishing methods and tools , fishing times , etc .
Third countries , however - Turkish fishermen being a typical example - fish as and when they want , using whatever equipment they choose , so that fish stocks are reduced , the seas are degraded , the environment is degraded .
I think we should take initiatives regarding Turkey , so that that country carries out correct fishing practices .
The environment comes first ; and of course , when I say Turkey , I mean all third countries that fish using non-standard methods .
( FR ) Mr President , I too am pleased to welcome the French Presidency , with the French minister Mr Jouyet among us .
It is true that it is unusual for the Presidency to be here on a Monday , even during these questions .
I will indeed be talking about the deployment of the police , the riot police , in front of Parliament today .
When I arrived earlier , I went through two riot police cordons .
I wondered what could be posing such a threat to Parliament that such an armada of riot police should be deployed .
Twice I had to state my identity ; I was asked why I was in the area of the European Parliament .
I was really very surprised , Mr Jouyet , because I do not feel threatened here and , on the contrary , I feel rather oppressed by all these barriers .
I would like to remind you that surrounding the house of the European people with riot police is a strange way to begin the French Presidency and I am keen to point out that we want this house to remain a house of the people , open to citizens .
( SK ) Since we shall not meet again until after 21 August , the 40th anniversary of the occupation of Czechoslovakia by Warsaw Pact troops , I feel it my duty to draw attention to those dramatic events .
It was quite clearly shown at that time that the communist regime was a crime against humanity , just like every totalitarian regime .
After August 1968 in my homeland we witnessed another 20 years of various forms of communist violence and terror from this organised machinery of evil .
Our respect should go to those who did not give in and conducted themselves with honour .
Allow me to paraphrase the words of the Slovak priest Anton Srholec , Chairman of the Confederation of Slovak Political Prisoners : ' We must never cease bearing witness that there are hundreds of thousands of honourable people in Slovakia , who made contributions to the preservation of freedom and human rights .
It is thanks to them that we are once again on the side of democracy , freedom and rights ' .
( HU ) Thank you .
The town of Khanty-Mansiysk in the Siberian province of Yugra is the site of the Russian summit and of Finno-Ugrian peoples , and in two days ' time it will be the site of the fifth World Congress of Finno-Ugric Peoples .
The EU is also providing financial support to the Finno-Ugric peoples for the fight to maintain their identities .
The speeches by the EU delegation present and the four heads of state , especially the Hungarian head of state , have emphasised how important it is that endangered peoples should have not only dance groups and choirs but also education in their mother tongue and self-determination .
This Congress has two messages for the EU .
The first is that the Year of Intercultural Dialogue should not only be a year of dialogue between the cultures of the large peoples .
The second is that we are facing incomprehensible phenomena when the parliament of a European country wants to vote to decide that its country should be monolingual when there are 75 regional languages in that country .
If the EU and Russia consider it important to preserve the cultures and mother tongues of the peoples living in their territory , this should also be the example for the Member States of the EU to follow .
Thank you .
( PL ) Madam President , a few weeks before the Olympic Games in Beijing , the only independent information station , New Tang Dynasty Television , ceased to broadcast to China .
Although the situation has now lasted several weeks , we do not know what caused the breakdown cited by the satellite operator , Eutel Communications , nor do we know when the breakdown will be put right .
We do know , though , who stands to gain from this breakdown and who stands to lose .
Millions of existing customers of independent , non-profit television broadcasting in Chinese and English are forced by the Chinese authorities to endure censorship of information from which they could have learned how effectively Chinese forces are dealing with Tibetan terrorists .
They will not hear about the strikes , disturbances and problems that are happening during the organisation of the Games .
We citizens and representatives of the European Union treat China with the respect it indisputably deserves as a great nation that has made an enormous contribution to the whole of mankind 's heritage .
It is a pity that in exchange for this respect we are treated extremely negligently by the authorities in Beijing .
Observance of agreements and adherence to the same principles is something we must demand both of ourselves and of our Chinese partners .

( EL ) Madam President , according to an article that appeared in The New York Times a few days ago , an agreement is pending between the US Government and the European Commission that will allow European governments , banks and companies based in the European Union to pass information on European citizens to US agencies , such as credit card transactions , details of journeys made , e-mails and visits to websites - all in an attempt to combat terrorism .
Negotiations are under way on the possibility of European citizens being allowed to take legal recourse against the US Government if they believe their personal rights are being infringed as a result of use of their personal data .
I call on the President and the Members of the European Parliament to investigate the matter , and I call on the European Commission to provide clarifications , so that this House is informed of the content and nature of these talks .
The European Parliament has a duty to protect the personal rights and privacy of European citizens if these are infringed .
Madam President , I wish to raise the issue of the increasing oil prices and particularly the oil futures market .
There are many reasons given for the increase in oil markets .
One is demand ; the other is supply and the poor investment in infrastructure in oil for many years .
Professionals in the oil industry and market are increasingly raising the issue of the ridiculously low margin requirement for crude oil futures .
It lies between 5 % and 7 % .
In other words , if you want to buy 10 million euros ' worth of futures in oil , all you have to do is put down half a million euros as an investment .
TrimTabs Investment Research , a leading US independent research service , has said that if their margin requirement was raised between 25 % and 50 % , which is the same as most people who invest in the stock market pay , it would have a significant impact on lowering oil prices .
The low margin requirement in the market means that the market is open to manipulation .
There is absolutely no question about that .
I have no problem with people investing in futures and commodities , but this is a ridiculously low margin .
We must pursue this issue .
The margin must be increased because the global economic effects are absolutely enormous and we must do everything we possibly can to reduce the price of oil globally .
( PL ) Madam President , the Polish President has decided not to append his signature to the Act ratifying the Treaty of Lisbon , having recognised the Treaty as defunct in a situation where the Irish have rejected the document in a referendum .
The Polish President thus recalled the fundamental operating principle of the European Union , to wit , that treaties enter into force only after they have been ratified by all EU Member States .
Application of this principle has hitherto been evident , and it was applied following rejection of the Constitutional Treaty by the French and the Dutch .
When that happened - despite continuation of the ratification process for that Treaty in many countries - it was recognised that the Constitutional Treaty was nevertheless defunct .
Unfortunately , after both the referendum decision in Ireland and the Polish President 's decision , voices were heard in the European Union , including those of some prominent politicians , demanding the ratification of this document by Poland , which is a denial of the essence of European democracy .
I would like to protest strongly against these voices and the pressure and particular type of blackmail that they bring to bear .
That concludes the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
2009 budget : First reflections on the 2009 PDB and mandate for the conciliation ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jutta Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the 2009 budget : First reflections on the 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget and mandate for the conciliation - Section III - Commission ( 2008 / 2025 ) .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , what should the budget for the European Union for the year 2009 look like , and what could it look like ?
We have been talking about this since the beginning of the year , and now we are about to embark on the second step by the European Parliament in this year 's budgetary procedure , which is a little different from those of previous years .
This is due to the fact that we want to start preparing ourselves in a small way for the amended procedure after the Reform Treaty .
After the resolution on the Budgetary Framework and Priorities for 2009 in April comes our resolution ' First reflections on the 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget and mandate for the conciliation ' .
This resolution was adopted unopposed by the Committee on Budgets and I hope very much that the plenary session will also take a unanimous decision on it , especially as the comments and suggestions from the specialist committees have been included in it .
What are we concerned with here ?
The title tells all .
We assess the preliminary draft budget with which the Commission has presented us and find much in it to criticise .
We do not see that the draft reflects budgetary truthfulness and budgetary clarity , that it is sufficiently transparent .
We already know that that the Commission , too , has to cut its coat to suit the limited cloth of the medium-term financial framework .
However , that does not entitle it to use creative budgeting techniques to create available margins .
Nevertheless , such techniques have been used - for example , the backloading of multiannual programmes ; the fact that known and easily discerned needs for financing are not taken into account ; and the non-budgeting of the Guarantee Fund estimated at EUR 200 million a year .
We do not see that the Commission has reflected in the figures the political priorities it formulated itself in its Annual Policy Strategy .
These are priorities that Parliament has vigorously supported , to wit the fight against climate change and the promotion of competitiveness for growth and employment , closely linked with the promotion of a sustainable Europe and of course the realisation of a common immigration policy .
Most importantly , we expected greater commitment to the fight against climate change .
The Commission claims to have earmarked almost EUR 14 billion in the budget for the environment , but closer inspection reveals that , of this EUR 13.842 billion , EUR 13 billion is already allocated to the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development , the Cohesion Fund and the European Regional Development Fund .
This amount will therefore have to be supplemented .
We also need to do more in the area of competitiveness , mainly for small and medium-sized enterprises , but particularly for small enterprises .
The first step was the Small Business Act .
The 2009 budget should provide a specific SME facility available to SMEs , who must first sue for their debts .
It is all very well to have laws that dictate that the 30-day time frame must not be exceeded , but how are SMEs supposed to implement them ?
Bridging loans under this facility can , however , prevent bankruptcy and job losses , and that is also in our interest .
I do not wish to address now the insufficient budgeting to meet the requirements of food aid , food security , Kosovo , Palestine , Afghanistan ; indeed , of the whole of heading 4 .
My fellow Members will do that in a minute .
I only wish to tell the Council , whose representative is no longer here , unfortunately - I cannot understand why he would be present for the one-minute speeches but not when we start talking about the budget - that Parliament is fiercely determined to enter into true political dialogue with it .
We want to implement the European priorities , and a proper budget is required in order to do this .
After all , our European budget is nothing other than politics in the form of figures .
( Applause )
Today we have a unique opportunity to familiarise ourselves at this early stage with the European Parliament 's main priorities for the coming year and to learn what causes concern among MEPs with regard to the project tabled by the Commission .
I would like to thank the initiator of this early discussion - the rapporteur , Mrs Haug .
May I assure you that the European Commission and I are devoting a great deal of attention to effective financial management and strict financial discipline .
We appreciate your constant attention and interest in these matters , ladies and gentlemen .
Therefore , while fully appreciating your concerns , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget was prepared by the Commission within the limits of the financial programming period 2007-2013 after thoroughly assessing the economic and social development forecasts and establishing a well-founded , adequate margin that provides for unforeseen challenges .
While preparing the budget for the coming year , we tried to make sure that the political priorities were given concrete financial expression and the objectives had a substantial , solid budgetary base .
Therefore , the highest financial growth is to be expected from the programmes that encourage economic development and competitiveness , as well as those promoting freedom , security and justice , financed from the corresponding budget categories .
With the aim of having a budget for 2009 that would reflect the European Union 's foreign policy goals along with the full participation of the Union in international activities , the Commission will , in the very near future , table an amendment to the draft , providing accurate calculations for the financing of Palestine and Kosovo .
Even before the preliminary discussions of the 2009 draft budget get under way in Parliament , the Commission will table proposals regarding the supplementary financing of short-term measures in developing countries that are struggling to cope with the impact of the rise in food prices ; we are prepared to establish a ' food fund ' for developing countries .
I have noted your concern about financial expenses , especially those not included under heading 5 .
You can rest assured that the 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget provides sufficiently detailed information from that aspect and we are prepared to provide all the information you require in your resolution .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , for her efforts , as a result of which , for the first time , we have a list of new pilot projects and preparatory actions at this early stage .
It will encourage a timely assessment of the possibilities for their financing and facilitate the efficient implementation of projects approved by Parliament .
Already next week - this week , rather - we will be having a tripartite meeting and next week , the first conciliation meeting to prepare for first reading in the Council .
I am sure that this year there will be no change in the atmosphere of constructive cooperation we have enjoyed for several years now and we will be successful in reaching an agreement at the end of this year .
Madam President , generally speaking , I am far from satisfied with heading 4 of the draft budget .
Firstly , I note once again the scarcity of funds allocated to this heading .
It is in total contradiction with the stated ambitions of the European Union to be a global player .
No only is heading 4 only 1.8 % up on the 2008 budget , but this increase is below the average budget increase of 3.1 % .
It can therefore be said that the portion reserved for external relations and development was cut in the preliminary draft budget .
Secondly , I reject the approach chosen by the Commission , which is already proposing to use the flexibility instrument and emergency aid for expenditure that is actually predictable and planned .
Accordingly , the Middle East , Kosovo , food aid and macrofinancial assistance are patently underestimated .
Take the example of Palestine . The preliminary draft budget this year proposed EUR 171 million in commitment appropriations and EUR 100 million in payment appropriations .
Yet in 2007 we spent half a billion on the occupied territories .
Now , by July 2008 , we have already spent EUR 365 million .
What are we going to do next year ?
Dip into the flexibility instrument ?
Reduce a margin that is already small ?
Thirdly , I am concerned about the food crisis that is taking shape and the effects of climate change .
If there is one priority for the EU , that is it !
In the 2009 preliminary draft budget , the appropriations allocated to food aid have risen by only EUR 6.8 million , the famous 3 % , even though at the end of April 2008 the Commission asked for a payment of EUR 60 million extra and it has just asked us for an additional EUR 40 million ; it is a joke .
I welcome the launch of a Global Climate Change Alliance and a Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund , but we need to increase the finance for these initiatives in the 2009 budget in addition to the commitments provided for under development .
Finally , I am aware of the importance for the Council of the European Neighbourhood Policy and our cooperation with the Mediterranean countries , but I refuse , as the finance in heading 4 currently stands , to support any additional costs that the EU would incur for the Mediterranean .
It is according to these long-term commitments , in areas where needs make themselves felt , that the European Union 's external and development policy is judged .
Without sufficient resources , the budgetary DIY strategy chosen for heading 4 will give a very poor image of it .
All of this is extremely important , of course , and it is good to know that things are in good hands with Mrs Haug .
I can say that cooperation with her has been extremely pleasant .
I am speaking as rapporteur for the budget for development cooperation , and I agree with those who say that an increase in the budget under heading 4 is urgently needed .
However , I should like to draw attention in this regard to two issues that are important from a development cooperation point of view .
The first is the food crisis , and the second is a results-oriented evaluation .
As has already been said , the food crisis is a major problem , and so we must seek solutions via the budget , both for the short and medium term and for the long term .
For the short term , there is food aid .
I welcome the initiatives developed by the European Commission in this regard .
For the long term , we have , in principle , the Food Security Thematic Programme under the Development Cooperation Instrument ( DCI ) .
Unfortunately , however , this is only just getting off the ground and is not quite working as yet .
The problem is greatest in the medium term , therefore .
Too little attention is being paid , both in the countries themselves and in the EU , to food security and food production in developing countries .
We do have rural development , but often this does not benefit areas such as food production , but rather those such as the building of roads .
I can understand the proposal by the European Commission to use underspends from agriculture for this purpose .
This is very tricky not only in budgetary but also in other terms .
Countries who meet their commitment to reserve 0.7 % of GNP for development aid will say : let other countries do the same , let them also meet their commitments , then we may be able to do even better .
They have a good argument , of which due account must be taken .
In any case , it will have to be made clear that the money must truly be put towards food security , towards increasing production , towards helping poor farmers in poor countries .
My second point concerns results-oriented evaluation .
Criticism is growing in Europe on the subject of development cooperation , even in countries that have always been generous and favourably disposed to development .
Madam President , we must go beyond good intentions and carry out results-oriented evaluation .
Better effects , better results .
This is the way to convince people .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( SV ) Madam President , first a big thank you to Jutta Haug .
She has taken a number of the views of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy into account .
For example , she has highlighted something we consider important , namely that there is a certain discrepancy between the Commission 's Annual Policy Strategy and what is actually being proposed in the budget , for example on climate and energy policy .
After all , last year the discussions of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the budget were concerned primarily with two major areas , Galileo and the European Institute of Innovation and Technology .
We now note that implementation in these areas has started well , although of course we will continue to keep an eye on implementation .
So this year we can instead concentrate on energy and climate policy .
There are many views on these matters in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
In particular , we are concerned at the inadequate margin , 82 million under heading 1A .
It is far from sufficient for these important priorities .
We understand that the Council , now ahead of the 2009 budget , is endeavouring to increase the margin , among other things by a number of administrative cuts .
That is fine - provided it does not create difficulties for the implementation of the Seventh Framework Programme - but it does not sound as though it will be enough .
Just to give an illustration of the orders of magnitude we are talking about : Mr Buzek , reporting on the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan , speaks of EUR 2 billion per year from and including 2009 , just for the SET plan .
I do not know whether that is realistic , but it makes the point that the energy and climate policy calls for a substantial amount of new funding .
In the Seventh Framework Programme and in the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme ( CIP ) a fair amount of money is set aside for the energy and climate policy , but remember that those levels were fixed back in 2005 , i.e. long before we had any idea of how the 2008 climate and energy policy would look .
We are also in the process of starting several Joint Undertakings , among other things to develop fuel cells and hydrogen gas technology .
The Commission now proposes 30 million as a first allocation for this .
However , it is proposed that the money be taken from the cooperation programme of the Seventh Framework Programme and its energy section .
This does not really represent new money ; it is just a redistribution exercise .
We want to form a complete picture of all the funding for energy and climate policy , because it is almost impossible to do so at present .
It must start to be given serious new resources , already in 2009 .
Besides , we are convinced that the energy and climate field constitutes the most powerful argument for a proper mid-term review of the long-term budget to begin next year .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , essentially , I can only agree with the statements by the rapporteur , Mrs Haug .
They also apply , in my opinion , to the budget available for transport .
The proportion of the budget allocated to transport has certainly grown - but that , of course , is due primarily to increases in the Galileo programme .
The reasons for these increases are a never-ending story , and have something to do with policies on industry in Europe .
The criticism I have to make of the Preliminary Draft Budget before us , however , is that we need more money for passenger rights , as this area concerns the rights of European citizens .
Most importantly , however , we need more money for research and for new transport strategies , so that we can finally arrive at mobility that is not detrimental to the climate .
Trans-European networks also need very strict monitoring , because large amounts of money are to be spent in this area .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . - ( FI ) Mr President , first of all I would like to thank Mrs Haug for a good report .
Direct support and market measures are central to the agriculture budget and have their own ceiling in the funding framework .
Expenditure remains at EUR 2 027 000 000 below the ceiling at EUR 42.8 billion .
This is an increase of five percent .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development expects that part of this margin could be used on a programme to distribute fruit to school pupils , thus promoting healthy eating habits .
Obesity is an ever increasing problem among young people .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also expects measures to create a restructuring fund for the milk sector .
The Committee is concerned about plans for this margin to be used to modernise agriculture in developing countries .
Funds from heading four of external measures , and not from heading two , should be used for this .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is also concerned about rural development measures .
Last year EUR 2.8 billion remained unspent , so the Parliament will monitor the implementation of the rural development programmes closely .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you for the floor .
Mrs Haug 's report , for which I would like to express my appreciation and thanks , summarises accurately what the Parliament thinks about the Preliminary Draft Budget .
Listening to the Commissioner 's speech , I felt that the rapporteur and the Commissioner dovetail together , and this could fill us with a kind of enthusiasm .
I have one tiny little problem : Mrs Haug 's sentences were worded with a critical edge , and the Commissioner expressed intentions of reassurance .
I am delighted by the intentions , but I would also like to see the figures in a format that is consistent with the intentions .
I would now like to highlight two thoughts from this complex material .
The French Presidency , like us , is interested in a strong Europe , but unfortunately right now it has gone away to build it .
A suitable budget is needed for this .
France understands Europe and has done a lot for it .
We hope that there will finally be an end to the lawnmower-style trimming .
The Presidency must be aware that every cent spent on underfunded programmes is a waste of money .
The People 's Party wants value to be generated from budgetary expenditure , so it is prepared to act in the interests of greater efficiency , in other words against poorly performing programmes , corruption or expenditure led by internal politics .
The surplus in the agriculture budget is changing due to the impact of global markets .
Many ideas have emerged regarding what we should spend it on .
I oppose all sudden , unjustified decisions , whether for the 2008 budget or for the 2009 budget .
Furthermore , the Union has serious debts in this area .
The twelve new Member States will have to wait ten years before they receive the same support as the old ones .
So competition will be distorted in the single internal market for a decade .
This unfair situation has come about due to a shortage of money .
If it now emerges that there is still money in the agriculture budget , there is a moral obligation to redress this competitive disadvantage .
Directing agriculture money elsewhere is an idea that is also supported by some of the leaders of the new Member States , but nobody should be fooled by the pathological compulsion to comply among the post-Communist leaders ; it is no longer from Moscow , but from Brussels that they expect the tap on the shoulder .
Among other things , we must face African problems too , since aid within the framework of the agriculture budget , in the form of seeds and fertilisers , has a serious reality .
Financial assistance can hardly solve a shortfall of products .
My group will support the tripartite amendment on climate change , and will wait with interest to find out what lies behind the surprising fall in the level of payments . Thank you for your kind attention .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this week , Parliament is deciding on the political priorities of the budget under difficult circumstances , both internally and externally .
We are having to cope with many challenges , while the framework of the financial perspective is very limited .
I therefore particularly welcome the courageous political work done by our rapporteur , Mrs Haug .
She has managed to anticipate the stages of the budgetary procedure to enable us to determine where our institution is heading .
This new procedure provides greater clarity , and therefore greater democracy , for citizens .
It has thus been possible to understand and discuss the priorities of the parliamentary committees and political groups .
Unfortunately , I must once again deplore the Council 's lack of ambition and the systematic nature of the cuts it made to the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
We note that its aim is to save money on administrative expenditure .
This is not a matter of identifying a political priority but of making technical savings that often double the margin in some headings , as Mr Färm said regarding sub-heading 1a .
Similarly , I cannot explain the linear cuts made in payments : EUR 1 billion less than the preliminary draft budget .
As regards heading 2 , matters are clear . In 2008 we left an unused margin of more than EUR 3 billion .
For the 2009 budget , the Commission is proposing a margin of more than EUR 2 billion , and the Council is going further by increasing this margin to EUR 2.4 billion .
However , needs are plentiful in rural development , and also in energy , immigration , climate change and international solidarity .
At a time when the food sovereignty issue is becoming more pressing with every passing day , and when it looks like if we do nothing , eating will become a luxury in Europe , the Council has decided to reduce agricultural expenditure .
Even if you have not touched the budget lines within our traditional priority , you have forgotten to increase all those for which you are making promises .
Similarly , after the recent failure of the Irish referendum and the French and Dutch referendums two years ago , does it not seem that communicating with and informing citizens are important activities that require considerable investment ?
By denying this essential need to inform , communicate with and listen to citizens , we are reaping the results of this autism in each consultation and opinion poll .
Finally , I will never understand the Council 's behaviour when it comes to heading 4 .
The observation is clear , and is always the same .
This heading is dramatically underfunded , so we should not allow promises to be made that will never be kept .
How can we hope to solve the problems associated with developing multilateral relations , problems of hunger in the world or the consolidation of democracy , and not propose an increase ?
You are even suggesting cuts for the policies that are working .
There is only one thing we can do in the next few weeks : go over both the monitoring and the writing of each budget line again , but also explore all the possibilities for achieving a budgetary framework that gives the European Union a realistic , unifying budget for 2009 .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to start by thanking Mrs Haug for her cooperation on this report , which my group can support .
We can also support a few amendments by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
The EU budget is an important political instrument , of course , even if it is a modest budget in relation to the overall economy .
The 2009 budget must naturally also reflect political priorities , so is that what we are seeing ?
The EU Heads of State or Government have adopted an ambitious energy-policy agenda ; can these ambitions then be found in the budget ?
No , they cannot .
There are no clear new priorities of this kind .
For example , the Heads of State or Government have decided that 12 pilot projects should be devised for coal-fired power stations that capture and store CO2 , but no one knows where the funding is supposed to come from .
Should these pilot projects not be reflected in the EU budget ?
I am only asking .
The Heads of State or Government want to see an ambitious common refugee policy complete with the adoption of an immigration pact this autumn .
What about the ambitions for the border agency Frontex , however , whose task is to help particularly vulnerable countries to manage the flow of refugees escaping poverty ?
From what we have heard , there is not sufficient money to meet ambitions in relation to this work .
Foreign policy is chronically underfunded .
This can also be seen this year , when once again there is nothing like a realistic budget for aid to Palestine and Kosovo .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has proposed transferring underspends from the agriculture budget to the areas in which the budgetary framework is too tight .
This is the solution we used for the financing of the Galileo satellite navigation system .
The Commission , on the other hand , has proposed funding development aid from the agriculture budget .
I do not think this is a good idea at all .
It is a real mess .
My group cannot accept , a priori , that we are now discussing a revision of the financial perspective . In the first instance , it is the Member States ' Finance Ministers who must demonstrate how they intend to reconcile the political ambitions of the Heads of State or Government with the ceilings laid down in the budgetary framework .
Madam President , Mrs Haug is right to alert the Commission to possible improvements in its draft budget when she talks about the transparency of administrative expenditure , particularly for the agencies , better financial programming and better evaluation of human resources .
I am going to focus my comments on a paragraph in the Haug report that points out the lack of correlation between requirements for fighting climate change and the EU budget .
Our budget is basically 1 % of Europe 's GDP , which is derisory in comparison with the 20 % of GDP committed by the United States at federal level .
The Commission tells us that it is taking 10 % of this tiny percentage for climate change - that is to say , 0.1 % of GDP - yet the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , the Stern report , the UNDP and the World Bank are telling us that if we really want to combat its effects , we should be mobilising between 0.6 and 1.6 % of GDP .
The Stern report even mentions 2 % of GDP .
The Commission is therefore between 500 % and 2 000 % below what all these international reports are telling us .
Here is another interesting figure : to help the developing countries , the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change - that again - tells us that around USD 100 billion a year would be needed to finance all these projects .
The Commission tells us that this is interesting , that it is going to set up a Global Climate Change Alliance and that it is giving it EUR 20 million a year for three years .
There is therefore a massive gap between needs and resources provided .
When I say a gap , I mean such a gaping chasm that all the carbon in the atmosphere could be sequestered there .
I do know that the Commission has little room for manoeuvre : expenditure is fixed , the envelopes for each programme are fixed , the measures to be financed for each programme and the conditions are fixed and , furthermore , the Council does not want to budge , and worse still , is cutting into expenditure .
Luckily the Commission has the right of initiative , if only it would use it !
We are within the ceilings of the financial perspective , as Mrs Guy-Quint has said .
We have a margin of at least EUR 2 billion .
If we do not use this EUR 2 billion margin , it is not simply a charming error of budgetary technique , but a failure to assist a European project in peril , a failure to assist a planet in danger .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner , at the start of our term of office we were all striving to increase funds for the implementation of EU tasks .
Sadly , in accepting the budgetary framework for 2007-2013 , the Council did not see any need to raise the level of the EU budget .
We are now witnessing the fatal consequences of that decision .
Besides the implementation of tasks arising from the Lisbon Strategy , we have seen an increase in other joint actions in recent times .
Let me name but a few : trans-European transport networks , the European Institute of Technology , the fight to combat climate change .
We have already encountered problems in the funding of the Galileo programme , and now the next set of problems are beginning to appear , on a much larger scale .
Why advance lofty aims when we already know that we shall not have the money to fund them ?
Reducing funds to implement the common agricultural policy and transferring them to finance other tasks will not take us far , and what will become of the programmes that have been launched ?
My fellow Member Mrs Haug was faced with an immensely difficult task if she was to meet our expectations even in part .
I therefore sincerely congratulate her on carrying out this tough assignment , and I hope that there will not be too many amendments .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the Commission 's budget is very austere .
Mrs Haug 's report justifiably draws attention to limited margins in many sections .
The least flexibility is in section four .
It is obvious that the sums to be given to Palestine and Kosovo in 2009 will not fit into the budgetary framework .
In principle , it is questionable whether the flexibility instrument can be used for these known needs which exceed the budget amounts for that section .
Our group supports the halting of climate change , and we would have wanted this objective to appear more clearly in the budget .
Instead , the amounts for security and defence policy that serve the militarisation of the EU do not belong to the common budget , although the Council would propose this , especially now , during the French Presidency .
A new situation was created when Ireland democratically rejected the EU draft constitution , and this is having an unpredicted impact on the draft budget for 2009 .
( Applause )
( SK ) For the third year in a row , a gap is gradually opening up between the long-term budget forecast and budget reality .
Member States ' governments are not drawing on budgetary resources sufficiently dynamically and they are consequently whisked away as frozen budgetary resources .
The volumes are increasing year on year .
On the other hand , the tendency towards a mid-year increase in payments is reducing not only in relation to gross national product , but also in absolute mid-year terms .
By accepting this approach , Parliament is creating a softer and less demanding environment for Member States ' governments .
This will in future be reflected in a lesser degree of implementation of key European Union policies .
This situation is worrying and rapporteur Jutta Haug correctly draws attention to this in several respects .
I should like to draw particular attention to the continuing relative and absolute fall in expenditure on competition and cohesion policy , which is intended to support economic growth and employment .
Such a development does nothing for citizens ' confidence in European Union policies .
This is not good news prior to the election year of 2009 .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , the Haug report presents our first reflections on the Preliminary Draft Budget at a very early stage , and we are combining these with a plenary mandate for the conciliation that will take place on 17 July .
Naturally , without the Reform Treaty , some important key points of future-oriented common policy are not yet in place but , even without the Treaty , there is much that contributes to the need to rework the Preliminary Draft Budget : compelling and conspicuous deficits , particularly in foreign and security policy , and the EU as a Global Player under heading 4 ; and the results expected from the G8 Summit and the conclusions of the European Council on 19-20 June also have to be taken into account .
In at least 13 paragraphs , the European Council has in fact presented an intensive programme for revising the multiannual financial programming : the further development of Frontex ; Europol ; strengthening Eurojust ; measures to deal with natural disasters ; pilot projects in second-generation biofuels and clean coal technology ; funds for agriculture in developing countries , food security assistance and stabilisation ; an increase in public development aid of 0.7 % of GNP by 2015 ; trade assistance for developing countries ; immigration policy ; and new financial resources for dealing with climate change .
I am eager to see how the Ministers for Finance , with whom we now have to negotiate , will tackle this series of innovations put forward by the Heads of State or Government and what figures and proposals they will provide to back up the political conclusions of these Heads of State or Government .
I want to concentrate on two supplementary elements - I expressly support the overall lines that the rapporteur has produced here thanks to intensive cooperation , including with the specialist committees .
If the Commission is now thinking about producing savings from agriculture for a new programme to benefit farmers in developing countries , then people are welcome to discuss where these will come from .
However , sneaking a project like that in under heading 2 by creating a new legal basis is simply not on !
If the intention is to finance it in that way , taking into consideration commitments we have made , this constitutes a revision of the financial perspective and belongs under heading 4 .
Secondly , we need considerable further discussion about whether to proceed by simply giving these funds to the United Nations or the World Bank without having access to the internal audits and without certain guarantees with respect to correct political priorities .
Given the experience we have had , it is not that simple !
Naturally , we know that , for example , we spent three times as much on Palestine in 2008 as is stated in the 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget .
Given the new challenges , given the political decisions , the old trick of financing the common foreign and security policy and new priorities at the expense of the developing countries in heading 4 is no longer acceptable and we shall not put up with it .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the budget is a political instrument , not an accounting instrument , and this report has the great advantage , I believe , of going beyond technicalities and making some political points .
The two most important points are , firstly , that the EU budget is not equal to the EU 's needs and ambitions and , secondly , that this budget does not reflect the EU 's political priorities as specifically mapped out by its other agencies .
On the first point , what can we do ?
What does the report say ?
We are asking for an increase in the very low level of payment appropriations .
In addition - and this is very important ; it has been said , but I want to repeat it - we are asking for the best possible use of the margins .
In other words , wherever we can avoid wasting money under certain policies to enable that money to be used for EU policies , it is very important that we should do so .
On the second point , we can see that the budget , as I said , does not reflect the political priorities .
I shall focus on two examples . These have been mentioned by other Members , but I shall repeat them :
Over the past political year , what have we found to be the most pressing problem currently facing the EU ? Energy policy , climate change , the food supply problem .
The sums allocated from the budget to combat this whole raft of political problems are very low .
The second issue , as many have said , is external policy .
Now that Europe is opening up and spreading its wings , we are once again reducing expenditure .
Thirdly , and let me insist on this : communications policy .
You see what is happening , the problem the EU is facing in terms of the institutional crisis it is going through .
We need political initiatives , and for those political initiatives we need communications and money .
( NL ) To begin with , I too wish to thank Mrs Haug and the Commissioner .
I had also mentioned the French Presidency in my notes , but regrettably its representative has already disappeared .
One aspect of this budget that is attractive to Member States is the low percentage of payment appropriations .
I believe that 0.9 % is one of the lowest percentages we have seen in recent years .
It is up to us to consider whether this is realistic or not .
There is nothing against keeping the percentage low , but it must be realistic , and we have already heard that we may be faced with a large number of new priorities .
One of the things we shall have to tackle - as many have already said - is heading 4 .
If we look at this heading , one of the main organisations to which funds are allocated is the United Nations .
I have just returned from a visit to Kosovo by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The things we heard there about the United Nations did not inspire great optimism .
I think that the Commission needs to have another good look at the policy with regard to this organisation .
Another aspect is budget heading 5 .
I believe the margin currently stands at 121 or 123 million .
How does this margin look in the light of rapidly rising inflation ? Four to five per cent a year .
What are the consequences of this for the Commission 's expenditure on human resources , buildings and so on , and what conclusions should we draw from this ?
( PL ) Madam President , there are four issues in this debate to which I would like to draw attention .
The amount of funds for commitments in the 2009 budget is 1.04 % of GNI , and just 0.9 % of GNI for payments , which means a fall of as much as 3.3 % in comparison with payments in 2008 .
With such a small budget , it will be difficult to put into effect the priorities drafted by both the European Commission and Parliament , especially as these priorities are distinctly increasing with each year that goes by .
Thirdly , the funds mentioned under heading 4 , with its characteristic title ' The EU as a Global Player ' , deserve particular attention , as they are just 1.8 % higher than in 2008 , even though it has been apparent for years that this is a permanently under-financed area .
Fourthly , such a modest rise in funds in heading 4 is all the more puzzling , since it is surely there that we find the funds for EU food aid for developing countries , and the prices of basic agricultural raw materials have risen by several dozen percent during the last 10-15 months .
To conclude , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , on a very thorough report that once more demonstrates how both the Commission and the Council sadly approach the process of budget drafting primarily from an accounting angle .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are in the process of setting a clear mandate for negotiations on the discussions we are to have with the Council next week .
I understand why many fellow Members who have spoken have pushed for special additional efforts on issues relating to the scope of their powers ( external relations etc . ) , but I believe that this year in particular , this mandate should be set in relation to what citizens expect of the budget , rather than what many of us expect because of special interests or other concerns .
We must focus on the four issues that , in my opinion , are now the most pressing issues for citizens in Europe today .
These four issues are : high prices , climate change , competitiveness and the environment .
These are the four cornerstones on which we should build the mandate : I think we are on the right path , but we must not lose sight of this outline .
I would like to say a few words about the idea that President Barroso pulled out of his sleeve yesterday and will be putting to the G8 summit today or tomorrow , if I am not mistaken , on food security .
It is an idea that we should examine , but we should examine it from the standard perspective of the way in which we draw up the EU budget : in other words , we should discuss it with the Council as a budget principle and decide whether it should be tabled as an EU proposal in international forums .
To conclude , I would like to say a few words about immigration .
I come from a Member State that is subject to enormous pressure on its external borders , which are EU borders , especially on its maritime borders .
I think we should make a special effort this year as regards the issue of Frontex , especially its maritime dimension , with operations such as Operation Poseidon in the Aegean , which last year alone , in the summer months , was able to respond to an average of 700-800 cases of illegal immigration .
We need this effort , just as we need to make a mark , at last , on the budget - and I am in touch with other Members with the aim of achieving this - to ensure that for the first time there will be a mechanism for solidarity between the Member States in handling the administrative cost and the administrative burden of receiving immigrants .
This is something which we do not have yet , and which we need .
This puts great pressure on some Member States and I think we have a special responsibility to make it work .
I shall end as I began .
No budget can succeed unless it responds to the expectations of citizens rather than special interests and lobby groups .
( SK ) My thanks go to Mrs Haug for her excellent report .
The draft budget for 2009 on the one hand allows for the consolidation of programmes approved for the financial period of 2007 to 2013 and , on the other hand , puts new emphasis on the need to resolve urgent issues and challenges .
In regional policy , it is in our interests to improve the social and economic situation of the inhabitants of underdeveloped regions .
Our objective is to reduce the inequality between European regions .
In comparison with 2008 , payments under expenditure sub-heading 1b have decreased by almost 14 % .
We of course wish to be able to face up to the current and future challenges while respecting the principle of solidarity within the whole of the Community .
We must therefore ensure that the resources we need for cohesion policy will continue to be guaranteed in the future .
In order to be able to convince our citizens that their financial resources are being used responsibly , we must ensure the effective implementation of operational programmes and large projects .
The analyses and subsequent measures put forward by Member States will thus play a key role .
It will be important to assess the results of cohesion policy for the period 2000 to 2006 .
( FR ) Madam President , first of all I would like to say that I have enormous respect for Mrs Haug , who was passionate in her presentation of a comprehensive , demanding and , at the same time , very brave budgetary report , which was voted through unanimously in the Committee on Budgets and which aims to clarify Parliament 's need for transparency and clarity in preparation for the 2009 budget .
Naturally , it pinpoints Parliament 's main requirements - policies linked to competitiveness , regional policy , R & D , development , agriculture and food safety , and to a lesser extent the requirements in terms of foreign policy and the European Neighbourhood Policy , as underlined earlier .
However , in the little time available to me , I would like to stress how important it is , now more than ever , that we avoid sacrificing the appropriations of sub-heading 3b .
In the current climate , where there is a lack of public confidence in the EU and Europe is struggling to inspire its citizens , it seems essential that , through cultural , youth and health policies , we can forge genuine European citizenship .
I join Mrs Haug in lamenting the fact that it is precisely those activities that help demonstrate what Europe does for its citizens that have been increased the least .
Finally , to conclude , I would like to ask the Council and its Presidency - and I too am sorry that the Council representative should be absent at this crucial point in the debate - to avoid making cuts in the Preliminary Draft Budget at first reading , as they have become accustomed to doing in previous years .
To that end , our institutions need to work closely together and the European Parliament has to be fully consulted in its role , yes , as joint policy-maker for Europe , but more importantly as the citizens ' representative in the key political act that is the adoption of the budget .
( LV ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in talking about the draft budget for 2009 prepared by the European Commission , we ought first of all to note that the total amount of commitment appropriations is increasing to EUR 134.4 billion , which is a 3.1 % increase .
At the same time , the amount of payment appropriations is decreasing by 3.3 % , and the amount of payment appropriations for EU cohesion policy is decreasing most rapidly - by 14 % .
Of course , the reduction in payment appropriations for EU cohesion policy is connected with protracted programming problems hindering the Member States from commencing full uptake of EU funds .
The European Commission should , however , have focused more on the successful commencement of resources uptake and reduction of the administrative burden , instead of on a mechanical reduction in payment appropriations .
I believe that we will have to give serious consideration to this issue once again at the conciliation meeting .
As regards heading 4 of the EU budget , relating to the EU as a Global Player , it is obvious that the amount of resources proposed by the European Commission is insufficient .
It is necessary to reconsider the draft of heading 4 of the budget , taking into account the EU 's commitments in Kosovo , Palestine and elsewhere , and to arrive at realistic figures .
In relation to the EU 's new priorities - the EU common energy policy and the fight against climate change - the current amount of EU budget resources for these objectives is obviously insufficient .
Of course , significant changes to the structure of the EU budget may be made only in conjunction with the mid-term review on the EU financial perspective , but specific changes may be introduced earlier , such as allowing the new Member States to channel a greater part of EU funds towards energy efficiency goals and home heating programmes .
Finally , on institutional issues , the 2009 budget procedure was begun on the assumption that the Lisbon Treaty would enter into force next year .
The current situation with the Lisbon Treaty is not very clear and it is important to agree on exactly what procedural changes it will introduce into the work of the institutions on the EU budget . Thank you for your attention .
( RO ) Supporting the single market is completely justified if we reach a high degree of consumer satisfaction , by safe goods and services , as well as efficient ways to solve the problems that may occur , everything under the conditions of ensuring a loyal competition .
The proposals submitted by the IMCO Committee for the 2009 budget follow this direction .
We request additional funding for the SOLVIT network that , despite the justified expectation , has not reached the estimated efficiency in solving the legal problems citizens are dealing with on the internal market .
We also support the further funding of the projects regarding consumers , market research , including prices , as well as market supervision measures .
The data collected may explain the potential distortions and contribute to finding adequate measures for correcting negative situations .
We notice that , in most chapters we debate on , the funding is adequate , but we insist with concern on a certain aspect : the current structure of budgetary expenses is completely non-transparent .
Thus , the democratic control over the destination of public money is undermined , a fact that the Parliament firmly rejects .
( RO ) The first report of the European Parliament regarding the preliminary draft budget for 2009 should indicate very clearly the political priorities of the European Union at present .
Thus , I consider that the report has largely emphasized the budgetary insufficiencies regarding the fight against global warming , but it has not insisted enough on the problem of the food crisis that European Union citizens are dealing with .
The price crisis and the food insecurity we are dealing with for the first time in more than thirty years needs to be part of our budgetary priorities .
I think the only instrument by which we can respond efficiently to the situation is the common agricultural policy .
This and only this can guarantee sufficient production of food products in Europe .
For this reason , I do not agree with the use of the margins available under title 2 of the European budget for other fields and not for agriculture .
Secondly , we have seen , for several years , the redirecting by various means of money in the first pillar , from direct payment to farmers to the rural development projects in pillar 2 .
I remind you that the rural development projects will not lead to a production increase in Europe and , implicitly , to solving the current food crisis .
Even if the tendency of applying these transfers by the instrument of modulation has lasted for several years , at present , we need the best measures for the current challenges and these measures are among the traditional instruments of the common agricultural policy .
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Madam President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , for the excellent work she has done so far , and for the comprehensive position before us now , as a result of which she is attempting to create a budget from the restricted framework available which can help us bring our priorities to fruition , and at the same time respond to the global challenges we face .
In view of the stagflation that is threatening the European Union , it is an important , positive step that the largest heading in the budget is now the section dealing with growth , employment , innovation and cohesion .
The sources that serve the goals of climate change and secure , competitive energy supplies can also be found between the lines .
It would be even better if there were separate headings for these challenges , namely reducing CO2 emissions , energy saving and renewable energy , thus promoting the development of a common , sustainable , European energy policy . Thank you .
( FR ) Madam President , following the Irish referendum , there is an even greater need for the EU to listen more to citizens and to keep them better informed about what concerns them on a daily basis , particularly now , less than a year away from the European elections , if we want to arouse the voters ' interest in European issues and ensure that a basic consensus is obtained on its aims and policies .
This is a difficult time for the 2009 budget , on which Mrs Haug produced an outstanding report with her new approach to the major issues and her wide-ranging consultation .
I recall from her report the points made about citizenship and information , which must rise to the various challenges in 2009 and require considerable resources in a heading where , unfortunately , the margin is small .
Information is an essential democratic tool .
Wherever they live , be it in an old or a new Member State , citizens need to be better informed about the realities of the EU and particularly its budget .
To that end , they must be given clear , relevant and concerted messages by the principal institutions .
In this respect , calls to introduce a sort of ' European Union ' brand that would be identifiable all over Europe and would appeal to everyone seems an important factor in involving citizens in the European project .
( PL ) Madam President , annual budgets are a kind of compromise between implementation of the strategic aims recorded in multiannual financial frameworks and the current political and economic situation , and particularly the need to act to deal with unforeseen situations that arise in the market .
This is the situation we are facing today : there is a steep rise in energy prices , including fuels , and there are clear symptoms of a global food crisis , while at the same time there is a rise in food commodity prices .
What actions does the Commission foresee and what budgetary sum can we assign to countering this difficult ongoing situation , to prevent this crisis from worsening ?
We have spent many years working on an energy and climate package , and this is very important .
Is this goal visible in the financial priorities of the 2009 budget , though ?
Elections to the European Parliament will take place in 2009 .
We shall have to give account for the disbursement of taxpayers ' money and for the extent to which this disbursement is in line with the aims and needs of Europe and its citizens .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much for your many kind words , for your appreciation of my work and , of course , for your support .
However , you know as well as I do that the work can only be done , and done properly , when all Members pull together on this .
Only then are we strong enough in relation to the Council to be able to push through the things that we believe are essential .
I particularly liked the way that Mr Surján described the Commissioner and me when he said that we were like two interlocking cogs .
I find it a particularly good image because when two cogs mesh , they move something , and that is exactly what we want .
We want to set something in motion ; we want to avoid a static budget and , above all , we want to move the Council .
As the President said , the Heads of State or Government can issue communiqués about all manner of wonderful things at their summit meetings but , in the end , the Commission and Parliament have to get the whole thing moving .
Of course the Council is part of it too , as one arm of the budgetary authority , but mostly I get the impression that it is always up to us to drag the Council along with us in this movement because the Council itself does not take the initiative in providing impetus .
We have analysed the Preliminary Draft Budget yet again , exchanged views on it and clearly carved out what we want from the budget for the European Union in the next year at a very early stage - before the summer recess .
This gives us a good basis on which to move into the preparations for our first reading after the summer recess .
I hope that all Members will support it as soundly then as they have done today .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 8 July 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The Committee on Budgets requests real support for poor regions , asking for a larger budget as an expression of the principle of European solidarity .
The Jutta Haug report has in view the 2009 budget detailing , emphasizing current priorities at the European Union level , including the fight against climate change and solidarity toward poorer regions .
This new approach should contain a better understanding of the difficulties and needs the poorer regions are dealing with and it is to ensure greater financing , which , by the relevant European institutions monitoring development progresses , shall lead to a decrease in disparities and to ensuring economic and social cohesion .
For Romania , this budget change could be good news as regards the financing of development regions , since 6 out of the 8 development regions in the country are part of the 15 poorest regions in the European Union and the North East development region remains the last in this ranking this year as well .
Therefore , again we have an important chance in what should be our fight and permanent concern to reduce the significant differences separating us from the regions of the Western European countries , in economic , social , cultural and civilization terms .
Airbus / Boeing WTO disputes ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission on the Airbus / Boeing WTO disputes by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade - B6-0155 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the trade dispute between the European Union and the United States about large aircraft is no ordinary controversy like others that are taken to the WTO for resolution .
This dispute has led to by far the largest and most complicated proceedings that have ever been instituted .
It involves an enormous conflict of interest .
The United States has criticised the way in which the EU and the Member States involved in the EADS consortium have subsidised the introduction of new large aircraft over the last 20 years .
For its part , the EU has accused the United States of granting hidden subsidies to Boeing as part of defence and aerospace projects in which it is involved .
We do not yet know which way the WTO Dispute Settlement Body will decide .
I assume that the decision will be that both parties have violated applicable WTO rules .
Whatever the outcome of the case , it is still possible to make some recommendations .
Firstly , perhaps it is time both Boeing and Airbus relied much more on their own resources instead of being able to fall back on comprehensive state subsidies , then keeping the support and profit for themselves but avoiding risk by means of the company structure .
Better functioning and greater transparency in the aviation sector would certainly benefit all aspects of the industry and also customers .
This does not mean that large aircraft manufacturers should no longer receive any financial support at all .
I should simply like to emphasise that a balanced , appropriate system is needed that does not favour the interests of large companies but also takes into account important issues such as , for example , the creation of jobs and the protection of the environment , together with the improvement of passenger safety .
Secondly , in this regard it is significant that , in 2007 , thousands of Airbus employees lost their jobs as a result of a restructuring that , in my opinion , was not necessary - after years of huge profits for this European consortium .
This is not an appropriate way for management to deal with crises , especially as it was not the employees who were at fault but the managers , who had failed dismally .
Third , the existence of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body is a considerable step forward in the international trade regime , because it delivers reliable directions in the event that differences of opinion arise from different interpretations of the Uruguay Round agreements .
We shall also be given its decision , but is that enough of a solution ?
Fourth , it is regrettable that the 1992 EU-US Agreement on Large Civil Aircraft was not sufficient to achieve a negotiated solution instead of a court ruling .
Fifth , the aviation industry is currently being confronted with new challenges .
The economic crisis and the rise in the price of oil are having more drastic effects on the air transport system than we have ever experienced before .
A solution must be found quickly , and perhaps it is time to start thinking about cooperation instead of confrontation .
Sixth , as far as matters of public procurement are concerned , my personal opinion is that it would be more appropriate not to include this important sector of the economy fully in the WTO system .
In almost all national economies , public procurement is an important catalyst for economic development .
Politicians must also have a certain degree of influence in some areas key to shaping the way society develops .
Seventh : it is time the United States and the EU came to an understanding that it must remain possible to take measures for political management of developments in the national economy , including the awarding of public contracts and financial support .
In addition , however , there is a need for transparency mechanisms and democratic control to ensure that everyone keeps to the existing rules .
Eighth : the Boeing case shows us that a government should avoid becoming entrenched behind the argument of alleged national defence interests in order to support its own national industry , or rather the interests of a few strong lobby groups with which it is closely associated .
Ninth : this controversy represents more than just a dispute between the EU and the United States .
This is yet another case in which those who portray themselves as the champions of free trade give in to protectionist national temptations out of self-interest .
We should distance ourselves from both , because that kind of behaviour does not lead to better conditions for our citizens but only to discrimination and unfair competition based on dumping .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to reply and answer the oral question on behalf of Commissioner Mandelson , who was not able to attend today because he is in the process of deep bilateral negotiations on the Doha Round .
The US case against European support for Airbus and the European case against US subsidies to Boeing are currently at the WTO Panel stage and the European legal position has been defended .
We are now expecting the interim reports in both cases in the fall or winter .
The next steps will be determined by the outcome of the dispute and by the underlying interests which led to it .
On the question of how this affects the ability of the industry to compete , we would like to say that we see no reason why the pending EU and US litigation in the WTO over support to Airbus and Boeing should affect the ability of European industry to compete fairly and in public procurement competitions with the United States .
Government procurement is about providing the best equipment , at the best value for the taxpayers , in the tanker procurement .
The US Air Force has determined that the plane offered by Northrop Grumman and the EADS is superior to the Boeing and is the best tanker to meet its needs .
The question of support for Airbus is immaterial in this assessment .
The WTO litigation and the procurement have nothing to do with each other .
On the United States Government Accountability Office reactions , we would like to say that the US Air Force 's selection of the Northrop Grumman KC-45 remains in force .
There is a misperception that Northrop Grumman and the EADS North America have somehow lost or that the Boeing award has been reversed .
Northrop Grumman and EADS North America remain under contract , albeit under a stop-work order , which places on hold the work under contract .
The US Government Accountability Office reviewed the Air Force 's evaluation process , not the capabilities of the aircraft .
There is no requirement or direction from the Accountability Office to recompete the previous contract award .
The Air Force and Department of Defense have indicated that the KC-45 best meets the USAF 's requirements .
The Accountability Office has requested the Air Force to respond regarding the steps it will take within 60 days of the 18 June announcement .
In general , the government support for aerospace meets the need that certain developments in the large civil aircraft industry require very high levels of investment .
It is the Commission 's view that any government support for aerospace on both sides of the Atlantic has to be balanced , in order to ensure that the conditions of competition are not distorted .
If this is the case , such support can contribute to innovation , increase safety and improve environmental performance and efficiencies in air transportation .
It is in the interests of airlines and consumers , as well as governments , to maintain a high level of healthy competition in the aircraft sector .
On the prospects of the bilateral agreements of 1992 , we would like to inform you that , despite several good-faith attempts to solve the dispute amicably over the past years , the differences between the two sides - the US and the EU - have proven too big .
The US has denied there are any subsidies to Boeing while at the same time demanding that the EU put an end to European support to Airbus .
On this basis it has not been possible to establish a fair and balanced basis for a negotiated settlement yet .
On 18 October 2007 Boeing publicly rejected Airbus 's offer to explore an amicable solution .
We should also be aware that , with the current pre-electoral atmosphere in the US , it may not be easy at the present time to find a balanced settlement .
We therefore do not expect that this dispute can be resolved in the near future , before the WTO has ruled on both the Airbus and Boeing cases .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the honourable Member of the European Parliament for his interest in and support for this cause , as demonstrated in the oral question and resolution provided to us .
Madam President , Euro-Atlantic economic relations are exceptionally important to both sides .
Any commercial disputes should be settled by seeking transparent , balanced solutions .
In this case , the desired objective is to secure a fair hearing for both sides , and a balanced approach to state aid for the aircraft industry .
This financial aid is particularly important for promoting research , innovation and environmental management , and for improving the safety and efficiency of air transport .
The unilateral withdrawal of the United States from the bilateral agreement of 1992 is cause for concern , since European state aid is fully in accordance with the letter and spirit of that agreement .
The European side is justified in considering the financial resources invested in Airbus to be limited in extent , returnable and without competitive impact , in contrast with the prohibited and actionable non-returnable US subsidies .
As you know , the Union has made substantial efforts to achieve a bona fide settlement of the matter on the basis of negotiation .
However , it has not yet met with a response .
The European Commission is therefore called upon to maintain a robust negotiating stance for a long-term settlement of the matter , under terms of legitimate , balanced competition .
The US demand for an end to subsidies to Airbus , as a condition for holding negotiations , falls outside an acceptable framework for settling the dispute .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there is only one reason why we wish to have a debate this evening and that is that the attacks from the American side , by both Boeing and many members of Congress , on the awarding of the contract to Northrop Grumman / EADS are very bitter and even go as far as to target individual Member States .
That is the reason why we are holding a debate here and why there will also be a resolution , for which I am very thankful , because we in the committee have been trying for a long time to bring this resolution about .
The frustration is directed against the fact that Northrop Grumman / EADS presented a better offer , to which the US Air Force gave preference over a Boeing model in a public tender .
That is the most natural thing in the world .
We are dealing here with NATO partners and not with countries who do not work together regularly .
We have the Transatlantic Partnership , which is reaffirmed at every summit meeting .
In the three stated areas , Europe purchases four times as much from the Americans , and so , to that extent , we already have a very intensive mutual ' partnership ' .
There is absolutely no reason for the Americans to be frustrated , and that is what we want to make clear here .
We do not need to go into the details again - I am very grateful that the Commissioner and Mr Papastamkos have already done that .
It is essentially a political protest that we want to voice today - and which , by the way , repeatedly influences the WTO discussion on the American side , because comments are constantly being made .
The US Air Force cannot be permitted to award a contract to , among others , a European consortium , at the same time as a WTO case is being decided .
This makes it plain that the two issues are interwoven politically , but the Commissioner is absolutely right when she points out that , in reality , they are not connected .
I should like personally to thank the Commission and the Member States for repeatedly setting great store by getting the facts right .
I should also like to thank my fellow Members for the fact that we are finally having this discussion and can present the resolution .
I hope this means that the Americans will give us a good hearing .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , for some years now the market for the manufacture of large aircraft has been virtually bipolar .
Airbus and Boeing rule the roost .
For the last two years , though , we have been witnessing an investigation by the World Trade Organisation into the EU-US dispute over subsidies to these two heavyweight concerns .
What is at stake here is a lot of money , and also - perhaps more importantly - ambitions to be leader in the field of state-of-the-art technology .
The United States is accusing Airbus of enjoying the advantage of large subsidies and beneficial credits from EU Member State governments .
Meanwhile , from the European side , we also hear serious reservations regarding the vast amount of state aid given to Boeing in the form of tax breaks provided by the states of Illinois , Kansas and Washington , as well as aid from the army and NASA within the framework of public procurement .
We fear a Pyrrhic victory in this dispute .
Both companies benefit from state aid of a debatable legitimacy .
Let us not forget , however , that they are the world 's only manufacturers of large passenger aircraft .
They compete with each other , but they must also cooperate if they are to make use of the best solutions in their designs and technologies .
All this has to be to the benefit of passengers .
It seems to me that what is needed here is more partnership and amicable negotiations , as there is room for both Airbus and Boeing in the world market .
According to my calculations , over 15 years the world will require some 36 000 modern , safe civil aircraft .
Perhaps 1 500 of these will be of the large type .
It is hard to say for sure who will come out on top , Boeing or Airbus , but let us also bear in mind that Russia is starting to feature in this market , and Russia too practises government subvention .
Madam President , the WTO dispute between Airbus and Boeing is nothing more than a bad joke .
The Americans are trying to oppose the superiority of Airbus by any means possible , even resorting to the courts .
However , while Airbus has received repayable financing , Boeing is collapsing under the weight of funding from different countries , and particularly under the enormous weight of military research .
This is why the Dreamliner is the most subsidised aeroplane in the world .
What is really behind the unfair competition in this case is the weak dollar .
Unfortunately , the US is complicit in this matter with the European Central Bank .
The real question , therefore , is whether or not Airbus will continue to design and manufacture its aircraft in the euro area .
To say yes would mean the European Central Bank being at the beck and call of industry , rather than refinancing investment banks without any guarantee of repayment .
To say yes would mean creating a sovereign European public fund , which would replace the private shareholders of EADS , who have shown their inability to develop a relevant industrial strategy , instead preferring to protect their dividends .
Replacing the A320 with an aircraft offering a 20 % fuel saving will only be possible with the kind of investment that the shareholders are unwilling to make .
Europe needs a strong EADS group that is 100 % public-owned if it wants an industrial policy that is able to provide it with its own energy-efficient air transport .
Madam President , any fair-minded person who has followed the two cases at the WTO would really come to the conclusion that to use an English phrase ' it is a six of one and half a dozen of the other ' .
For example , Boeing receives US Federal and State Government support exceeding the 1992 EU-US agreement ; Boeing receives subsidies from NASA and the Department of Defense programmes ; Boeing benefits from non-competitive military contracts at inflated prices and Boeing benefits from the US foreign sales corporation tax breaks , infringing WTO law .
Opposite to that , the US complains that Airbus receives launch aid relating to R & D ; it receives grants for development and production sites ; it receives loans on preferential terms ; it receives debt forgiveness relating to large civil aircraft production and development financing ; it receives R & D grants directly benefiting Airbus and it complains that it receives illegal export subsidies .
On a positive side , many EU airlines continue to order Boeing aircraft and the US Department of Defense did award the contract in the first place to the EADS Northrop Grumman tanker .
Those are positive signs .
While both sides have cause for complaint , I am afraid that what we find in this question is naked anti-Americanism and a petty , little European mentality .
Airbus is cast as the angelic saviour of European skies while Boeing is the evil American company seeking to unfairly dominate global aviation .
I sincerely hope that my group , the EPP , does not see fit to support this resolution since it would really show my group at its very worst - anti-American , protectionist and anti-competitive .
Maybe we are allowing ourselves to be overly influenced by the French presidency , but please let 's not allow the initials EPP to stand for the European Protectionist Party .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution that we are going to vote on makes a number of recommendations to the Commission , reminding it that , on behalf of the EU , it defends the interests of the Member States and of the European large civil aircraft industry .
In view of the fact that the US Congress has already supported Boeing on numerous occasions , and bearing in mind that the infringement of the tanker agreement undermines the position of the European aircraft manufacturer , the unflagging support of the European Union as a whole - the Member States , the Commission and Parliament - is more crucial than ever .
This much we know .
EADS has been widely criticised and doubts have been raised as regards both its seriousness and its reliability .
The Commission must reaffirm two things today : on the one hand , that Boeing 's appeal , in the context of the tanker procurement process , must in no way affect the quality of the proposal for the EADS / Northrop Grumman partnership , because only the selection process has been challenged by Boeing .
A reversal of the US Air Force 's decision would be unacceptable .
The Commission must be clear in making this point .
The Commission must also remember that the attacks on Airbus before the WTO are unjustified .
Not only is the system of repayable financing beyond reproach because , by definition , it is repaid , but the position of the United States is all the more surprising , since US aid is incompatible with WTO rules and with the binding agreements between Europe and the United States .
To avoid a sterile confrontation that would undermine the industrial interests of the parties concerned and EU / US relations , which we have to improve , the only possible solution for the future is a negotiated one .
This must be preceded by a preliminary phase in which both parties demonstrate their goodwill .
One final question : does the new situation influence the decision that might be made during settlement of this dispute ?

( DE ) Madam President , I should like first to apologise on behalf of my colleague , Mr Sturdy , who has been delayed and cannot be here for the plenary session .
I should like to say in advance that both the United States and Europe - at least most of the Member States - are NATO partners .
This is a conflict between groups that are on friendly terms .
I would also say in advance that the United States and the EU signed an agreement on large civil aircraft in 1992 .
It actually functioned very well until the United States departed from the terms of the agreement by calling upon the WTO Dispute Settlement Body in 2004 .
We know that , to a certain extent , State aid is common practice , particularly in this market for large commercial and military aircraft .
Nevertheless , it is important that very strict controls and conditions be imposed on this State aid .
The European Union has so far held strictly to these , and EADS Airbus , too , has paid back most of the subsidies or even paid back more than it received from public funds .
We have documented this in detail .
In contrast , the United States has still not come up with such documentation and it is not exactly clear to what extent Boeing has complied with these obligations .
Overall , I should like to say that , whilst the European Union naturally advocates free trade , this resolution should not result in us calling for anti-American rhetoric .
It is important that we seek fair treatment for both partners , and I assume that the WTO body will take its decision in this spirit .
Straight anti-Americanism would be too narrow an approach , but we must still call upon the United States to keep to the rules that we all agreed upon .
Madam President , I will be supporting this resolution and the majority of the amendments that have been tabled to it , including those on behalf of my colleague Erika Mann .
In my constituency thousands of jobs depend on Airbus directly , particularly in the Filton area of Bristol , and of course across the United Kingdom and in the European Union tens of thousands of jobs depend on the success of Airbus .
I would have criticised Mr Kamall to his face for his approach , which is widely Eurosceptical and anti-European , but as he buggered off within about two minutes of speaking I will not have the opportunity to direct my criticism to himself .
I hope it will be reported by one of his colleagues , who will tell him that normally we try and stay to the end of the debates we participate in , rather than call in , speak and then rush off to do your press release .
In 1992 there was an agreement between Boeing and Airbus - or rather between the European Union and the United States - to mutually desist from complaining , even though it was to the advantage of Boeing , who get direct subsidies from the US Government through NASA and the Department of Defense , whereas Airbus merely gets launch loans which have to be repaid with interest .
Already EUR 7 billion have been repaid .
In 2004 the United States broke that agreement by referring the whole matter to the WTO .
The union Unite and the management in the United Kingdom are united in insisting that we put as much pressure as possible on the United States over this matter .
The criticism from Boeing and from Congress needs to be resisted - and resisted strongly .
If we are to lose our competitivity with respect to Airbus , leaving Boeing alone in the world with a monopoly position , then we will see a loss of contracts and a loss of jobs .
A negotiated settlement is clearly the best solution and the best way forward - maybe 1992 plus .
But , in its absence , we have no alternative but to vigorously defend our position and the interests of Europe 's economy , competitivity and jobs .
I have received one motion for a resolution in accordance with Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 9 July 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
Following the debate that we had on this issue of the Boeing complaint against Airbus before the WTO , and in response to the US Senate resolution on the same subject , I am pleased to see that we are today defending a resolution that will ensure the European Parliament 's support for Airbus .
Boeing 's complaint against Airbus seems to have more to do with commercial interests than with actual compliance issues relating to competition rules .
It was only when Airbus won a series of aircraft orders that Boeing filed a complaint with the WTO .
The US aircraft manufacturer is also in violation of the 1992 bilateral agreement , since it received subsidies that were prohibited under this agreement .
Yes , Airbus also received subsidies , but these consisted of repayable financing allowed under the rules .
Not only was this financing fully repaid , but Airbus also paid back 40 % on top of the amount lent to it by EU governments .
I support the resolution that we will be voting on tomorrow .
The European Parliament must call for a fair and swift end to the dispute while making a public show of support for Airbus .
Creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission by Monica Frassoni , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy - B6-0170 / 2008 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Giusto Catania , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy - B6-0451 / 2008 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Jan Marinus Wiersma , Claudio Fava , Kristian Vigenin , Gianni Pittella , Adrian Severin and Katalin Lévai , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy - B6-0452 / 2008 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Viktória Mohácsi , Marco Cappato , Alexander Alvaro , Sophia in ' t Veld , Sarah Ludford , Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert , Ignasi Guardans Cambó , Adina-Ioana Vălean , Renate Weber and Gérard Deprez , on behalf of the ALDE Group , on the creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy - B6-0453 / 2008 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Minister Maroni has described this debate as grotesque but the reality is that today he has stopped swaggering like a cowboy and is trying to convince his European colleagues that it is all the fault of the press and the left , and that his sole aim is to do the right thing for the poor gypsies , shut in terrible camps and that with ethnic profiling it will be possible to make all Roma children go to school and that it is not necessary - nor does he wish - to criminalise all travellers .
So this debate is grotesque .
However , I do not agree .
I believe that this debate , and the attention that we have managed to attract , along with so many NGOs , and so many fellow Members of different nationalities - because this is not just an Italian issue - and so many people who are simply concerned about the situation of rights , is important , and is important precisely because we are holding it here , in Europe , and because we are talking about an issue of rights and of citizens and hence today this is also meant to be a small contribution to what is seen today as a crisis of meaning in Europe .
Europe has purpose : it has the purpose of checking cowboy attitudes and policies that are cruel and above all ineffective ; it has the purpose of combating racism and discrimination , using the law and existing agreements born out of a bloody history .
This debate has the purpose of confirming that there is no room for ethnic profiling in Europe : so much so that the Government seems to be doing an about-turn on this issue and we welcome that if it is the case .
The debate also has the purpose of publicly and legitimately calling into question the need , in an advanced country of 58 million inhabitants , where the mafia controls EUR 120 billion and a huge turnover and whole areas of the territory , where refuse is killing off one of the richest provinces in the history of Europe , to declare a state of emergency appropriate to a tsunami or an earthquake for 12 months on account of the presence of 160 000 ' travellers ' , half of whom are Italian citizens .
We believe that this debate is important because with the threat of ethnic profiling and the constant criminalisation of the Roma and Sinti we shall no longer be safe .
The efforts of those who work with the Roma and Sinti communities , to bring them out of a marginalised situation , one of poverty and violence to women and children - which is objective , which exists , which neither I nor any of us wish to deny - is at an impasse , and there is simply no way out if the situation remains as it is today .
Today we are discussing these issues , Mr President , for the third time in a few months .
I hope that positive , amicable and constructive pressure , also represented in this debate , will convince those of my compatriots , and other European citizens , that trying to throw everybody out and using a violent , simplistic and racist approach to solve what is really a problem of exclusion , as well as an economic problem and also a problem with the culture of our country and our continent , that they will be convinced that that is not the right path .
I therefore invite you , Commissioner , to give a high profile to the Commission 's work , the work we are doing in Parliament , and also to the money that is being given for positive policies of this type , which today are little known , as they are hidden and swept aside by prejudice that is ingrained not only in Italy but also in Europe .
We , too , are dismayed by the latest measures announced by the Italian Government to solve the ' Roma problem ' in Italy .
I think it a great shame that we are having to hold such a debate here today .
I myself was rapporteur for the accession of Slovakia for years and had a great deal to do with the Roma issue .
I always used to say : discrimination is inadmissible , it is quite simply prohibited : so say the rules and agreements of the European Union .
The registration of Roma smacks strongly of discrimination , and this did not happen in Slovakia 's case .
It is a shame that I am now having to conduct this debate on account of the actions of the government of an existing Member State .
The most recent package issued by Italian Minister of the Interior Roberto Maroni to tackle the ' Roma emergency ' , as the government is now calling it , leaves a bad taste in the mouth .
The creation of a database of fingerprints of Roma children runs counter to the EU 's fundamental principles of non-discrimination , equality before the law and protection of minorities .
This measure was announced even though the European Commission has not yet completed its evaluation of an earlier package of Italian measures .
In May of this year , the Prefects of large cities were granted extraordinary powers to take action against illegal migrants and Roma , powers that raised eyebrows in our ranks even then .
Therefore , I should like to call on the Italian Government to exercise great restraint in order to avoid overstepping the boundaries of what is permissible in Europe .
I would urge it to abandon that measure : it has no place in the European Union .
The European Commission finds itself in a situation here that , to my knowledge , has never occurred before , and so we would ask it to scrutinise the measure closely .
The Commission must take an objective position , look at the letter of the Treaty , and not let itself be swayed by political considerations .
This approach and Italy 's are skimming the edges of the EU Treaty , and the Commission must make it crystal clear where the boundaries lie .
It should be made clear that the issue here is not just Italy , however .
This latest episode is a further illustration of the need for a much more active policy to break the social and economic isolation of the Roma and combat discrimination against them .
Last Wednesday the Commission presented an overview of what is now possible with European instruments , for which I should like to express my thanks .
As the Commission says , there is scope for Member States to make more and better use of the existing instruments to promote the integration of the Roma .
I also expect the Commission to present the specific plans that were still lacking last week , however .
Parliament also calls for this in various resolutions , most recently dating from January of this year .
If one thing has become clear , it is that we can no longer delay in truly taking the Roma and their position in Europe seriously .
The Roma are a very special minority , which cannot be counted as a traditional minority .
The issue is one that concerns the whole of Europe , particularly since the most recent enlargement rounds , as a result of which a great many Roma became EU citizens .
When all is said and done , a policy of repression will not solve the problems of the Roma , nor the problems and tensions to which they sometimes give rise in our society .
An integrated approach is important and , as I see it , the Italian Government 's approach to the problem is unacceptable .
author . - ( HU ) Mr President , Commissioner Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of June our Chairman , Graham Watson , and I sent a joint letter to the Commission , asking them to investigate the grave situation in Italy , and to take appropriate measures to condemn it if it infringes the principles or pledges of the European Union .
In connection with the events in Italy , several of my fellow Members will remind us of the injustices that have occurred recently , including the collection of fingerprints .
I would much rather press for alternatives that are solutions , as my fellow Member , Mr Wiersma , has also stated .
I am very pleased with the communication that the Commission issued recently , and I am even more pleased that it deems the Roma problem and European integration of the Roma as a minority to be serious , and even more so that it deems it to be urgent .
I am unable to express how delighted I am about the creation of the new Horizontal Directive .
In my opinion , the Horizontal Directive must bring together the elements that can correct the current legislation .
I am unable to emphasise enough in my speeches how important it is to declare segregation in schools to be discrimination in legislation , as laid down in the Race Directive 2000 / 43 .
Even so , this directive only says that discrimination in schools against groups of children that belong to a different race or ethnic group is prohibited .
This directive does not say that segregation and educational segregation are discrimination .
We have a lot of evidence of this : this has been confirmed not only by civil society organisations , not only by the European Commission and not only by different opinions of the European Parliament , but even the Hungarian legislature has confirmed that this is discrimination .
It would be very important to weigh up this important aspect and the recommendations of the so-called ' Decade of Roma Inclusion ' relating to five Member States when creating the new Horizontal Directive , as the development of a European Roma strategy , and it would be effective from the perspective of integrating European Roma . Thank you .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to Mrs Mohácsi and Mrs Frassoni , Mr Wiersma , Mr Catania and all Members for their questions .
For the fourth time in this House , we have the opportunity to talk about the situation of the Roma in Italy .
I believe that everyone in this House , across the political spectrum , will agree that the situation of the Roma needs to be resolved through immediate and appropriate measures to overcome the social , economic and humanitarian crisis .
The Commission was alarmed to read in the press that the Italian authorities were taking fingerprints from people living in ' nomads ' camps ' with which to create a database .
Meanwhile , the Italian authorities have provided the Commission with information on the general legal context .
It seems that , under the terms of the state of emergency declared on 23 May , an Order dated 30 May authorised the Mayors of Rome , Naples and Milan to implement certain measures .
These measures include ' identifying and counting the people , including minors , present in the nomads ' camps ' .
It also states that the measures implemented by the Mayors must be ' in accordance with the general principles of Community law and directives ' .
The Italian authorities state that these measures have been adopted in the interests of the people living in these camps , in particular so that they can live in dignified conditions .
The Commission appreciates the Italian authorities ' willingness to cooperate .
This information is helpful , but there is still a lack of clarity with respect to the nature and real impact of the measures implemented by the Mayors .
Fingerprints can only be taken and stored in a database within a legal framework in strict observance of Community regulations and basic rights .
In this context , the Commission has requested clarification of the purpose of these activities , pointing out that their implementation must adhere to the principles of legality and proportionality .
In order to be able to assess whether these principles are being observed , a key factor will be how the Italian measures are actually being implemented .
In order for the Commission to be able to obtain a more accurate picture of the legal framework within which these measures are proceeding , it decided to write to the Italian authorities to ask for additional information on this subject .
On 7 July , the Italian authorities sent the Commission further information which will be analysed in detail .
The Commission is aware of the existence of social tension in Italy .
In May , we discussed the situation of the Roma in Italy and other countries in this House .
The Commission emphasised at that time that it is impossible to ignore the real problems of poverty and social exclusion faced by the Roma in Italy and other countries .
It also underlined that this situation results in human suffering and social tension .
In order to respond to this situation , we must combat criminality and find real solutions to the problems facing the Roma , especially Roma children who are the first victims of poverty and social exclusion .
The Roma need to be helped , not stigmatised .
This is why the Commission , in its report adopted last week , emphasised that the European Union , Member States and civil society must join forces to ensure effective coordination of their efforts .
To conclude , the Commission , in particular Vice-President Jacques Barrot , continues to be in regular contact with the Italian authorities who have undertaken to provide a full report on this subject by the end of July .
The Commission will also continue to assess how Member States have transposed Directive 2004 / 38 / EC of 29 April 2004 into their national law and how they are applying it in practice .
I firmly believe that the Italian Government has the will to implement a policy aimed at social inclusion while fully observing basic rights and Community law .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the European People 's Party Group and my colleague Mrs Járóka , who unfortunately was not able to be here , I would like to say the following . For decades civil society organisations and sociologists have tried to draw attention to the extremely difficult living conditions of Roma living in the European Union , whose numbers and ratios have grown since the enlargement of 2007 .
In order to resolve the situation , it is not an immigration policy that is needed but rather programmes that promote social inclusion .
It is important that we put the discrimination and social exclusion that afflict the Roma on the agenda , and indeed it is unacceptable that the oppression suffered by European Roma as a consequence of several centuries of exclusion , marginalisation and rejection by the political elite of all ages should again be a tool in the party political battle .
This conflicts with the interests of the Roma , it conflicts with the interests of non-Roma and of Europe , and it greatly undermines the authority of the European Parliament if it adopts its opinions on the basis of unverified rumours and assumptions .
For many months the situation in Italy has remained bad , and indeed instead of encouraging real action , the parties are creating hysteria and use the Roma issue for their own short-term , self-serving interests , and it is easy for them to do so since the Roma civil society organisations are too weak to protest against or oppose it .
When the Interior Minister of the Prodi government , Giuliano Amato , expressly spoke about the Roma emergency , my esteemed Socialist and Liberal colleagues unfortunately did not protest .
I would like to state that what is currently happening in Italy is not an ethnic matter , and we must act against injustice , from whomever it comes . Thank you very much for your attention .
Before giving the floor to Mr Pittella , I must ask the Members who are displaying T-shirts - and I must stress , not wearing them but displaying T-shirts like flags or banners - to remove them , because our Rules of Procedure are quite clear : Annex 16 to Rule 146 explicitly states that they cannot be tolerated in this way .
I ask them to remove them , otherwise I will be obliged to have the ushers remove them , or worse , suspend the sitting .
I therefore ask Members please to remove immediately the T-shirts that are being displayed as if they were posters .
That includes Mr Ferrari .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a Minister of the Interior of a European country may not describe a debate in the European Parliament as grotesque .
It is a statement that undermines the dignity of the European Parliament .
We are not happy about a measure of the Italian Government having to be appraised in this house .
For us , Europe is not the scapegoat for all national problems , nor is it the gendarme having to keep watch over the Prime Minister of Italy .
We believe , even when we are in opposition in our country , that it is right to uphold and defend in international circles the sound choices that Italy makes .
The Italian Government and the Interior Minister should , however , have looked for other means , fully in line with European standards , and informed the European Commission beforehand rather than late in the day .
We have been endeavouring to tackle the Roma issue for years : exploitation of minors , begging , racketeering , robbery and other pathological phenomena .
But the solution is not ethnic profiling , but rather a specific policy that brings together the three pillars of citizenship , decency and security .
The identification of Roma children and not them alone is a guarantee for those involved and essential for combating racketeering and trafficking in minors , but it may not be done on an ethnic basis using invasive methods such as fingerprinting .
We are grateful to Commissioner Špidla for his commitment to give a European response to a major European issue and we ask him to speak clearly about the measures adopted by the Italian Government and to report to the European Parliament .
It is surprising that the third millennium , which should have heralded the dawn of a new era for citizens ' rights , has in fact descended to the depths of cultural regression .
Let the European institution itself stand up against rampant conformism , in defence of the values of decency that Europe represents in the world .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , as you have said , the Italian Government will send full details of the measure by the end of the month .
However , there is another point to consider before that , namely the state of emergency : the European institutions need to look at this point .
Firstly , when a state of emergency is declared , in cases like this , the Council of Europe has to be informed first .
This does not appear to have been done .
We would ask you whether you have been informed and whether this was done .
A state of emergency is justified by natural disasters or catastrophes or events of that kind .
However , it is possible to define - earlier our fellow Member said ' measures previously proposed by Minister Amato ' - but this is certainly true , let us be clear : the mismanagement of the Roma question is not peculiar to the Berlusconi Government ; it is the legacy of years , of decades of mismanagement of the issue .
For that very reason it is unthinkable , intolerable , today to declare a state of emergency when it is no such thing .
The state of emergency that we have today , if you will , is the absence of legality and democracy in a country such as Italy , which is the country most condemned before the European Court of Human Rights .
That is the emergency : you cannot declare a ' Roma emergency ' when no such emergency exists .
There is a need to manage a problem .
It should be managed by acceptance , by integration , investing resources in it rather than wasting them as is being done by failing to use European funds properly , rather than relying on the illusion of biometric technology to conceal the Government 's inability to deal with a problem like this .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , digital fingerprints are a modern version of Nazi methods to distinguish gypsies from other citizens .
The digital fingerprints database is the most brutal revival of racism since 1940-1945 - for the fingerprints are a state-authorised first step to facilitate mass evictions of an ethnic group .
Most of the Roma who are legally crossing the borders of an increasingly borderless Europe are poor and badly educated .
What they basically need is a place to stay .
Poverty should be solved on the spot , not by evictions , and let us keep in mind that Roma are the largest minority in Europe - not less than 19 Member States have a population smaller than the European Roma community .
During Communism , Roma had jobs and free access to health care and education ; after Communism their living standards dropped .
But the poverty was a fertile soil for fund-raising .
The gypsy industry emerged ; NGOs like Oxfam and CARE made big money as executors of projects .
But Roma hardly benefited , and moved to the West as soon as they were allowed to .
Pushed by the Council of Ministers to examine policies to improve Roma inclusion , the Commission admits the urgency of this in a document of 2 July .
It refers to the European Parliament resolution for a European framework strategy and it recognises its role as a coordinator - finally !
In the document , under the heading ' Lessons learned ' , I read ' For effective Roma inclusion , the full involvement of civil society and in particular Roma NGOs is a factor for success . '
Roma have become partners !
I hope we will soon see how this will be feasible within a structure of the Commission itself .
Meanwhile I strongly advise the Commission to study the OSCE action plan .
Why reinvent the wheel ?
Finally , I call upon the Commission to make clear to the Italian Government that fascist rule is in contradiction with EU law , and that Roma victims who lost their property should be compensated .
Once Italy exported fashion ; nowadays it exports racism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate gives me the opportunity to put some questions to the left , which has had the clever idea of using the European Parliament , for the umpteenth time , to pass judgment in a totally inappropriate , specious and premature manner on the application of an Italian act that is still at the preparatory stage .
First question , then : where was the left , which has governed in Italy for decades , when these illegal camps were set up and proliferated in conditions totally lacking in the most basic health and safety standards ?
I would also like to ask you if your silence over all these years does not bear you down , like a ball and chain , fashioned of indifference and hypocrisy , of looking the other way , when you obviously had no eyes - nor much political interest - to see that dozens of children were dying of cold or burns every year because of the lack of safety in these shanty towns .
Perhaps you are not even interested to know that in Rome , where nearly 7 000 minors live , millions of euros have been earmarked for schooling : wasted schooling , since last year only 25 % of these children regularly attended school .
Who knows whether you know or pretend not to know that this schooling was entrusted , almost as a monopoly , to a few associations that were motivated not so much by the best interests of minors as by the availability of public money .
I uphold the right of the Roma people to have a census , as happens regularly for all Italian citizens , because the census guarantees the right to health , social inclusion and integration into the school system .
I also uphold the right of the Roma community to identity checks .
Obviously there are no plans for any widespread measure : anyone whose papers are in order will not be checked .
However , a child who is not registered at birth or who has no recognisable identity , becomes an invisible child , easy prey for any kind of exploitation : organ trafficking , illegal adoption , sexual exploitation and under-age working .
This applies to all minors living in Italy : Italians , and EU and non-EU citizens alike .
Finally , a few words about the title of your oral questions .
Not only does the act make no mention of ethnic groups , but there are no plans for a specific database , especially not a Roma fingerprints database .
Better proposals are always welcome of course : we are open to constructive proposals .
However , we will not be lectured by anyone who year after year has failed to lift a finger to resolve a serious social emergency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it was exactly seventy years ago , on 14 July 1938 , that the fascist regime in Italy enacted the Decree on race , falling into line with the German race laws .
We know our history : more than 500 000 Roma were killed in the death camps .
Then too , it all began with a census .
In Italy we are witnessing a full-blown profiling of all Roma , including children , who are being fingerprinted , and including Community citizens and even Italian citizens , despite the fact that their details are already registered .
The questionnaire used in Naples , Mr Angelilli , contains questions about religion and ethnic origin and is very similar to the one used by the Vichy Republic under the Nazi occupation .
In Milan , they made a file on an old Roma , an Italian citizen , a survivor of deportation to the Nazi death camps .
What use will be made of these data ?
Now in the Italian Parliament , chairing the Committee for Children - in total indifference and silence - is Alessandra Mussolini , the Duce 's granddaughter , a coincidence that reinforces the symbolic link between the present and a past that we thought was definitively dead and buried in Italy and in Europe , yet is rearing its ugly head again today .
While history is not repeating itself , there is no doubt that the Italian Government has set in motion racist procedures that clearly run counter to Directives 2000 / 43 / EC and 2004 / 38 / EC .
I call on Parliament to approve this resolution , condemning the Italian Government , and on the Commission to initiate infringement proceedings against Italy as a matter of urgency .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there is no doubt : it is clear that the Italian far left now runs this Parliament in practice .
Following a bad practice that is now established , the parliamentarians of the far left and the Greens keep using the Strasbourg Chamber as a vehicle to attack the Italian Government .
Swept aside from the national political scene by last April 's popular vote , the Socialist and Liberal parties find a stage for amplifying their national lies .
Together they are attacking a legitimate government of a great and strongly pro-European Member State , chosen and supported by 60 % of Italians .
Then we are surprised at the results from Ireland !
All this business , Mr President , Commissioner Špidla , concerns matters falling within the national sphere , not the EU 's competence .
Yet the Italian Government has at all times provided the Commission with any explanations it has received .
I urge you , Commissioner , to pay a little less attention to the newspapers and more to the documents that the Italian Government officially forwards .
The acts do not relate to the Roma , nor to fingerprinting ; they are about non-EU citizens and travellers , some of whom have for some time been featuring in the Italian crime reports .
We need to be clear about people 's identity in order to allow them to have access to schools , social welfare , health care and housing .
The acts make no reference to ethnic origin , they are not acts of indefinite duration , they do not concern the whole national territory but relate to three specific cases only .
The serious problem of the lack of identity documents was raised even by the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe on 19-20 June .
The aim is to carry out identification surveys authorised and required in many States and throughout Europe for travel documents and residence permits , and includes descriptive , photographic , fingerprinting and anthropometric systems .
It has the support of the Italian judiciary , especially the part that concerns minors ; it is being implemented in cooperation with the Italian Red Cross , and so on .
I could go on , but to my fellow Member I would like to say that I would never have dreamed of talking of racism in relation to her country .
I would like to remind her that Italy has been exporting culture for the past 3 000 years and continues to do so , and that at the time an advanced civilisation was established in Italy , as we see today , people in many other countries were still living in primitive conditions .
Mr President , this is the fourth time in the last few months that we have spoken on the same issue .
The results are modest , as modest as is the attendance in this Chamber tonight .
This is , perhaps , a shocking thing per se and a matter of concern .
Roma people are a pan-European ethno-cultural community which does not have a nation state .
Roma were already present in Europe when the European nation states were established .
Those states kept them in misery , when not in slavery , or sent them to concentration camps .
The European Union enlargement was the last act of Roma liberation .
Roma are today European citizens .
Perhaps they are in absolute terms the truest European citizens because they are only Europeans .
Their cultural , social and economic integration is a European challenge .
Therefore we must communitarise the Roma policy .
A strategy which only makes recommendations to the states , leaving them the ultimate choice and the ultimate responsibilities , simply does not work .
On the other hand , what we are seeing today in Italy is the ugliest face of the dangerous phenomenon of the renationalisation of Europe .
It is the national populist expression of this phenomenon .
The Italians do indeed have the right not to be afraid , but for any Italian citizen the present racist policy of its government is most frightening .
Today fingerprints ; tomorrow forced work ; the day after tomorrow concentration camps - and then not just for Roma but for any other alliance .
We have asked the Commission to check the conformity of the Italian legislation with European Union standards .
Nothing has been done .
The checking was postponed in order to wait for the legislation to be adopted .
Now the situation is worse .
We must take action and use the instruments provided by the Treaties in order to stop these dangerous racial developments in Italy , thus discouraging similar approaches elsewhere .
We must not wait for another holocaust before we organise new referendums to support European integration .
Mr President , today we have yet another debate in Parliament on the way Italy deals with the Roma population .
This time the flavour of the month , proposed by the Italian Government , is no less than calling a state of emergency , taking a census of the Roma population , and fingerprinting them before expelling them .
Today I again find myself calling on the Commission and the Council to react .
Enough promises : now we want to see the Council and the Commission take concrete action to make Italy comply with EU laws and values .
We need an evaluation of the implementation of the EU Anti-Discrimination Directive as we are doing for the Free Movement Directive .
We must enforce the integrated approach and speed up the implementation of the EU Roma strategy .
We have all the instruments available but it seems that when it comes to defending civil liberties versus security there is a certain shyness in applying them .
It has been one year now since Italy started devising disproportionate and shocking security measures tainted with brown populism .
Now brown seems to be turning to black .
Are they really going to hunt Roma down in Italian streets ?
Will Europe continue watching as a silent accomplice ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a serious matter that for reasons to do purely with Italian politics we are unable to have a calm examination of the measures required .
It has been said that no state of emergency has been declared .
It seems to me in fact that the Prodi Government , by means of measures prepared by Minister Amato , had declared an emergency and the need to take measures relating to the Roma .
The present Italian Government has not done this , as it is merely carrying out a census .
This is what the letters say that have been submitted to and examined by the European Commission , which could do no more than acknowledge the truth of this , because political speculation is of one colour , while the truth has another .
It is more substantial .
The measures concern everyone .
Maybe someone here is pretending not to know , yet perhaps knowing the truth , that in the travellers ' camps there are minors who are phantoms : they have no identity - and is it not a human right to have an identity ?
They have no vaccinations , are unable to go to school , even if they wanted to , because they are prevented from doing so and instead are trafficked as we know only too well .
No database has been set up .
There are very clear and specific rules stating that no database may be used unless it complies with the rules on privacy .
This is not a record that anyone will have access to : the data are collected only in case of need .
When the judges took down the data in the minors courts , it was considered standard practice .
In the end , the Government wisely decided to have the act implemented by the Italian Red Cross .
It is not the SS who go into the camps , but the Italian Red Cross , known throughout the world for its competence and sensitivity in helping the marginalised and persecuted all over the world .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ethnic profiling of a population : that is basically what this proposal to fingerprint the Roma , including minors , is about .
This initiative of the Italian Government recalls dark times , and tragic policies that Europe has seen in the past and that we would have preferred to consign to the history books for ever .
It is a hateful act that violates human rights and the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights .
The Interior Minister demonstrates that he does not even know the European directives when he claims that the act is in line with Regulation ( EC ) No 380 / 2008 in requiring all non-EU citizens to be fingerprinted .
But the Roma who live in Italy , especially the minors , are almost all Italian or at least EU citizens .
So if the problem we wish to solve is the inhumane conditions in the camps , the children obliged to live with rats , as the Minister says , he should explain to us how fingerprinting can solve the problem , as even the Prefect of Rome has said that it is unnecessary .
If it is really concerned about minors ' living conditions , the Italian Government should take action to ensure proper health conditions in the camps , to foster social inclusion and integration , and to promote schooling and entry into working life .
Racial profiling of an ethnic minority , on the other hand , is liable to jeopardise the future of minors and compromise any prospect of integration and , paradoxically , to criminalise the victims .
The far left does not say what I am saying .
I finish by quoting Famiglia Cristiana : ' Today with digital fingerprints , the police state shows its harshest face to Roma children , who are Italian citizens after all .
Why , ' wonders the paper , ' is there not the same determination to fight real crime in vast areas of the country ?
Maybe because there is less political capital to be made from it ? '
( RO ) The situation of minority groups in Romania was one of the intensely debated subjects during the period of accession negotiations .
Regarding the Roma people , the Romanian authorities prepared an integration strategy approved and monitored by the European Commission .
This strategy comprises a series of actions , especially in the field of education and access to the labour market , entirely complying with the European standards .
As of 2004 , some of the Roma population has travelled to other European Union countries , according to the principle of free movement .
I do not contest that some of them have infringed the laws of the countries to which they travelled .
They must answer before the law for their actions .
Nevertheless , I believe that what has been requested from Romania should be requested from any other Member State from now on : coherent integration programmes based on the European principles .
These programmes should completely avoid discriminatory actions , such as the recent fingerprinting decision adopted by the Italian Government or force actions that could affect honest citizens .
This type of attitudes may create - and I am afraid that this has already happened - a negative , undeserved , image of other European Community citizens who live and work in Italy and whom the communities in which they live appreciate .
I request the French presidency to take into consideration all these aspects and include on its half-year agenda a real European policy for the integration of Roma people .
I request the Commission to present systematically information regarding the situation of the Roma , reflecting the concrete steps taken for integration , social inclusion , the ways in which the European funds have been used and the results achieved .
On this occasion , I also address the non-governmental organizations representing the Roma population and I request them to inform and encourage the citizens whose interests they defend , to use as efficiently as possible the instruments provided until present by the European Union and the Member States .
( BG ) Mr. President , Commissioner , the united action of different political groups in defence of human rights and dignity are an example of the maturity of our parliament .
I express regret that the EPP group did not join the common draft resolution , but it has the chance to support it by vote .
We cannot simply observe how lines considered insurmountable after World War II are crossed .
The Italian government plan to establish a database with biometric data for Roma is yet another provocative measure after Berlusconi 's return to power .
I would just like to recall his statements that immigrants are an army of evil , as well as the decision to criminalize illegal immigration .
It shows total failure to understand the problem and channelling efforts into an entirely erroneous direction .
This plan treats Roma in a way which , instead of supporting integration , actually destroys the opportunities for that and practically seeks solution in isolation and segregation , creates anti-Roma attitudes , increases the fears of the public .
And we all saw to what that leads .
Remember the recent events in Rome and Naples .
To try to put out a fire with gasoline means that one either intentionally wants a larger fire or that one is not aware of what one is doing .
Roma are the largest majority in Europe and probably the most discriminated one .
In most of the cases , Roma do not have access to adequate health care , public services , schools , work .
Dealing with these problems is an all-European challenge and to this day no country has succeeded alone .
Italy will not succeed either .
That is why the solution should be sought in cooperation between local and national authorities , with coordination and support at European level .
That is why it is necessary for the European Commission to develop a clearer and financially supported policy towards Roma .
This plan destroys fundamental principles of the European Union and stands in contradiction of Article 12 and Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
As a guardian of the Treaty , the European Commission should act uncompromisingly in the case of their violation by any member-state .
In conclusion I would like only to recall that the policy of Roma integration was one of the key issues by which the readiness of my country to become a member of the European Union was assessed .
I ask , Commissioner , how would you have reacted if Bulgaria had applied the Italian plan in respect to its Roma ?
And if today you declare the Italian policy acceptable , what do you think the effect from your position regarding immigration policy will be in Bulgaria ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I honestly would have preferred not to have witnessed this afternoon 's debate .
The belated about-turn by Minister Maroni , who is fanning the flames of racism in Italy while trying to put them out in Europe , like an amateur fireman facing an irritated Commissioner Barrot , is the only really grotesque situation that we are seeing at the moment in Europe .
In Italy , the Roma emergency is mainly against the Roma , Mrs Angelilli , in Rome , Naples and also Milan .
Of course , there is a widespread demand for security because the Government is faced with general delinquency , as in other European countries , and is not responding with adequate resources , manpower or policies for repressing and preventing social ills , from which so many Mafiosi and petty criminals draw their lifeblood .
We cannot tolerate that the post-electoral need to reassure the discontented fringes of the majority should compromise 60 years of constitutional freedom .
Europe cannot and must not tolerate this .
( Protests )
I am sorry , Mr Susta .
What is going on ?
In this House we do not allow any kind of intimidation of other Members .
Please leave the Chamber .
( IT ) Europe cannot and must not tolerate discrimination against people on account of their ethnicity .
That is why we in Europe , we in this Parliament that has been termed grotesque , must be vigilant to ensure that equality between citizens is guaranteed , perhaps even using the same means for everyone in the census already planned for next year , and guaranteeing especially for minors and the poor , regardless of their ethnicity , the right to education , health , dignity , that they are entitled to as human beings , never mind citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , human rights are indivisible .
Membership of an ethnic group cannot be grounds for discrimination any more than skin colour , sex , religion , sexual preference or anything else .
That is a fundamental achievement of our common system of European law .
However , part of the self-image and identity of this common system of law is that we take equality before the law seriously , and that means that we have general legislation on matters of social support , schooling , the labour market and fighting crime , and that we apply them - without discrimination .
Determining a person 's identity is a precondition for many of these policies .
Commissioner Špidla rightly referred to this legal aspect of what is sometimes called the ' Roma problem ' .
He also said that he does not want to do whatever the press calls for , but instead require the Italian Government to provide clarification .
That is the correct way to proceed .
As well as the legal side to all this , there is the human suffering .
Many Roma - and therefore many children - live in abject poverty , are not integrated and have little or no opportunity to get ahead in our society .
Help is indicated here .
In my home city , Graz , vigorous discussion about Roma begging , and a discussion with the Roma about how people can escape from this difficult situation or at least make the best of it , have been ongoing for years .
One of the solutions is for the citizens of Graz to finance jobs in Slovakia , in the countries that these Roma come from : in this way at least many children are saved from begging and from the street .
We have to do more - we shall do more !
There is one final problem concerning the Roma , and it relates to us .
It is a problem of politics .
This topic , these people and their suffering is potentially the stuff of politics , populist politics on the ground and - as our debate here also shows - sadly also of European populism .
( ES ) Mr President , the gypsies , who are one of the most ancient people groups in Europe , deserve the attention of the European Union , which they have not received up until now .
What is being applied in Italy at the moment is of course intolerable and we strongly reject it , as it is legislation based on race that criminalises a particular ethnic group .
However , we must make it clear that it is not enough to stop this practice as if by stopping what we are now criticising , we would be solving the problem .
No !
The fact is , and this is something that we need to condemn , that behind it there are serious social problems , which have been neglected for too long by some governments and ignored by the European Commission itself , which had the power to react to them .
We need a European policy , along with commitments , resources , initiatives and measures that match up to what we are dealing with .
The Commission needs to be proactive in terms of the social integration of the Roma people , of the gypsies .
There are positive examples in the whole of Europe ( in Spain , for example , in the field of education ) .
They do exist , but we still have problems to resolve .
We have all spent many hours talking about European citizenship , and it is time to realise that that citizenship applies to all , irrespective of race .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is being used as if it were the third chamber of the Italian national parliament , for a discussion based on inaccurate newspaper reports .
The Commission is still looking into the matter and will present a report on the Government 's initiative by the end of the month .
Meanwhile , the Italian Government has not infringed anyone 's rights , especially not those of minorities or children , and Minister Maroni has already stated and guaranteed several times that no database is being set up but rather that all the data will be processed in full compliance with personal data protection rules .
Moreover , the measure will be a temporary one and hence will be used for a very limited period only .
Minister Maroni has also confirmed that the census of travellers and minors living in the travellers ' camps is taking place in full compliance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and is aimed at carrying out schooling and integration programmes for children and adolescents , already provided for in the civil protection acts .
I very much regret that once again the various forces of the left should bring to the European Parliament a controversy that is entirely within the Italian sphere .
I am convinced that many things should have been done sooner .
The challenge is on .
The emergency is real and has been acknowledged by many Members who have spoken , but it was not acknowledged by the governments that preceded the Berlusconi administration , or by many large municipalities .
So , at the end of the month we will see the Commission 's report and we will then see how opportunistic the left 's position is .
Friends of the left , you started too early and did not do a very good job with the little information at your disposal .

Mr President , I am not Italian and I am not a lefty , so , when I am asked by Mr Zappalà and Mrs Angelilli to accept that the intentions of the Italian emergency decree are benign , just to make sure that the Roma community gets appropriate public services , I think I am entitled to beg to doubt this , given the populist and nasty political rhetoric that has surrounded this issue in recent weeks .
The fingerprinting of Roma people only is discriminatory and surely illegal - have we forgotten the history of Nazi and fascist racial persecution ?
I think Commissioner Špidla showed a reasonable degree of commitment to pursuing discriminatory treatment , and I hope he sees it through : he would redeem the Commission 's reputation from the example of Franco Frattini , who merely weeks ago was exhorting us to observe justice and equality and is now an apologist for prejudice .
We need a European Roma strategy with funds attached to improve the status , education and integration of Roma people , rather than marginalising and stigmatising them .
If we can have a common agricultural policy surely we can have a common policy for the Roma .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the modern human rights culture places more emphasis on being human than being a citizen .
It is a principle that requires foreigners , stateless persons and travellers to be treated as people equal to citizens as regards their basic human dignity , which requires a special solidarity towards the weakest , namely children in particular .
However , this sensitivity is not a valid excuse to turn the European Parliament into a stage to make the most absurd of accusations , namely racism , against a national government which declares - at least this is the context of the documents we are talking about - that it is taking charge not only of public order but also of the defence of children , with reference to some nomadic communities in situations of special emergency .
The answer to the questions submitted can be found simply by reading the acts adopted by the Italian Government , limited as has already been said to three regions out of twenty .
You may be surprised to learn that the words ' Roma ' and ' fingerprints ' are not in these documents .
It is not true , therefore , that there is express provision to register everyone of a particular race ; neither is it true that a military census regime is to be introduced .
The discretionary powers granted to the police commissioners must take account of the humanitarian and welfare profiles and be aimed - at least this is the declared intention - at human promotion , integration , especially of minors , with particular attention to schooling .
Of course there could also be reason to fear that the measures in question might be implemented with military or repressive means .
It is therefore right to hope , but in a spirit of close cooperation , that priority will be given to positive action and action for support , reception , integration , especially in relation to minors , notwithstanding the duty of every public institution to enforce the law .
It is unreasonable to expect more .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am sorry for what happened earlier but I certainly had no intention of intimidating my fellow Member , and I offer my apologies to her .
However , since she claimed that we did not know what we were talking about , I wanted to give an example of a registration card which I will read out here .
This is a registration card , not rumour : ' Police Commissioner for the emergency and settlements of travellers ' communities in the Campania Region : census , central office for milk , family , surname , forename , date of birth , religion , ethnic origin ' .
' Religion and ethnic origin ' means racism .
It runs counter to everything in Regulation ( EC ) No 2034 / 2004 , and when identification by fingerprinting is justified by reference to Regulation ( EC ) No 380 / 2008 , I would point out that that Regulation relates only to third-country nationals .
However , in the Italian Roma camps , three quarters of the Roma are Romanians and the others are Italian Roma and Sinti citizens .
We must safeguard the lives and futures of the Roma and their minors , especially those at risk of deviancy and abandonment , but not discredit or throw suspicion on a whole community , and avoid arousing anti-gypsy sentiment .
There is a very high risk of that in Italy .
( SK ) I should like to make just a short statement on the situation of the Roma which has been discussed here .
I come from a country , Slovakia , where we recently made the Roma language a codified language , a normal minority language , and where there is full access to health care and full access to education .
Whether Roma children attend school or take full advantage of all the opportunities is another matter .
Thanks to social security benefits , this minority is developing dynamically and it is one of the most dynamically developing minorities as regards numbers in Slovakia .
There are multi-million programmes for integration and the resolution of housing issues .
I believe that the Italian Government is in a similar situation and is seeking solidarity for the poor , children and adolescents and of course also wishes to maintain the public order needed to protect children and adolescents .
Of course , the matter of fingerprinting is something which , I believe , goes beyond the pale .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , much of what has been said is true , but much is also false .
There are three things we must hold to .
Firstly , randomly selecting groups of people in order to collect personal information about them is unlawful , both generally and under the Italian Constitution .
Secondly , this means that protective measures taken for children , such as Roma children , must be taken within the framework of the legislation in force in the European Union and in Italy .
Thirdly , Italy 's Minister for Foreign Affairs Franco Frattini phoned me an hour ago to tell me that he wants to indicate - at least to my group - that Minister for the Interior Roberto Maroni has met Commissioner Barrot in Cannes .
I know that a meeting with Mr Deprez , the Chair of the competent committee , also took place there .

By means of Mr Frattini 's phone call and of statements by Mr Maroni , the Italian Government has signified that it does not want to take any legislative measures that contravene European legal standards in any way .
Commissioner Špidla , I assume , therefore , that you will make contact with Commissioner Barrot when he returns from Cannes , and I would ask you please to report to Parliament immediately afterwards , because the Italian Government has apparently understood that the initiatives it has taken so far are not compatible with European law .
If it is now drawing the correct conclusions from that , I find this a very welcome development .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Chairman of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , this morning I happened to be in Cannes , where an Informal Justice and Home Affairs ( JHA ) Council meeting was taking place .
While I was there , I had the chance to discuss matters with Mr Marroni .
It was obvious that we did not agree , but this is not why I asked to speak .
I am speaking in response to statements made by some of my Italian fellow Members , who say that this is Italy 's business and no one else 's , and that we are making unfounded accusations against the Italian Government .
This is not true .
From the conversation I had with Mr Marroni , it emerged very clearly that the people targeted by the new instrument include Community nationals who should have freedom of movement ; this is my first point .
The second point is that the new instrument , while having the power to suspend the application of certain Italian laws , is not exempt from European law and European directives .
It is expressly provided in Italian law , which is why I asked Mr Marroni , ' Minister , would you be happy if a delegation from the European Parliament went to Italy to conduct a quiet appraisal of the situation , meet with all parties and report back to the European Parliament ? '
He had no objections and he agreed .
This means that trying to give credence to the story that this is only an Italian affair ...
I am sorry , but that is a bit much .
If all goes well , what are you afraid of ?
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not need long , it was just about Commissioner Špidla 's answer to our question .
I would like , if possible , because today I found him a little general , evasive and to a certain extent perhaps a little contradictory in his answer - I suppose he must have received some news that in part has been confirmed by the Members who spoke before me - I would like to ask you , Commissioner , if this is the case , to let us have that news and to allow us all to see it .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to remind you that public opinion in Italy is perfectly well aware of what is going on in the Roma camps .
The Roma camps and the Roma communities are illegal and immoral .
While among civilised Christian European peoples , women and children are regarded as people to be protected and defended , in the Roma communities they are often willingly subject to exploitation , and led into crime and prostitution .
The Italian Government therefore has the duty , even while awaiting these people 's expulsion , to take action to guarantee justice and protection for the women and children and , by means of the census , to prevent crime spreading to the whole community , and especially children being persecuted or being victims of paedophilia or led into crime .
Mr President , I think it is absolutely unacceptable to tolerate Nazi speeches in this House !
Ladies and gentlemen , as regards fingerprinting , concentrating on a single ethnic group , whether directly or indirectly , is quite clearly unacceptable in the eyes of European law .
The Data Protection Directive lays down some very strict rules and I think that it has emerged from the debate , which has been very wide-ranging and very complicated , that the situation is developing very rapidly .
I therefore of course accept the invitation of some Members of Parliament and , following discussion with my colleague Jacques Barrot , I shall recommend that he keeps Parliament directly informed of the latest developments in the situation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 10 July 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) When discussing about the control over an ethnic minority group belonging to the EU area , we undertake a great but necessary responsibility at the EU level .
This issue of fingerprinting an ethnic group falls under the competence of the European Parliament and we should firmly decide that the EU countries be subordinated to the European legislation in this field .
Why should the fingerprinting of the Roma ethnic group not lead to a decision regarding the fingerprinting of all the European citizens as well ?
Thus , we come to see the need for the technical and practical development of a European citizenship , materialized by a unique electronic European identity .
in writing . - ( RO ) The measure of fingerprinting the citizens of Roma origin does not comply either with the European legislation or with any other act guaranteeing human rights in Europe .
For supporting this measure , Directive 380 of 28 April 2008 was invoked , which provides for the possibility to fingerprint third country citizens .
Nevertheless , I emphasize the fact that this act refers only to countries that are not part of the European Union area ; therefore , the measure cannot be justified in this way .
Fundamentally , Directive 2004 / 38 guarantees the free movement of all EU Member States citizens , no matter their ethnic origin .
Consequently , the infringement proceeding can be initiated against Italy and the European Commission should inform about the illegal nature of the measure provided under the Italian ordinance for civil protection .
There are already positions of certain international institutions against this measure .
The Council of Europe has firmly condemned the fingerprinting initiative .
I think it is time for the European Parliament to take a stand and firmly respond to this situation .
in writing . - ( RO ) In the context of another debate in the European Parliament plenary on the situation of Roma in Italy , I would like to call attention to an aspect that I consider essential for the action of integrating the Roma communities .
I refer to education , a field that transcends borders , an essential aspect , if we take into consideration the nomadic nature of the Roma people .
The experience I have had in the educational field has proven the fact that education at an early age can change people 's mentalities , behaviour and attitudes .
In Italy , as well as in other European countries where Roma people live there need to be lifelong educational and learning programmes developed , which shall promote the specific habits , traditions and crafts of this ethnic group , in a manner that would make them proud of their membership in it .
From my point of view , the education of Roma people should represent a priority in the European Union , representing the democratic way to integrate this ethnic group and , primarily , the young people .
in writing . - ( RO ) The population of Roma origin , wherever they are in the EU Member States , must be treated with the respect that all the European citizens deserve .
The cost of the absence of action at European and national level as regards the economic , social and cultural integration of the Roma population has become ever more obvious .
It is time that the member States , the European Commission and Council adopt and implement concrete programmes for their insertion .
I firmly reject the action that the Italian Government has taken , namely to fingerprint people of Roma origin .
I request the European Parliament , Council and the European Commission to adopt a clear action to reject this measure of a racial nature and request its annulment by the Italian Government .
Common authorisation procedure for food additives , food enzymes and food flavourings - Food additives - Flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties - Food enzymes ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following recommendations for second reading on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety :
on the common authorisation procedure for food additives , food enzymes and food flavourings ( 16673 / 2 / 2007 - C6-0138 / 2008 - ( Rapporteur : Mrs Westlund ) ;
on food additives ( 16675 / 2 / 2007 - C6-0141 / 2008 - ( Rapporteur : Mrs Westlund ) ;
on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods and amending Council Regulations ( EEC ) No 1576 / 89 and ( EEC ) No 1601 / 91 , Regulation ( EC ) No 2232 / 96 and Directive 2000 / 13 / EC ( 16677 / 3 / 2007 - C6-0139 / 2008 - - ( Rapporteur : Mrs Drčar Murko ) ;


on food enzymes and amending Council Directive 83 / 417 / EEC , Council Regulation ( EC ) No 1493 / 1999 , Directive 2000 / 13 / EC , Council Directive 2001 / 112 / EC and Regulation ( EC ) No 258 / 97 , ( 16676 / 1 / 2007 - C6-0140 / 2008 - ( Rapporteur : Mrs Doyle ) .

rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I want to begin by thanking the Commission , Commissioner Vassiliou and her always helpful staff , the Slovenian Presidency , the Council of Ministers , my fellow rapporteurs , Avril Doyle and Mojca Drčar Murko , and of course the shadow rapporteurs from all the parties for excellent cooperation over the years we have worked on these matters .
I am glad that we have now settled on a compromise which brings simplification for the industry and at the same time strengthens consumer protection in a number of areas .
Previously , for example , allergy sufferers were not even mentioned in the legislation .
They will be if we approve the compromise tomorrow ; it will then be easier in future to take account of how allergy sufferers are affected by additives .
I am also proud that we from Parliament have secured three crucial changes to the new rules .
The first relates to so-called azo dyes .
These are found , for example , in soft drinks and sweets , despite the fact that it has been shown scientifically that certain azo dyes can render children hyperactive .
It was therefore important to me and to Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety to get these substances banned .
We did not succeed in this because the Member States are strongly opposed to both a ban and special labelling .
Despite this opposition we did at least get a commitment that food containing these azo dye substances would be accompanied by a clear warning text .
The second change relates to the environmental effect of additives .
An example of the potential of additives to affect the environment is the sweetener sucralose .
Sucralose has been found to pass straight through the body and is not treated in our sewage systems .
If the compromise is adopted , it will be clear that we have to take the environment into account when we make decisions on additives .
The third change relates to nanotechnology .
Under the compromise , if an additive which has already been approved is altered by nanotechnology , it must be counted as a new additive and must be subjected to a new approval procedure .
As regards the regulation on the common authorisation procedure , firstly I welcome the fact that we are now to get such a common procedure .
Secondly , it was important to ensure that EFSA is given sufficient time for its evaluations of various substances .
The Greens have tabled an amendment to ban azo dyes , which thus goes against the compromise with the Council on additives .
By doing so they put at risk all the improvements mentioned , including a special warning text for azo dyes .
I would like to have seen a ban , but it is not possible to get it accepted by the Council of Ministers .
I am therefore minded to vote against a ban , since otherwise we risk not getting either a ban or a warning text , which would really not be in the interests of children .
Finally I urge all Members here in the Chamber to support the compromise tomorrow and vote against all other amendments .
rapporteur . - Mr President , flavourings are defined as the addition of odour or taste to meals and are mostly a mixture of a large number of aromatic preparations .
The European Parliament insisted on amendments which it believed would be the basis for a balanced and enforceable regulation taking into account scientific and technological developments .
It is known that the Council and Parliament took a different stance on the issue of herbs and spices .
Parliament believed that it has not yet been proven beyond reasonable doubt that prepared food in which certain undesirable compounds are naturally present has the same toxicological potential as when they are tested in isolation .
Herbs and spices have been used since time immemorial without known adverse effects .
As the rapporteur , I was not seeking complete exemptions for herbs and spices from the limits set out in Annex III .
Appropriate exemptions were requested to be granted only where scientific evidence is not complete and , therefore , possibly the situation is not yet mature enough to be harmonised at European level .
The second-reading compromise consisted , therefore , of appropriate guarantees given for some herbs and spices that exempted them from limits set out in Annex III .
This helps to maintain the limits as proposed by the Council : 4 out of 11 purified active principles and in respect of some 30 out of 40 food categories .
This is the most that could have been achieved and I , therefore , ask the European Parliament to vote for it .
As an individual MEP , however , I still have some concerns that I hope the Commission will take care of during the implementation stage .
The compromise in the footnote does not apply when herbs and spices appear together with flavourings in compound food .
The unintended effect of this could be that the food industry would move away from herbs and spices because extracts and flavourings are much easier to standardise .
Due to the varying levels of active principles in herbs and spices , food manufacturers would have to vary their recipes on a batch-by-batch basis , and this would be very costly .
The herbs and spices industry could even be wiped off the European market .
This must not happen because European consumers do not want such a limitation on their right to choose as well as for reasons of public health .
The consumer would in this case paradoxically consume higher levels of flavourings , which , according to the so-called purification hierarchy , are closer to the undesirable active principles than herbs and spices .
I would appreciate it if the Commissioner could reassure me that possible negative developments will be properly monitored and stopped if necessary .
Mr President , I am going to speak on behalf of the rapporteur , Mrs Doyle .
I apologise on her behalf that she is unable to be here , as she is currently on the way to Strasbourg .
Mrs Doyle welcomes the compromise with the Council on this Food Improvement Agents package , which is so essential .
Enzymes are added to food to perform a wide range of technological functions in the manufacture , processing , preparation , treatment , packaging , transport or storage of such food .
They are most commonly used in baking , beer making , cheese production and the production of alcohol and other beverages .
They play an increasingly important role in food production and can be used as an alternative to chemicals in improving the texture , appearance , nutritional value and taste of food .
They also help in certain production processes .
This proposal is , in fact , the first specific European Union legislation aimed at food enzymes .
There are currently no harmonised rules at Community level controlling the use of enzymes , which not only creates obstacles to trade and a lack of legal certainty , but also different consumer protection standards in the 27 Member States .
Only three Member States have their own risk assessment procedures : the United Kingdom , France and Denmark .
Under the new legislation , which we will vote on tomorrow , harmonised rules will be established in the European Union for assessing , approving and controlling the enzymes used in food .
The rapporteur thinks that all of this is very important , as food safety will be improved and consumer choice will be increased , and consumers will have more information on what is in the food they eat .
She particularly welcomes the fact that the Council has agreed that the two authorisation procedures for any substance produced from genetically modified organisms may be carried out simultaneously , thus avoiding double authorisation of these products .
She is also very pleased that the Council has agreed to Parliament 's wish to have a single legal basis , namely Article 95 of the EC Treaty , on the internal market , in accordance with the amendment tabled by her at first reading .
It is also particularly helpful for the industry that the Council has provided a one-year transition period from the date of entry into force of the proposed Regulation , during which time food that is legally marketed or labelled that year may be sold up until a minimum storage life or the expiry date .
To conclude , the rapporteur would like to thank her colleagues for their support and cooperation , in particular Mrs Westlund and Mrs Drčar Murko and all the shadow rapporteurs , as well as the Slovenian Presidency , for their hard work .
We have successfully coordinated four proposals for legislation and we will therefore improve the single market in this field , which promotes European innovation and competitiveness , at the same time ensuring a high level of food safety and environmental protection .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would first like to thank Parliament , and especially the three rapporteurs - Mrs Drčar Murko , Mrs Doyle and Mrs Westlund - for the considerable efforts they have made and the time they devoted to this important legislative package .
In particular , I appreciate the efforts to keep the proposals together as a package , therefore achieving a consistent approach on these similar cases .
This legislative package makes an important contribution to the Commission 's simplification programme .
It provides for harmonisation within the respective fields and also promotes consistency between the three areas .
The common authorisation procedure will establish a system for assessing and authorising additives , enzymes and flavourings in a consistent manner .
This is of major importance for consumer safety and the competitiveness of the food industry .
The operators would , in particular , benefit fully from the advantage of a centralised , transparent and time-limited procedure .
In relation to the proposal on food additives , the regulation of such substances is important to ensure the safety of food and also to ensure that the consumer is not misled .
These criteria , along with the evidence of technological need for the use of food additives , are important prerequisites for the use of food additives .
Although these principles are established in the current legislation , I welcome the changes and additional clarifications that have been introduced to strengthen these important aspects .
It is also a requirement that the legislation is kept up to date in the light of scientific and technological developments .
In this regard I can , in particular , support the amendments which have been introduced following EFSA 's evaluation of the results of the Southampton study .
These will require labelling of the possible adverse effects on children 's behaviour which has been associated with certain food colours .
This labelling will ensure that adequate information is provided to consumers who may wish to avoid these colours .
During the discussions on this proposal , there has also been some concern about the possible allergenic effects of some food colours which are commonly referred to as ' azo colours ' .
Specific procedures and legislation apply to potentially allergenic foods and I can , therefore , state very clearly that the Commission will request the European Food Safety Authority to explicitly address the potential allergenic effects of azo colours during the re-evaluation of these food additives .
If necessary as a result of this re-evaluation the Commission will consider taking appropriate action to amend Annex III , part A , to European Parliament and Council Directive 2000 / 13 / EC to provide adequate information to consumers suffering from food allergies .
In relation to enzymes , enzymes have been used traditionally in the production of foods such as bread , cheese , beer and wine .
Enzymes can improve the texture , the appearance and the nutritional value of food , and can be used as alternatives to chemical-based technology .
Up until now , the legislation on food enzymes has not been fully harmonised in the EU and , as a consequence , this lack of harmonisation has created barriers to trade and hindered growth in this field .
The successful conclusion of this proposed regulation will bridge the current regulatory gap by creating harmonised rules for the scientific evaluation , authorisation and use of food enzymes in the Community .
I would like to welcome the changes that strengthen the precautionary principle and the criterion of not misleading the consumer , which are underlying principles of the proposed regulation .
I also welcome the change that clarifies further the interplay between the regulation on enzymes and the GM food and feed legislation .
In relation to flavourings , the proposal offers high protection for the consumer while allowing the industry to continue to develop new flavourings and new applications , in order to respond to the increasing consumer demand for more convenient foods .
The framework will enable the European industry to maintain and consolidate its leading position in the global market .
Flavourings are used to impart or modify odour and / or taste of foods for the benefit of the consumer .
The use of flavourings should not mislead the consumer about the nature or quality of his or her food .
The new rules for the labelling of flavourings will indeed better inform the consumer and help to avoid the consumer being mislead .
During the discussions , there were differences of view on the need to include spices and herbs in the scope of the regulation .
The Commission welcomes the agreement that has been found which will improve consumer protection and at the same time takes into the account possible impact on traditional uses .
I have listened carefully to Mrs Drčar Murko and I wish to assure her and also confirm that from the entry into force of the regulation the Commission will carefully monitor , based on information provided by the Member States , the development in the respective use of spices and herbs and natural flavouring extracts .
With this information , and taking into account the latest scientific developments with respect to toxicological concern and consumer exposure , it will , if appropriate , propose amendments to Annex III , part B.

Mr President , Commissioner , I am now speaking on my own behalf , and I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur , Mrs Drčar Murko , on the hard work that she has done , and the other shadow rapporteurs as well as the Slovenian Presidency and the Commission , for being prepared to negotiate in order to reach an agreement at second reading on this report .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs for the other reports in the package , Mrs Westlund and Mrs Doyle , as well as the shadow rapporteurs , for their help and collaboration in seeking solutions to the horizontal problems raised by these proposals .
The most controversial subject that has been raised in this proposal on flavourings , from the start of the debate , has been the biologically active principles that are naturally present in herbs and spices , which posed a major problem for herb and spice producers , as they found that they were unable to comply with the requirements of the proposal , given the special nature of their products : different harvesting locations , times of the year in which they were harvested , eating habits in the various countries , etc .
Regarding this aspect , I would like to say that what the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats has been aiming for since the start has been consumer protection .
I therefore think that it is positive that an agreement has been reached with the Council and the Commission that the maximum levels shall not apply to certain substances where a compound food contains no added flavourings and the only food ingredients with flavouring properties which have been added are fresh , dried or frozen herbs and spices .
To conclude , I would like to welcome the fact that these proposals for legislation on the Food Improvement Agents package are going to be voted on tomorrow , because not only will they bring the legislation up to date but it will also be possible to assess the risks of marketing flavourings , which will provide a great deal of protection for European consumers .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , and on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her work , for trying to find a consensus with the shadow rapporteurs and for the efforts made to try to reach the desired agreement between the parties .
The proposal for a Regulation on flavourings aims to clarify and update the rules on the use of flavourings and food ingredients with flavouring properties taking into account technological and scientific progress in the area of flavouring , developments in food legislation in the European Union and , at the same time , human health protection requirements .
The Regulation lays down the general conditions for the use of flavourings or food ingredients with flavouring properties , it includes a clear definition of flavourings , general rules for their use , rules on labelling and maximum levels for substances that pose a risk to human health .
The compromise reached in this second reading process is the result of cooperation between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
Several meetings have been held , the more controversial points have been negotiated and there have been concessions from all sides .
The agreement nevertheless reflects the principles of various amendments put forward by Parliament , which take into account two key objectives : informing consumers and protecting their interests , as well as protecting public health .
Flavourings and flavouring substances must be safe and their use should not mislead consumers .
In this context , the new legislation lays down maximum levels for certain substances in flavourings and food ingredients with flavouring properties that are potentially toxic and of risk to human health , taking the European Food Safety Authority 's scientific opinions into consideration .
These maximum levels do not apply to three substances : estragole , safrole and methyleugenol , when present in compound foods to which no flavourings have been added and only food ingredients with flavouring properties in the form of herbs and / or spices have been added .
Nevertheless , this exception shall be reviewed should scientific evidence come to light proving that their consumption carries health risks .
The notion of natural is still confusing for consumers but the new proposal for labelling natural flavourings does correspond more effectively to consumers ' expectations as use of the term natural is limited to flavourings obtained from natural flavouring substances where at least 95 % of the flavouring component must be obtained from the natural source referred to .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , as regards the regulation on additives , my group welcomed the proposal to modernise and harmonise European legislation and supported the rapporteur Mrs Westlund in her efforts to secure sustainable protection of consumers and their health , in particular the vulnerable groups of the population .
It is a fact of life that food manufacturers respond to the growing demand by steady development of new products , and their diversification is achieved mostly by adding additives .
The legislation on foods should be proportionate and balanced while serving public health and guaranteeing a level playing field for food producers .
This principle is simple , but obviously there are many interpretations of it .
Where can we achieve a substantial gain in terms of public health but at the same time not hamper the technological development of European food production ?
We agreed on sound amendments I think - aiming to safeguard the interests of consumers , in particular with exact labelling - but we wanted to contribute to raising consumer awareness too .
I am convinced that informed , attentive consumers can influence very much the production of prepared food in the European Union .
We supported the amendments aimed at strengthening the Commission 's proposal , particularly on three points : involvement in the authorisation procedure of additives , transparency of the authorisation procedure and specific conditions for authorisation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , our voters want good , safe food they can trust .
Will they get it with these regulations ?
Parliament has succeeded in getting some improvements accepted .
What I am personally very pleased about is that nanotechnology , in particular , will finally be regulated and can no longer be slipped onto the market without proper vetting .
The inclusion of the environment as one of the criteria for the approval of additives is an improvement .
The fact that the presence of azo dyes must be shown on labels is an improvement .
So there are things to be glad about .
Moreover , on the point of flavourings , Parliament has succeeded in ensuring that naturally flavoured products will not be completely disadvantaged in favour of the products of the artificial flavourings industry .
Despite this , I am surprised that the Council goes against the wishes of its voters .
How can our governments actively oppose a text which says that additives must not mislead consumers into thinking that a food contains ingredients other than those it actually does ?
How can they actively oppose that ?
The ministers actively oppose the notion that there must be a special reason for using dyes in otherwise colourless substances .
The Council of Ministers actively opposed a ban on azo dyes .
They actively opposed a requirement that product labels must show that pesticides used as preservatives are included , so that the consumers would be aware of the fact .
I think that if we approve the proposal for the Greens for a ban on azo dyes in products for children , we shall force the Council out into the open to defend its position in the public debate .
After all , it is easy for the Council to stick to its position on such matters when it negotiates with us behind closed doors , but what government will stand up and approve additives which we know lead to hyperactivity in children and which we have good reason to believe gives rise to allergies in children ?
I wonder whether the Commission could not go straight for a ban .
Dyes are after all hardly essential and irreplaceable additives .
Besides , there are dyes other than azo dyes .
If we insist on applying the precautionary principle , as soon as EFSA has shown that there are allergy risks and a heightened risk of allergy , then all we have to do is to ban it .
After that , we no longer need to discuss azo dyes .
I should like to start by expressing my sincere thanks to the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation on the devil of a job this has been .
The end result may not be entirely as I should have liked , but I believe it represents the best that could be achieved in these political conditions .
As I see it , two things take precedence in all these dossiers : maximum consumer protection and complete transparency .
As far as I am concerned , economic interests are entirely secondary to these two key concepts .
Maximum consumer protection means systematic application of the precautionary principle .
If it is not known with 100 % certainty that something is safe , market authorisation should not be granted .
Misleading the consumer at the time of purchase must also be prevented at all costs .
Maximum transparency means that we do not yield to pressure from food multinationals to keep their formulae and production methods secret .
Consumers have a right to know exactly what is in their food and the conditions under which it has been produced .
Assessing the four reports in the light of these two principles , I note that , even though they are not always perfect , they represent a clear improvement on the original proposals .
They benefit consumer protection and transparency , and therefore I shall be supporting the compromises .
It is a shame we were not able to also regulate GM labelling directly .
I should like to add one more thing by way of conclusion .
I think it most extraordinary that , in new proposals such as novel foods , the Commission is launching the uniform procedure even before this has Parliament 's approval .
This does not strike me as showing very great respect for European democracy , to put it mildly .
( SK ) I should first of all like to mention the work of Mrs Doyle and to thank her for her attempt to produce a balanced document , intended mainly to protect citizens ' health .
Food enzymes are contained in many products consumed every day at every level of society , such as rolls and bread .
It is therefore very important to monitor their production .
It is also very important to ensure that they are harmless to health and to harmonise such control throughout the European Union .
It is very important to gain the confidence of citizens of the European Union in the preparation of European directives , especially in a period when Europe is being shaken by the scandal of ' rotting cheese recycling ' .
In order to prevent another such situation , we must concentrate not only on the preparation of a directive , but above all on monitoring its implementation in the various Member States .
Since we know that up to 80 % of food enzymes are manufactured by four companies , I think that quality control of production should not be a problem .
Production methods , however , may become a problem and I therefore believe that Mrs Doyle 's report is right to draw attention to this key problem .
( FR ) Mr President , at a time when yet another food scandal is erupting in some EU Member States , even if it is doubtless due to fraud on a massive scale , it is no wonder that the consumer is questioning and expressing doubts regarding anything that might seem ' artificial ' .
The Europe that offers protection also guarantees consumer safety and public health .
Food additives , flavourings and enzymes play an important role in the manufacture of our food .
This is why we need clear , harmonised rules regarding the safety , authorisation and sale of these substances in order to protect consumers and above all increase public confidence in the food produced using these substances .
It is important , therefore , that the rules are based on reliable scientific opinion .
We also need to fill the legal void that has always existed at European level when it comes to enzymes , which are used in the manufacture of bread or dairy produce , for example .
I am delighted to see that additional safeguards have therefore been introduced to ensure transparency through clear and more comprehensible labelling .
This is particularly important where these products are also said to be ' natural ' .
A key aspect of the draft legislation lies in the introduction of a single common authorisation procedure for food additives , flavourings and enzymes , with a safety assessment carried out by the European Food Safety Authority for all of these , which are certainly being used increasingly in the food industry .
Of course , Parliament will be watching to see that these substances are monitored .
Under no circumstances should food additives endanger the health of consumers or mislead them , because it is absolutely essential that we guarantee consumer protection and food safety while at the same time maintaining the innovativeness and competitiveness of the food industry .
Mr President , I should like to talk to the Commissioner about one of the reports on food additives , and in particularly about the food colourings known as azo dyes .
I am extremely pleased that we have some very good news : from now on they will have to be labelled on all food products .
I want to congratulate Åsa Westlund , who has worked very hard to get this .
When she started out on this work , nobody was suggesting there could be such progress , and yet we have got progress .
It is a real improvement on the status quo .
But I do not think it goes far enough .
You will be aware I am sure of the study by Southampton University last Autumn which shows a link between the behaviour of children who are fed a cocktail of different sweets and soft drinks and azo dyes .
It is a very serious study ; it was published in The Lancet .
It is peer-reviewed and it is so serious that the United Kingdom , through its Standards Agency , has now called for a ban on these colourings in food products .
Many companies in Europe are voting with their feet and are actually phasing them out voluntarily .
The single market is failing on this issue already .
It is quite well known that these products have no dietary value , and there are natural flavourings available .
I saw something in one of our newspapers asking : ' Do we need an end to Smarties ? ' ( these are very brightly coloured sweets ) , but there are perfectly good natural alternatives to those colourings available .
We do not need to have these colourings .
We welcome what has happened today but hope you will keep working with the European Food Safety Authority to speed up its work on reviewing these substances .
I do not think people in Europe want these artificial colourings , and I think we should be looking more at what people need to have in their food , not what companies want to add .
I hope you will push the EFSA to work more quickly and to get a resolution to this problem .
Mr President , I wish to speak about the food enzymes proposal on which I was a shadow rapporteur .
In that respect I would like to offer my congratulations to Mrs Doyle - and I hope she gets here safely from Ireland tonight - for an excellent report .
I also wish to express my thanks for the very good cooperation afforded to the shadow rapporteurs , a cooperation which was always conducted in a spirit of understanding , an effective exchange of political as well as adequate scientific wisdom .
This cooperation was good enough to produce a much-desired compromise which has widespread support across the political groups of this House , and which I believe contains many eminently sensible parameters which will strengthen the piece of legislation under consideration , and will make it much more effective and more easily applicable .
With this compromise package in mind , I think that the objective of the proposed regulation - which , as is well known , is to harmonise legislation controlling the use of enzymes in food processing in the EU , with the primary aim of protecting human health but also secondarily to promote fair trade and competition - will be very largely achieved .
We are particularly pleased that the precautionary principle , which is held in sacred regard not just by my group of MEPs but by the large majority of MEPs in Parliament in general , features prominently in this report , and this should make European consumers feel that much is being done to secure the protection of their health as regards enzymes in food .
Additionally , special emphasis is placed on guaranteeing that the information given to the consumer is precise and useful .
As expected , the issue of GMO involvement has been an area of some controversy .
However , a sufficient compromise has been reached .
In concluding , I wish to say that this is a good report and my group will strongly support it .
Mr President , we talk a great deal here about protecting children .
Evidence abounds to suggest that artificial flavourings and supplements are detrimental to the health of children on many counts .
Firstly , we can consider the 435 % increase we have seen in the rates of children with autism in the last 15 years and the rates of ADHD , which currently affects 3-5 % of children .
Then we can consider the symptoms attributed to flavourings , of which there are so many , but let us take as an example MSG , which is found in children 's sweets , drinks , snacks and dinners .
There are 92 symptoms , but among them are hyperactivity and mood irregularities .
As a mother myself , my primary concern in food is safety and transparency .
I feel that we are seriously compromising children and their ability to learn when we allow cocktails of colourings , preservatives and additives into their food .
Children need good fresh food , grown as locally and naturally as possible .
Therefore , let us really begin to protect children .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks to all the rapporteurs , especially Mrs Drčar Murko and Mrs Ayuso , for their constructive cooperation and trust .
The Food Improvement Agents package will lead to uniform , harmonised rules on the use of additives becoming applicable throughout Europe .
In the future , too , when additives , enzymes and flavourings are used in food , there will be a high level of consumer health protection - which is the way it should be .
The package adapts the current legislation to the technical and scientific developments in the area of food additives .
Where there is a scientific basis that indicates health risks , threshold values must be set so as to prevent all hazards .
However , we must not become hysterical or incite unwarranted panic .
There are food additives such as konjac , a humectant , and beeswax , an anti-caking agent , which have been used in the preparation of food and drink for centuries .
In addition , certain stone fruits such as cherries , peaches and apricots naturally contain small amounts of hydrocyanic acid , yet we have been eating these fruits for thousands of years without any problems .
Similarly , some herbs and spices naturally contain substances which , in high concentrations , can cause health problems .
Yet we have been using herbs and spices such as basil , tarragon and nutmeg in the preparation of our food since the year dot without any problems , but only in small , safe doses , of course .
I therefore welcome the compromise in the new Regulation on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods .
Where there is no cause for concern , exceptions are made to the threshold values , although only when exclusively fresh or dried herbs are used for food preparation .
This way , we promote the use of natural products and natural ingredients , so that recipes with thousands of years of history , such as Italian pesto , will be maintained into the future .
( HU ) I welcome the fact that , after the REACH regulation and the regulation of pesticides , we are turning to the regulation of the use of frequently condemned chemical substances and food additives .
The effect of the increasing number of scandals has been that European public opinion is thinking about these substances , which are suspicious for consumers , with ever greater concern .
An average person consumes approximately 3 kg of the roughly 2 600 different additives with E numbers each year , without being clear about their harmful effects .
There have already been some well-founded accusations relating to a significant proportion of additives .
Additives create a false impression in consumers and give foods vivid , bright colours that are not found in nature .
In addition to this health risk , they also cause psychological damage to children , accustoming them to unnatural foods when it is precisely a return to natural foods that we must make more popular among young people and adults alike .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Westlund on her report ; what she has managed to achieve is that , under the new legislation , additives that are harmful to human health and to the environment may no longer be used in future .
It is important that hazardous substances like the azo food colourings that cause hyperactivity in childhood at least be marked on foods , although I also agree with my fellow Members that we should have adopted a ban .
I do , however , regret the fact that , despite the recommendation of the Parliament , additives containing GMOs need not be marked strictly .
A large part of the European population does not want to consume foods containing GMOs , and according to the polls 90 % of them expect to know whether or not a given food contains GMOs .
We cannot neglect our citizens ' healthy concern and right to information to this extent .
By the way , a few of my colleagues and I are protesting in a statement that the Commission wants to introduce new GMOs to Europe by stealth .
We must protect everyone 's right to natural , healthy foods .

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we owe our thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Westlund .
She worked with a great deal of commitment and very cooperatively .
I welcome this , and it means we can also be happy with the result .
I believe that the new Regulation on food additives has achieved a satisfactory result for both manufacturers and consumers .
The current legislation on food additives is almost 20 years old .
With the transfer of new directives and two decisions into two regulations , the text has been simplified and updated in accordance with new technological and scientific developments .
It is a very good achievement to have a positive list that clearly states which substances can be used .
I believe this is a good thing , and I am also in agreement with the use of the comitology procedure when new substances have to be added .
We should act quickly here .
I am satisfied with the rules on GM products .
We need both authorisation procedures - there will be assessments - and so I do not see why we should not proceed accordingly here , as some Members have said .
Granted , thinking about azo dyes - the results of the Southampton study are indeed available - we also have to take note of the fact that the European Food Safety Authority has developed a study that has published an initial verdict in which it clearly states that the Southampton University study is not infallible .
It is not 100 % reliable .
We must not become hysterical and start striking out because a procedure has been instituted .
The licensing procedure via the Food Safety Authority is excellent , but what bothers me - and here I should like to ask the Commission to have a rethink - is that we are giving the Food Safety Authority nine months for authorisation or risk analysis .
The Commission also needs nine months to take a risk management decision .
A business must therefore wait 18 months before receiving permission to place the product on the market .
This is a long way from bureaucracy reduction , so we really ought to put some thought into how it could be done more quickly .
( PL ) Mr President , the entry into force of new regulations concerning the principles for the use of artificial additives ( enzymes , flavourings ) in food products not only unifies legislation in this area , but also supports consumer health protection and facilitates food sales within the European Union .
Harmonisation of enzyme use in the EU has the backing of the European food industry , which is concerned not only with the unification of principles , but also , above all , that consumers do not lose faith in their products .
As one such consumer , I would like to be sure that the food I buy is safe .
The hundreds of artificial additives and the thousands of flavourings added to foods must not harm our health .
Quality requirements must ensure that safety is fully maintained .
It is important for foods to retain their natural character to the greatest possible extent .
( PL ) Mr President , there are three issues in this debate to which I would like to draw attention .
Firstly , support must be given to the European Commission in its efforts to unify the procedures for issuing permits to use food additives - enzymes and flavourings - in the European Union , and particularly to increase the transparency of these procedures .
Secondly , the procedures for issuing permits must be directed towards maximum protection of consumer health .
The consumer should be convinced that both European and national institutions are on the alert to provide him or her with maximum health protection and that , thanks to their functioning , he or she is getting healthy food that is as natural and safe as it can be .
Thirdly and finally , the principles of fully informing the consumer about the additives contained in food must be observed .
Information on this subject must be clearly marked on the pack , and also drawn up in language that is clear and comprehensible to the consumer .
( DE ) Mr President , I should very much like you to support the proposals put forward by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , because we want a ban on azo dyes .
European consumer policy is characterised by safety , but also by the application of the precautionary principle .
Without a ban , the precautionary principle would be trampled underfoot .
Furthermore , there is technically no need for azo dyes because alternatives exist .
This therefore amounts to deceiving the consumer ; it leads people to believe something that is not really the case .
I would urge you again to take this alarming study seriously and really apply the precautionary principle - which , after all , we have enshrined in European law .
I would also urge you once more to also close the labelling gap for additives manufactured using genetic technology - we are currently trying to close the labelling gap for GM products of animal origin , and it would be downright ludicrous if we did not take this opportunity .
What we need is a well-rounded authorisation procedure that takes due account of the precautionary principle but has no labelling gaps , and in which consumers have the right to make a free choice about what they eat .
( SK ) I appreciate the efforts of the rapporteur to achieve greater transparency in the process of approving food additives , flavourings and enzymes and to strengthen consumer protection , especially for those who are allergic to certain substances .
Food additives should be constantly monitored and reassessed on the basis of changing conditions of use and new scientific information .
Many of them are manufactured from chemicals and , in long-term use , may have a negative effect on health .
It is therefore very important to mark the products in a way which is clear and obvious to consumers .
This involves consumer products and there may be consequences associated with inadequate or no product marking .
I should also like to stress my view that , for example , genetically modified foodstuffs should be clearly and legibly marked , as in Canada for example where they consume canola or rape seed oil .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I welcome the successful conclusion of this package of proposals and hope that Parliament will support the compromise proposal tomorrow .
More importantly , this package will strengthen consumer protection and food safety .
I particularly note some of the difficult issues which have been discussed and appreciate the desire to find a compromise .
In this respect I would like to express once again my thanks to the three rapporteurs for their hard work and for the very good cooperation that they had with the Commission in order to reach this compromise proposal .
In particular , I would like to thank Mrs Westlund for her efforts in relation to the colourings .
She knows very well that the Commission supported her proposals .
We have reached a compromise proposal , but I assure you we will not remain complacent .
We have already asked the EFSA to re-evaluate all their authorised additives , and if the EFSA 's opinion indicates that direction we will not be hesitant in applying new rules regarding these additives .
I would like to say this in general as well because , as I said , the EFSA re-evaluates all the substances .
If at any time for any substance the position of the EFSA indicates that there is any risk to human health , we will not hesitate in making use of our prerogative and push for an amendment .
There was a question regarding enzymes and the GM Food and Feed Regulation .
If an enzyme is extracted from a genetically-modified organism which is covered by Regulation ( EC ) No 1829 / 2003 on genetically modified food and feed , its GM origin will be indicated on the label .
However , the scope of Regulation ( EC ) No 1829 / 2003 excludes food , including enzymes produced by fermentation using genetically-modified micro-organisms .
The purpose of this proposal is to catch these enzymes for the safety assessment authorisation , but not for specific GM labelling .
Mention was made regarding the period of nine months given to the Commission to make its risk management .
The proposal provides for nine months for the Commission to present a proposal to the standing committee for an opinion .
This is the maximum time proposed and of course in many cases proposals for updating the list will be presented in a shorter time .
However , there are cases , notably for food additives , where nine months will be necessary for the Commission to consult Member States and all relevant stakeholders on various matters .
This can only be achieved if adequate time is available for the stakeholders to respond , so I think that a maximum of nine months is not an exaggerated period .
I would like to end by thanking you once again for your cooperation and I look forward to the adoption of the proposal at tomorrow 's sitting .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , let me once again thank Commissioner Vassiliou for her support on azo dyes .
We really appreciate that this was one of the first matters you had to attend to when you took office .
It showed that you are ready to take up your responsibility in the Commission , not just to follow EFSA 's recommendations , but also to make it your business to undertake an independent assessment of all aspects associated with the legislation .
You have really shown that you are ready to take up that responsibility .
I think that the debate here this evening has made it clear that the European Parliament will of course also be closely following EFSA 's review of the allergenic effects of azo dyes and will be looking closely at the Commission 's position on that assessment .
It goes without saying that we shall also examine other studies which will be presented on the effects of azo dyes on children 's behaviour , for example , in order possibly to return to this matter later .
Finally I would also like to say that it is one thing to draft legislation , but the legislation also has to be applied .
I think that many consumers share my view that we are in fact often tricked in the shops today .
I would like the Member States - and I think this is a justifiable demand - to tighten up their inspection systems and , together with the Commission , ensure that the legislation we have to vote on tomorrow is actually followed and complied with , so that consumers will not get home , for example , with a pot of fruit yoghurt believing it to contain a lot of fruit or berries , only to discover that it contains nothing but dyes when they read the package carefully .
( FR ) Mr President , the food industry uses 300 food additives , 2 600 natural or artificial flavourings , plus traditional diastases or enzymes and also azo dyes .
This is why our laws need to be harmonised . Since it concerns goose and duck liver , preserved truffles or snails , we can clearly understand why there are a dozen laws , plus the four regulations tabled for a common authorisation procedure with the list of products .
Yes , these additives increase the risk of sometimes serious allergies , but perhaps the precautionary principle has been taken too far here .
In 2008 , a year when the global food crisis is rampant , when , Mr President , Italy is selling us dioxin-contaminated mozzarella , a business worth EUR 10 million , I find it hard to believe that the 15 million unemployed in Europe should be particularly worried by enzymes and flavourings , although it is typical of the European Union to concern itself with the infinitely small in an infinitely large world .
Mr President , in addition to what has already been said today , I wish to reiterate that flavourings have considerable market value .
When harmonising national rules aiming at securing the microbiological safety of prepared food , European legislators must be aware of the sensibility of the area and try to avoid distortions of the market .
I hope that this will be the case , and I thank Commissioner Vassiliou for the statement she made today .
We have come a long way with the Council and the Commission by clearing up contentious areas , excluding as many ambiguities as possible and reaching the second-reading agreement .
Apart from food safety and the strengthening of the internal market , other consumer interests also needed to be taken into account .
Prominent among them was the desire for food to be as natural as possible .
It is not necessarily the case that all flavourings are safe from a toxicological point of view and , at the same time , beneficial to consumers .
Parliament wanted to highlight in particular the right of the consumer to choose .
In the procedure for approval of flavourings , ' reasonable technological need ' , for example , tackles other European strategies , such as the fight against obesity , since the addition of excessively potent flavourings can mask the poor quality of prepared food .
I think that this has been made clear enough in the recitals .
Concluding , I wish to thank all who were involved in the work on the food improvement agents package and helped us to make practicable and enforceable regulations .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I would like first of all to congratulate the rapporteurs on these reports on food additives , enzymes and flavouring .
It is essential that our Parliament pays the utmost attention to these regulations as they have a huge impact on public health and we ought therefore to ensure that the amendments we supported on first reading are included in the final text .
Protecting consumers ' interests and ensuring food security must remain here our first priorities .
We should - in line respect to the precautionary principle - avoid the use of certain compounds for which we lack reliable data and independent scientific assessment on their consequences on consumers ' health .
We ought indeed to ensure quality and safe food for our citizens and should therefore develop efficient methodologies to list and monitor the effects on consumers ' health of potentially dangerous compounds .
Moreover , we have to increase transparency in the production , the labelling and the authorisation procedures as well as harmonising regulations on additives , enzymes and flavouring to set up a coherent regulatory package ensuring better consumer protection and public health .
While ensuring consumer 's protection the real challenge is to actually regain consumers ' confidence and ensure a quality food production for their benefit .
Corrigendum ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Formation of political groups ( amendment of Rule 29 ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendment of Rule 29 of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure - Formation of political groups .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I rise to present to you a report from the Committee on Constitutional Affairs concerning our Rules , where we have examined the question of the threshold - the minimum threshold necessary to constitute a political group in our Parliament .
All parliaments that have a system of political groups have , of course , a minimum threshold .
Normally one does not allow a single Member or two Members to create a political group ; it is necessary always to define what that threshold should be .
And , as our Parliament continues to grow , it is logical that we pause to reflect and think what should be , in the next Parliament , the threshold for creating a political group .
We have looked at this in detail in the Constitutional Committee , and the committee 's opinions were fairly evenly divided .
There was a majority of one vote against raising the threshold when we looked at it in committee , although , of course , this matter is now before us again in the House .
We also looked at groups that exist already but fall slightly below the threshold when one or two members leave and whether it is right that such groups should automatically and immediately cease to exist or whether in some circumstances we should allow such groups to continue to exist .
Here the committee approved my proposal , which was based on a suggestion of Mr Bonde , the former co-leader of the IND / DEM Group , who pointed out to me what difficulties he , as a group leader , could face , leading a group that was just above the threshold , when one , two or three Members might threaten to leave the group unless they got their way on something or other , thereby effectively blackmailing the group .
On his suggestion , the committee wisely adopted my proposal that , once a group has existed for a certain period of time , we should help the smaller groups by allowing them in such circumstances to have the possibility - we will allow the President of Parliament to have some discretion on this - to continue to exist , even if they fall below the threshold , for a limited period of time until the next constitutive session of Parliament and provided , of course , they still have a reasonable minimum membership : we cannot allow a group to exist with two or three members .
The idea was to find a balance between a reasonable threshold and to give something to the smaller groups , to make sure they are not facing that dire prospect of virtual blackmail by a minority of Members within their group who could pull the plug at any moment .
As I said , the committee hesitated on raising the threshold - it was a majority of one .
But that issue is now before us again .
At the moment , if you look around the parliaments of the world , we have one of the lowest thresholds that exist for allowing the constitution of a political group .
Just 2.5 % of our membership can create a political group .
When you remember that constituting a group gives those Members extra resources above what ordinary Members get as a Member - extra resources as a group in terms of finance from the taxpayer , in terms of staff and in terms of procedural privileges - it should give us cause to reflect .
Do we want to give such huge resources to what could frankly be a very small and unrepresentative number of Members - 2.55 % ?
My own thought was that this was a very low threshold : it comprises the danger that we give such resources to very small , possibly unrepresentative and even extreme groups .
Some people have pointed to the extreme right potentially being able to create a group with such a small threshold if ever they won enough seats .
That is something that it is legitimate to ask . What is the minimum threshold ?
My proposal had been to raise it to 4 % , which is still rather low if you compare it to national parliaments across our Union , still below what is the norm in many national parliaments , but perhaps a reasonable balance .
I understand now that some smaller groups that initially opposed this idea are on board for a compromise between the 30 Members that I proposed and the 20 Members of our current rule ; they would be happy to go along with a compromise of 25 .
Changing hats and speaking as the coordinator of my group instead of rapporteur , I can tell colleagues that my group is willing to go along with such a compromise - if indeed it is a compromise - and we can all unite around that .
If it is not a compromise - if that is not acceptable - then my group will continue to support the proposal for 30 instead of for 25 .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , my party and I are among those who have supported the creation of a Parliament with stronger cohesion in the event that we raise the threshold that has been a condition for forming a group up to now and at present .
I say that it will lead to a stronger Parliament because I feel that it is in the interests of the European Parliament that there should be tighter cohesion between political parties and political groups and among political groups in the Parliament , and that the political parties will be even stronger at European level .
As Mr Corbett has said just now , we have faced the fact that this measure is currently very low , and it is low if we compare it with other parliaments .
It is for this very reason that , on behalf of the European People 's Party , we have supported this recommendation , and we have supported the view that this limit should be flexible , although I would like to add that , with regard to flexibility , I would have authorised the creation of such groups for a shorter period .
Naturally , however , we have seen that not everyone has shared this opinion , and I am convinced that , in a European Parliament where there are very many different colours , very many kinds of political party and very many kinds of political persuasion , efforts must always be made to reach some sort of consensus on this matter .
I was therefore pleased that there was an opportunity for a compromise within the framework of which we can set the limit for creating political parties higher than at present but lower than planned .
One last note : I am convinced that , with regard to both the number of countries and the minimum number of political groups , it would be better to apply not a specific number but a percentage ratio .
In this case , these ratios would not need to be changed constantly , and particularly in view of the fact that , now that the Lisbon Treaty has become uncertain , we do not know for certain what the numbers will be for the next Parliament in 2009 , and whether we will have to amend this rule again .
Thank you for your attention ; the People 's Party supports the recommendation .
Mr President , I should especially like to thank Mr Corbett for preparing these reports .
It was clear from the outset not only that agreement would be reached on this subject but also that the subject would be hotly debated .
However , we must note that this Parliament has grown from 626 to 785 Members and , should the new Treaty come into force , the figure will very likely be 751 .
Obviously we shall have to adapt the rules by which we work .
We have a Working Party on Parliamentary Reform , which is addressing many areas in which Parliament must move forward , and cannot remain standing still as was the case many years ago .
The status quo is always the easiest option .
Defending the acquis communautaire means not having to modernise or change , but in this case it is obvious that the matter of the size of the political groups in Parliament must now be dealt with .
Mr Corbett has already said that we have one of the lowest thresholds compared to the national parliaments of the world .
That could be an aim - why not ?
Alternatively , like Mr Szájer , one could say : ' It seems to me that we need more coherence in this Parliament .
We are no longer an advisory assembly ; we are now a legislative body .
We make laws for 500 million people , and a certain degree of coherence is needed to do that . '
Therefore , I would wish for truly political groups in this Parliament and not just technical groups - groups that get together only because of the money and do not really have anything in common politically .
The proposal that was on the table of moving from 20 to 30 would still have been moderate and not at all excessive .
Well , it did not make it past the committee stage , and one has to be willing to make compromises .
Even though the latest suggestion is 25 , that is still progress and the smallest acceptable next step .
We have 10 political families registered - from the far right to the far left .
At the next European elections , citizens will have a broad selection of political families to choose from in order to say what kind of Europe they want .
Therefore , I have no doubts about undertaking this reform .
The diversity of this Parliament will be retained , but perhaps we shall contribute a little to improving its coherence , and that is the point of the exercise .
Thank you , therefore , to Mr Corbett .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the committee , as we know , tries to be consensual , but tonight the consensus has broken apart , and I have a strong objection to Mr Corbett 's proposal on the grounds of both principle and practice .

I simply cannot accept that the existence of seven groups inside Parliament creates a particular problem of efficiency .
Lessons drawn from national parliaments can only take us so far .
Here we should reflect on the more complex and wider spread of public opinion from 27 countries .
In fact , it is critical at this sensitive phase of integration that all sorts of minority opinions can organise themselves professionally to express themselves in an articulate fashion .
Groups contribute to , and do not impede , the work of the assembly .
Mr Corbett 's proposal and also the compromise would have the effect of closing the UEN and the IND / DEM Groups .
Now frequently , perhaps always , I disagree with the opinions of those groups , but they have a perfect right to express their opinions and they certainly represent a specific strand of public opinion .
Should we close them , their members will be forced to join a larger group , thereby complicating affairs and increasing the incoherence of those groups .
Alternatively , they will swell the ranks of the non-inscrits .
So , to conclude , and in the interests of efficiency , pluralism , coherence , fairness and liberalism , please support the committee 's position and reject the amendments .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , sometimes - not often - it happens that the large groups in this House have something on their conscience .
Sometimes you can tell , because a matter is dealt with late on a Monday night in Strasbourg .
That is the case today because , otherwise , the public might be interested in why a report that was rejected by the committee should come to this plenary session .
The public might also be interested to know why a rapporteur , on behalf of the committee , is presenting a report that does not contain what he is presenting and that was not rejected by one vote - as Mr Corbett claimed - but by the majority of the committee , and for good reason .
The public might be interested to hear that you are tabling this motion in plenary in violation of the Rules of Procedure - that is , with a view not to voting on the motion but to doing something entirely different .
I have been a Member of Parliament since 1990 .
During this time I have become familiar with a consensus regarding parliamentary culture , and that is that the majority in a parliament does not use its voice , its weight , to create privileges and powerful positions for itself in the Rules of Procedure at the expense of other groups .
That is what you have done here .
You have violated this taboo .
What is being said here is fraudulent .
The major groups simply want to prevent smaller groups from forming and to put pressure on Members from all countries in the Union to join their groups , to prevent the parts of their own groups that are breaking away from doing so .
They want to adjust the Rules of Procedure according to their taste and to tailor-make their groups .
In doing that , they are disregarding another taboo , which is that it is unacceptable to use formal tricks to get rid of existing groups , such as the Independence / Democracy Group .
That is out of the question in a political democracy .
This is becoming a tradition , Mr Corbett .
I have researched the last two years , and we shall discuss this before the elections : over the last two years , the larger groups in this Chamber have tabled a series of amendments to the Rules of Procedure , all of which have the same outcome : strengthening the power of the larger groups , diminishing diversity , reducing the rights of individual Members and curtailing the rights of the smaller groups .
If that is the way to make Parliament popular , to respond to the crisis of confidence amongst citizens and to prepare ourselves for the electoral campaigns next year , then you will find us to be vigorous opponents on this issue , and proponents of a democratic Parliament .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , pluralism and respect for differences are an important value for the European Parliament .
This is because the European Union as such must reflect unity in diversity .
For this reason , too , the European Parliament should not only respect but actually support the diversity of colours on the political map , the multiplicity of its strands .
While properly defending the rights of ethnic , religious and sexual minorities , we must also bear political minorities in mind .
Any manipulation of or politically motivated changes to the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament will overtly restrict Parliament 's role as the body representing peoples and communities from all over the European Union .
We do not see any need to tamper with those points in the Rules of Procedure that concern the number of countries whose representatives constitute a political group .
The current state of affairs is fine .
The European Parliament as it is today is working effectively , and as the Chinese proverb goes , ' leave well enough alone ' .
Six states are adequate in this context and should not be replaced by seven .
All this will do is cause an increase in the number of non-attached Members , who often differ from one another completely and to an extreme .
Such a change , like the raising of the threshold needed to form a political group to 30 , could in fact impact on pluralism , freedom of opinion , the representativeness of European institutions and our credibility as European Parliament representatives .
Such changes will not create an image of authority for the European Parliament in an election year , which I think is particularly important in view of the turnout at these elections .
These changes should not enter into force either in 2009 or at any time , and I am saying this as representative of a group that would manage perfectly well even if these changes were to be introduced .
Mr President , let us face facts .
The history of European integration , its dominant ideological currents , practices inherited from half a century of close cooperation within the Commission , the Council and Parliament - all this has resulted in a sort of Christian Democratic-Social Democratic condominium within the European institutions .
I am not passing judgement here ; I am simply stating a fact .
In this Parliament , the qualified majority necessary for the adoption of any legislative text at codecision means a constant search for consensus between the two main groups , which further marginalises the expression of differences and divergences .
The question is therefore simple : do we want to exacerbate this tendency to avoid conflict by tightening the conditions imposed for the formation of political groups , on the eve of elections that will see the number of MEPs per country decrease , therefore further penalising minority groups , particularly in the least populated countries ?
How credible would these professions of faith in favour of pluralism be then ?
The quality of the democratic debate will not be improved by swelling the ranks of non-attached members .
This is why my group is unanimously in favour of maintaining the current rules on the formation of political groups , even though our opinions differ when it comes to the refusal of the two main groups to accommodate our request concerning the procedures to follow : acknowledge the disagreement or accept a compromise .
The majority of my group - including me - has now spoken out in favour of the compromise in a sole bid to help perpetuate pluralist expression within this Parliament , yet with the utmost respect for those who think differently , because at the end of the day we share the same principles .
These principles have a name , and that name is democracy .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the debate we are currently holding is surreal .
Indeed , it is every bit as absurd as a Kafkaesque trial .
I shall have to run through the course of events to explain why I permit myself this comparison , as I realise it is rather crude .
On 27 May a meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs considered a draft report that sought to make it more difficult to form political groups .
Mr Corbett , the rapporteur for the report , wanted to raise the number of members from 20 to 30 , and at the same time require that the group represent a quarter of the countries as against a fifth up to then .
This draft report was rejected , which in any other context would mean the report being taken off the agenda .
Instead , however , the committee chair , Mr Leinen , allowed the committee to continue voting on amendments to the original text of the report - and this despite there being no report to amend !
This manoeuvre made it possible to keep alive a report that was in fact dead .
All the rules and customary procedures may have been violated , but this does not seem to worry Mr Corbett , flanked by the committee chair .
We need to ask why .
After all , in 2004 the threshold was raised on the grounds that the European Parliament now consisted of 25 countries instead of 15 .
Two more countries have joined since then , but this does not justify amending the rules so drastically .
They say that , in many cases , the threshold is higher in national parliaments , but what they forget to say is that the European Parliament has an additional restriction - a geographical restriction .
To my knowledge , no such restriction exists in any national parliament .
Why , then , this drastic amendment of the rules on the formation of political groups ?
It most closely resembles an unholy alliance between the two major groups in Parliament to create a two-party system .
Indeed , if I were paranoid , I would say that it resembled an unholy alliance with a sinister ulterior motive , one consisting in making it very difficult to create political groups belonging to the opposition ; groups such as the one to which I myself belong .
Parliament has no right to judge political opinions .
Only the voters have such a right .
Members elected in the course of lawful democratic elections are legitimate participants in the political process .
They have every right to play on this ground , and it is not for either the Socialist Group in the European Parliament or the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to make it difficult for them to exercise their mandate .
I would recommend that all Members vote against amendments to non-existent reports .
This would be my recommendation both today and in the future .
This is quite simply going too far if we ever want to be taken seriously as a legislative assembly .

( NL ) The rapporteur has actually said himself what this report is about : it is about the European Parliament further intensifying its role as a kind of representative of eurocratic one-dimensional thinking , and doing away with the modicum of freedom enjoyed by the smaller political groups .
Parliament 's role is to serve the European mandarins and no longer to represent the political diversity among our peoples .
What an undemocratic farce your Europe is turning into !
The famous Amendment 6 on parliamentary questions is also yet another curtailment of our rights .
In addition , we read that this rule is being introduced because the European Commission - and I quote - ' has [ ... ] strongly complained about the number of such questions and the administrative workload answering them imposes on its services . '
However , I think it is more likely to be MEPs who feel the need to complain strongly about the dreadful way in which many European Commissioners barely answer our written questions , namely without getting to the point , incompletely and sometimes with a barely disguised refusal to provide us with the correct information .
We would do better to incorporate a disciplinary procedure for Commissioners instead of once again making it difficult for MEPs to do the job they are paid to do .
Mr President , this debate is about the nuts and bolts of Parliament , and it is our duty to ask if the proposals about groups are practical .
It was certainly with practicalities in mind , faced with the basic requirement of 30 Members , that I submitted my amendment - I think it was my amendment , Mr Corbett - which enabled the President of Parliament , with the agreement of the Conference of Presidents , to allow a group to continue its work for a limited period if it fell below that particular threshold .
In committee it was generally agreed this was a good idea to avoid a group being held hostage by a Member threatening to leave and thereby instantly disbanding such a group .
That is why I am somewhat attracted by this new compromise which has been proposed for a limit of 25 Members .
It does seem to me to be a sensible idea , which would alleviate one of the difficulties I was referring to when I prepared my amendment .
We must always remember , however , that we were elected to represent the views and interests of our electorate as a whole .
It is a fact that our European electoral spectrum spans an ever-wider variety of opinion , which is good for democracy .
It is not just the number of Members which increases in this Parliament ; it is also the diversity of views which they bring with them .
If we are successfully to fulfil our parliamentary mandate , we must have the opportunity to fully mirror the views of our national electorates .
A small group in the European Parliament here may well represent a large body of opinion in Member States .
We need to be able to work constructively as a Parliament and also , most importantly , in line with the wishes of the people that we represent , however that is formulated in the disposition and composition of our groups .
So , whilst I welcome this possible compromise , I welcome a sensible and pragmatic approach to this matter .
I hope that we do not allow ourselves to fall into the trap of assuming that fewer groups necessarily means more democracy .


( BG ) Mr. President , colleagues , I think that the motion in the report of Mr. Corbett deserves attention and , in my opinion , comes just on time , since actually with its adoption we do not threaten any of the currently existing groups in the European Parliament .
I am in support of a more effectively functioning Parliament in the next mandate from 2009 to 2014 .
We have discussed the meaning of these changes repeatedly and limitation of the opportunities of Members elected to the European parliament to express their opinion has never been discussed .
But since our Parliament is a large Parliament , maybe , as we say the largest democratically elected parliament in the world , its essence of European Parliament is held precisely by the parliamentary groups , by the political groups that represent not the nations of the elected Members who participate in them , but represent the political trends which unite the Members .
This is also the meaning of the great power , opportunities which both the political groups and their leaders have in the activity of our Parliament .
That is why I think that now , too , should we blunder in the direction of blaming Socialists or Christian Democrats of being undemocratic , we will not be right .
Quite the contrary , I think that in this way we shall provide the opportunity for a much clearer profile of the political groups which manage to form and actually operate in the next mandate of the European Parliament .
Of course , I also think that it is easy to speak in the name of a political group which is not threatened with failure to come up with the necessary number of Members in the next parliament .
I think that in any case the groups that exist today will be able to continue to exist over the next mandate .
In addition , our presence here , in this Parliament , is largely due to the power of the political parties we represent .
We should not consider the one in isolation from the other .
That is why we should not think , either , that the political life of Europe unconditionally revolves here , in Parliament , and depends on the two political groups , nor should we forget the parties we represent .
And in this sense I suggest that we really move toward the suggested compromise and support the motion of Mr. Corbett .

Mr President , this Parliament frequently talks about openness , transparency and democracy , but does not always display it .


In this instance , the rapporteur , Mr Corbett , has been very open and transparent about what he seeks to achieve : he wants to make it harder for small groups to form and function ; he wants to deny them the resources and privileges they are currently entitled to , which enables them to represent the will of those who elected them .
Mr Corbett wants to put political groups that he does not approve of out of business if he possibly can .
This is totally undemocratic .
Why should not the will of European electors be expressed in political groups , formed by those they elect , however small those groups may be .
Why not ?
Because Mr Corbett does not think they should be allowed to !
These rules , if adopted , would , for example , put my own - the Independence and Democracy Group - out of business .
The IND / DEM Group was , of course , formed to oppose the European Constitution , and we have been very successful , having spent money on the ' no ' campaigns in the French , Dutch and , most recently , Irish , referendums .
That is why Mr Corbett and other Europhiles want to try to put us , and any group like us elected after 2009 , out of action if they can .
His totally undemocratic credentials are transparent for all to see .
( PT ) Mr President , Parliament needs to interpret Democracy in a democratic fashion .
This means that the Rules of Procedure should not be taken in isolation ; rather they must be interpreted in the light of the moral basis for suffrage and the principle of representation as signifying self-legislation and citizens ' autonomy .
Drawing some points from this principle , I should like to say the following : from my point of view , the amendment Mr Corbett has proposed is correct in principle , but the reason why a group that falls below the minimum threshold necessary during a parliamentary term must continue to exist lies especially in the fact that voters ' democratic choices are also nearly always made taking account of the EP political group that candidates belong to .
Voters are not indifferent to whether a candidate is elected to sit on the benches of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament or of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
This being the case , I believe that this amendment , rather than containing a discretionary power for the President of Parliament , should contain a binding power , rather than a permission , a duty , and the period for continuation of the group can only , from a democratic point of view , be exactly the period of a parliamentary term .
Otherwise we would be completely subverting the principles of freedom that make up what we are .
My second remark concerns the temptation to copy what the national parliaments do .
National parliaments really do act as models for us , but in this case we need to copy them cum grano salis , with caution , as the proliferation of groups in European democracy can make up for the lack of representativity that hurls Europe from one crisis to another .
Proliferation here may make up for the persistent divorce between European citizens and those who represent them .
Additionally , the more plurality there is , the more evident the struggle and intense politicking that normally lead to our consensuses will become , as systematic consensuses are not free from controversy here either .
Having many groups can help Parliament politicise bureaucratic Europe , because a Democracy is a Democracy and not an Order .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we should not direct any additional financial support towards Members and representatives who argue against democracy at the European level .
Mr President , it is very simple to recognise the agenda of those who are pressing for an increase in the qualifying size of political groups in this House .
It is quite patently a blatant attempt to squeeze out the smaller groups , who are more often than not more likely to be less enthusiastic - indeed likely to be quite questioning of the precious European project .
Mr Corbett is effectively looking for the steamroller approach in politics .
That is why he is leading the charge tonight in defiance of the committee 's democratic decision .
It has been well said that you can judge a parliament , its worth and its integrity by how it treats it minorities .
By the standards of this report , Mr Corbett would have this Parliament regress further into the undemocratic cabal of large groups , where decisions are not taken in this House but are taken in deals between the two main parties .
( DA ) Mr President , I should like to dispute a most fundamental premise , namely the premise that dividing ourselves into fewer groups gives us more political coherence .
I could go and join the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , but that would not increase the group 's political coherence .
Equally , I could join the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , but I can guarantee that it would not increase that group 's political coherence - by no means .
This proposal is not about political coherence , therefore .
It is about creating large numbers of independents who do not wish to belong to any of the groups that have a sufficient mandate to become established .
This , in turn , will mean millions of Europeans not being represented by a political group in the European Parliament .
I do not regard that as a good development .
Above all , I do not regard it as a democratic development .
Lastly , I should like to ask Mr Corbett - now we are on the subject of political coherence - whether the proposal he is presenting here has the unanimous support of the PSE Group , or whether there is in fact deep disagreement on the proposal within the group .


( ES ) Mr President , this debate tonight is interesting , because I have listened to the rapporteur saying his report was inspired by Mr Bonde who , like Rodrigo Díaz de Vivar , El Cid Campeador , won battles after his death .

Then along came Mrs Dahl , who has replaced Mr Bonde , and compared the rapporteur with Kafka , which is certainly a favourable comparison ; that is to say , Mrs Dahl should not be so much in agreement with Mr Bonde .

Then Mr Batten confessed to us that the parliamentary group 's money has been used to interfere in national referendums .
I imagine that the Quaestors will have something to say about that , Mr Batten , because it is forbidden to use that money for such things .
What about Mr Voggenhuber ?
What can I say about Mr Voggenhuber , who is from the country that so marvellously organised Euro 2008 , which we Spaniards are so pleased about ?
Mr Voggenhuber has accused us of manipulation and criticised the compromise amendment , and it turns out that he signed it .


In short , Mr President , in the interests of consistency , and being in agreement with what Mr Szájer , Mr Kirkhope , Mrs Esteves and Mr Rübig said , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is going to vote in favour .
( DE ) Mr President , ' Let us risk a bold democracy ' was the title of a major article I wrote in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Sonntagszeitung two weeks ago .
It was people from social democratic circles who came to me and said ' exactly ! ' - and not only because the title echoed a famous statement by the great Willy Brandt .
What are you doing here now , Mr Corbett and Mr Leinen ?
You are turning the thing on its head , and you know what you are doing .
I remember well what you said when the last increase in the access barrier for groups was discussed .
I remember Mr Leinen from the days when he was still an upstanding democrat .
He should pull back and think carefully about which cause he is serving .
With what you are doing here , you are destroying democracy .
You are looking after the Haiders and Straches , the extreme left , people cut from a cloth that makes even Mr Lafontaine look middle of the road .
Shame on you !
Stop and think , and withdraw this amendment for Europe 's sake .
Do not be the ' anti-Europeans ' .
( FR ) Mr President , there is a single market , there is a single currency , so it would make complete sense for there to be a single group , which in any case would be much more efficient .
There would be a single speaker and things would be shared more easily .
Mr Corbett is proposing to raise the threshold to 30 .
This seems highly dangerous , because the Irish , the French and the Dutch are able to send 31 and this would cause us real problems .
Personally I think that we need a floating threshold .
It would remain at 30 , but the President would be able to use his or her discretion to increase it to 35 or 40 if MEPs who want to join are not fully enrolled .
During the Fourth Republic , a practice known as ' unseating ' was used .
At the start of the legislature , the majority would decide whether to renew the office of a particular Member of Parliament or to unseat him or her .
This method is perfect .
Mr Corbett could be in charge , for example , of unseating anyone who did not share his views .
We could also adjust it : those who did not share Mr Corbett 's views would pay their salary to him or his group .
Anyway , none of this matters ; the Irish have proved that you can adopt whatever rules you want .
It no longer works like that here , Mr Corbett .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I have enjoyed this debate .
I have enjoyed the wild allegations that have been made about this change , that raising the threshold for creating a group in this Parliament from 20 to 25 , or perhaps 30 , would somehow be the end of democracy and the end of pluralism in Parliament .
What utter nonsense !
This is a modest proposal .
Even 30 would be well below the threshold that exists in most national parliaments , which we all find perfectly democratic .
So why not here ?
The idea that this is an attack on existing groups is nonsense .
I was glad the UEN Group spokesman recognised his group would not be affected .
I was surprised that Mr Batten thought his group would be affected .
I thought he was expecting to gain seats in the next European elections .
I rather think they will lose seats and that they will be annihilated so that they would not even meet the existing thresholds . So they will not be affected one way or the other in any case .
As for the idea that this is targeting a particular viewpoint such as Eurosceptics , as was alleged , also what nonsense !
Eurosceptics have always been represented in this Parliament , well represented , have almost always had a political group and I am sure that will continue to be the case .
They represent a small but significant strand of public opinion and of course they should take part in our debates .
That will not be changed by this proposal .
This proposal is not a radical one .
It is a sensible , common-sense , practical proposal to examine what is a sensible level in an expanded Parliament to have a threshold for creating a political group .
It is not a radical proposal , it does not target anybody .
I am glad that many groups are seeing the sense of compromising between the two views on this matter and finding a compromise around the modest proposal of 25 .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday 9 July 2008 .
The work of the Plenary and initiative reports ( amendment of the Rules of Procedure ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Corbett , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on amendment of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure in light of the proposals by the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform concerning the work of the Plenary and initiative reports .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I hope colleagues will bear with me yet again taking the floor on a question of changes to the Rules of Procedure , which always seem to be on a Monday night .
As colleagues will be aware , Parliament has had a working group very ably chaired by our colleague Dagmar Roth-Behrendt which has been looking into improving the workings of our Parliament .
We have shifted from being a talking shop to a co-legislature .
Whatever happens to the Lisbon Treaty , that change has already essentially taken place .
It is therefore rational and logical that we should look at how we organise our work .
One major aspect of that is inevitably and rightly a shift away from own-initiative reports from committees , with no legislative impact , to focussing more on legislation .
That is the first and perhaps most important part of the package of proposals that I tabled before you today .
The working group 's proposals , of course , were wide-ranging : only a few of them require adjustment to our Rules , but this is one of them .
The idea here is that we should differentiate between the types and significance of own-initiative reports .
Some , of course , will continue to merit full discussion and voting in plenary ; but perhaps some really do not .
We should not turn this Chamber into a drafting committee that rewrites , paragraph by paragraph , a detailed own-initiative report on a specialist subject by a specialist committee .
I would have liked to have gone further and ask : Why do such reports , that type of own-initiative report , not stand in their own right as a report of the committee ?
Reports of the House of Lords , that we all talk about , are reports of House of Lords ' committees : they are not voted on and rewritten by the chamber of the House of Lords , they stand on their own merits - often very good , deep , analytical reports .
They do not use the Lords as a revising chamber , paragraph by paragraph .
We should not do that either for this type of own-initiative report .
With this rule change , that will be possible ; we will , of course - that is the compromise - still put the report to the chamber to give a yes or no to it .
We will also allow groups that disagree with it to table an alternative motion for a resolution , but we will not start voting for hours on hours , paragraph by paragraph , to redraft a committee report of that sort .
That , then , I think is a first , very important change .
Another change , of a completely different sort , is to liven up our debates and the way we conduct our speaking time .
The role of the rapporteur will be enhanced : the rapporteur will present the committee 's report which is in response to the Commission 's legislative proposal , immediately stating what the Parliament thinks of the Commission proposal , and will wrap up the debate at the end , perhaps answering the points that different Members have made in the way that I attempted to do just now in our previous debate .
That is something that should liven up our debates and is well worthwhile .
There is , however , one detail which seems to have attracted a lot of comments : this is the suggestion that we should have guidelines for written parliamentary questions in the same way that we already have guidelines for questions at Question Time to the other institutions .
I do not see why there is such a drama about this .
It is not an attempt to create a power of censorship over questions .
It is simply saying in the guidelines that written parliamentary questions , just like questions for Question Time , should be within the remit of the institution that is being asked to answer the question .
That seems logical and rational , yet it is missing at the moment .
The fact that it is missing has allowed one Member of this House to table over a thousand parliamentary written questions on subjects that have nothing whatsoever to do with the European Union .
That has clogged up the system , making all the rest of us wait longer for our answers , costing a fortune because all such questions have to be translated into every language , circulated around the Commissioners for a collective reply and collegiate reply , and is a waste of our time and resources .
Simply laying down guidelines to say that questions have to be within the remit of the European Union and of the institutions seems to be sensible .
And who should judge this ?
Under my proposal , our President , the President of Parliament , should judge this .
If we lay down guidelines , we will not leave it to the Commission to judge that and say : ' No , we are not answering that question or this question ' .
No , we will decide - and that is something to protect Members and should be a guarantee for Members .
I am surprised that some Members who are not here tonight have seen fit to attack that in an e-mail to all Members of Parliament .
These are modest , sensible proposals coming out of the working group of vice-presidents and Dagmar Roth-Behrendt , and I commend them to the House .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , a reformed Parliament that promotes a livelier political debate on the EU is in the interests of all our citizens and also all the institutions .
We need a more dynamic discussion on European affairs and I belong to those deeply convinced that debate is the lifeblood of any functioning democracy .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to congratulate Mr Corbett on his report concerning the work of the plenary and the presentation of written questions .
Over the years there have been an increasing number of parliamentary questions .
In 2007 , over 6 700 questions were answered by the Commission .
That represents an increase of 12 % compared to 2006 and almost 35 % compared to 2005 , and the trend so far this year suggests a further increase .
The surge in questions has at the same time meant a real challenge : almost 25 % of the total number of written questions have been put by no more than eight Members of Parliament .
Furthermore , quite a large number of questions are not related to issues falling under Community competence .
I can give you some examples if you like .
The Commission is absolutely committed to fulfilling its responsibility and providing high-quality responses to parliamentary questions .
It is a duty that flows from the Treaties ; it is also a central feature of our accountability to the Parliament .
The Commission welcomes the introduction of some guidelines and admissibility criteria for written parliamentary questions as proposed in the report .
A system of guidelines is currently in place for oral questions addressed to the Commission and to the Council and the Corbett report suggests a method which is already implemented by Parliament and well known by the Council and Commission .
The effective implementation of these guidelines will strengthen the opportunity for individual Members to address questions to the Commission and receive timely responses , as has already been explained by the rapporteur .
We will be able to focus on questions that address issues really related to the Commission competence or of general interest .
Let me comment on another issue addressed in the report , and that is the order of speeches in plenary debates .
The Commission recognises the logic and the opportunity of opening legislative debates with a statement from the rapporteurs .
When it comes to the order of speeches and speaking time I would , however , like to stress the need to keep the principle of equal treatment of Commission and Council .
As a last word , let me recall that we recently expressed our position on the second interim report adopted by the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform and we are looking forward to having the opportunity to discuss these issues with Parliament before your institution adopts the final position on the reform package .
I am confident that the spirit of good interinstitutional cooperation that both institutions have demonstrated so far will continue throughout the whole reform process .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , again we have been able to hear voices saying that this recommendation is about us restricting the activities of certain MEPs .
I would like to draw the attention of the Eurosceptic MEPs to the fact that they should read the recommendation before saying this .
This report , and this change to the rules , should have happened a very long time ago , since the European Parliament has had major legislative powers for a long time .
In the meantime , we should look at the fact that in total 17.4 % of our time , the time we spend on debates in plenary sessions , is spent on legislation , and the rest on other activities .
In fact , this report makes it possible for Parliament to occupy itself with what the Treaties authorise it to do .
In other words , we will actually be able to concentrate on legislation , and this does not mean that we would devalue the own-initiative reports , since these also contain very important points , but we must know between ourselves that their impact is significantly less than what we can achieve with legislation .
When we legislate , we create changes that will have a direct impact on the lives of 500 million people in the years to come , while for own-initiative reports this transfer takes much longer and is much smaller .
Consequently , this Parliament has to occupy itself with legislation much more , and this report makes it possible .
We have also been able to reach agreement in connection with questions , since it is important that the questions really do receive real answers .
Very often , we MEPs do not receive real answers from the Commission , although , as the Commissioner has said , every single MEP has the right to be given answers to his questions , but these must be questions that fall under the remit of the European Union and of the Commission .
I am also pleased that the Commission has finally rejected the restriction of only asking a total of two questions a month .
This was a wise decision , but in any case we can achieve a better result and this new rule will help to make questions more effective , so I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Corbett .
Thank you .
Mr President , own-initiative reports are certainly justified in this Parliament .
We are a parliament of 27 countries and peoples , and there are many questions preying on people 's minds , both within the EU and in our relations with other parts of the world .
However , I also agree with those who have said that Parliament has increasingly developed from being an advisory assembly to a legislative body .
The Treaty of Lisbon will take that a big step further .
Therefore , we must set priorities .
I hear that we spend only 17.4 % of our time on legislative work : this is not enough .
We are under stress , under time pressure .
We want better lawmaking , so we need more time and priorities .
It is also a good thing that we are now saying that not every report has to be discussed again in plenary .
It is possible to vote without first debating , and Members can make a written statement if they want to express their views on the report .
It does not have to be done orally in a plenary session .
Madam Vice-President , I feel it is right that the rapporteur has both the first and the last word in Parliament because , as a kind of ' chamber of the citizens ' , we must express ourselves at the beginning and the end of a debate .
That is a good innovation .
Last but not least the subject of the questions .
This system is very good , until it is abused .
We have heard the figures - that eight Members are putting 25 % of the questions .
That makes nearly 1 700 questions from eight members .
We can observe that they are very hardworking , but it looks very much as if the EU system is being wantonly abused here , as in many other cases , by opponents of the EU .
We must introduce a rule for this , and the guidelines are a benchmark , a framework that we can work by .

Congratulations to Mr Corbett for knuckling down time and again to further develop Parliament . Thank you very much .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , it is a pleasure that I can be more consensual in this speech than in my previous one .
The Liberal Group strongly supports the thrust of the reforms that are encapsulated in this set of proposals , especially upon the parliamentary questions .
I think it is quite correct that we dropped the rapporteur 's first proposal to cap or to restrict the number of parliamentary questions that could be asked .
Frankly , I would propose two further minor improvements .
The first is to broaden the procedure to stop bad quality committee reports - and sometimes , regrettably , there are some - from sliding through the plenary without improvement and here it would be appropriate to permit the committee itself and not simply the rapporteur or two political groups or 10 % of the membership of Parliament to table amendments .
My second proposal is to add a catch-the-eye phase to the new sort of short presentation proposed by the rapporteur .
I think that these two changes would slightly broaden the chance for parliamentary debate and exchange while not destroying the purpose of the working group which is , of course , to streamline and to vitalise the proceedings of the Assembly .
Mr President , I feel much the same way as Mr Duff .
I should like to say at this point that we as a group can support the report overall , in contrast to the previous report , because it reflects the proposals of the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform and implements them as amendments to the Rules of Procedure .
What we cannot support , which I should also like to mention briefly here , is the proposal to no longer allow amendments to own-initiative reports .
In our group , we are of the opinion that amendments are very much part of the political culture and political debate and , particularly , of the rights of individual groups - and this right of the groups should not be curtailed .
To finish , I should like to add that I believe that Amendments 13 and 15 by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are worthy of support .
Even if we do not need long , detailed debates on individual reports here in plenary , there should be some discussion , and it should be brief - either one speaker per group , as the Verts / ALE Group suggests , or via the catch-the-eye procedure .
Not having any debate at all would be doing ourselves a disservice .
If we do not allow debate then we are not taking ourselves seriously , and I do not think that is good either .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , all legislative bodies must be subject to scrutiny at all times and must also be prepared , as we are , to carry out self-monitoring .
I fear , though , that the self-monitoring in the present report goes too far ; I would go so far as to call it self-censorship .
If this report is adopted in its original form , it will mean Parliament itself proposing to restrict the right of its Members to put relevant questions to the Council and the Commission .
This of course makes sense in itself , but the report also states that it is up to the President to decide whether the respective question may be put .
Thus the President of Parliament is to decide which questions it is appropriate to put to the other EU institutions .
We are thus introducing additional self-censorship and , on top of that , permitting the President of Parliament to exercise censorship too .
I should like to remind the House that we are the only directly elected body , and thus have a particular obligation .
Our task is to exercise parliamentary control , and so we cannot on any account impose self-censorship , which is open to abuse .
Of course , we all have a moral obligation not to waste any institution 's time with irrelevant questions , but we cannot accept the setting of ' objective criteria ' for relevance .
There are no such things as objective criteria in politics and , if we set them , we risk them being abused .
Mr President , in its original incarnation , this report was far more draconian and anti-democratic than its final version .
Our Euro-fanatical rapporteur showed much of his true colours when he proposed diminishing the rights of elected Members in this House to dare to ask questions of the unelected Commission and of the Council ; hence , his monstrous proposal to restrict Members to three questions per month .
Happily he had to beat a hasty retreat but his report still bears some of the repressive character that lay behind that proposal .
In particular , the veto which he seeks to give the President over what can be posed in a question is unacceptable ; not least since this present President does not enjoy the confidence of everyone in this House , given his inability to abide dissent , as was evidenced by his punitive action against those in this House who dared to demand the right of their electorate to have national referenda on the Lisbon Treaty .
The President showed his intolerance , and a President handed censorship powers which will enable him to protect the European elite against probing questions from Members - such a President will gladly exercise that censorship .
Therefore it is foolish , it is wrong and it is undemocratic to bind and to gag Members in this House in the way that our rapporteur , not surprisingly , seeks to do .

( EL ) Mr President , parliamentary procedure is not a mere formality in our work ; it is the very essence of the work of any parliament , even a parliament like ours , which has 780 Members from so many different countries , is so far from the public eye and , as a result , is often far removed from matters of interest to the public ; a parliament with known procedures when it comes to debate - and the debate here in plenary is simply a formal procedure in relation to the real work carried out in the committees .
Any effort , then , to improve the work of this Parliament 's plenary sessions , on the basis of certain principles , is always welcome : firstly , the principle of efficiency , so that we hold discussions in order to arrive at options and finally decisions ; secondly , the principle of democracy , a level playing field for all , regardless of the power they wield , so that everyone gets a hearing ; and thirdly , the principle of ' vitality ' , I would call it , so that what we say is of interest to the public .
How well are these principles served by the proposal in this particular report ?
Satisfactorily , I think , although there is room for some small improvements , which I shall suggest .
On the issue of the ' short presentation ' , I agree .
There is one reason why it is a very good idea to have a short presentation : it means that there will never be a report that is not discussed at all .
I shall give you an example : the very interesting report by Mr Duff , on which we shall vote tomorrow , concerning the way in which some kind of control is to be exercised over the Commission , will not be discussed at all , although it would be a very good opportunity to use this shortened procedure .
I therefore say ' yes ' to this , but beyond that I would point out - we are seeing it today , we see it every time - how interesting the catch-the-eye procedure is , and how uninteresting a discussion is when only the rapporteur and the Commission take part , although it would be interesting if others could speak .
One final comment : with regard to questions , I think the course we are taking is quite correct .
Lastly , on the own-initiative reports , I think amendments to these reports should be discussed .
Mr President , sometimes when writing these short speeches , it strikes me that it would really take the talent of a George Orwell to do justice to these reports .
This report from the unconscious satirist and humorist , Mr Corbett , is a case in point .
What monumental undemocratic arrogance it is to suggest that Members of this Parliament should have their questions to the Council and Commission censored !
We are told that this is to avert abuses by the right or stop use of offensive language .
Perhaps Mr Corbett is concerned that we might ask questions about some Commissioners ' criminal records or their past careers as apparatchiks of Eastern European Communist regimes , or perhaps about former EU Presidents ' alleged careers as KGB agents ?
Recently the President of Parliament assumed arbitrary powers to control the right of MEPs to speak in this Chamber .
Now Mr Corbett wants to censor what MEPs can say on behalf of their constituents to the Council and the Commission .
If I may respond to Mr Corbett 's comment about my speech in the last debate , I was of course referring to his proposed rules on the formation of political groups in relation to the Independence-Democracy Group as it is currently constituted .
It is the Labour Party that is facing annihilation in Britain .
One reason is its Europhile fanaticism , and I can assure him that in 2009 UK Independence Party MEPs will return here in even greater numbers .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the questions represent precisely the range of information that citizens want from the EU .
Since Commissioner Wallström is here today , I call on her to allow these questions to be worked through , and perhaps to have a brochure made in which the results of the questions and answers are also made available to the citizens of Europe , including on the Internet , so that they can see how the questions put by their MEPs to the Commission and the Council are answered .
It would be fantastic for journalists and the citizens of Europe if that could be done before the elections .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I have asked for the floor in response to Mr Leinen 's speech .


Mr Leinen , if you would listen for a moment : I want to speak about your remarks on own-initiative reports .
The quality of the own-initiative reports that are tabled and then adopted here is open to question but , if you stop allowing amendments , how can own-initiative reports be improved ?
I should like to remind you that Parliament does not have the right of initiative on legislation .
We are dependent on the Commission for that .
How can we tell the Commission what initiatives we should like to see if we trim the own-initiative reports down or do not take reports in a direction that improves things ?
If I understand rightly , according to the Treaty , or what used to be called the Constitution , we ourselves do not have the right of initiative in the area of legislation .
All we have is the ability to make known what we want in own-initiative reports .
I think it is unfortunate if you devalue that , because it robs us of an opportunity .
I believe you should think again - both you , Mr Leinen , and the rapporteur .
( ES ) Mr President , the rapporteur does not need anyone to defend him ; I have no doubt that he can defend himself , but I must say that I asked for the floor because I think that some of the speeches were excessive .
I think that in this House we need to have debates and set forth arguments .
I have just listened to Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's speech , and we always disagree on this , but I think that some of the descriptions , insults and caricatures ultimately damage this institution , and especially those responsible for them , Mr President .
Given that we are in France , I think it was a French writer who said that anything that is excessive lacks value .
Today there have been some speeches that have lacked value .
We appreciate what Mr Corbett has done , which is simply to reflect what is done by a group of Vice-Presidents of this House , in which all the groups in Parliament are represented .
This is reflected in the Regulation , we have debated with him and we greatly appreciate the work that he does .
rapporteur . - Mr President , after our previous debate I am glad to see that we are still friends and that we can reach a wider consensus on these issues .
Just let me clarify a couple of points that have given rise to controversy .
On parliamentary questions : we are not proposing any limit to parliamentary questions , we are simply saying that the same guidelines that we as a Parliament have already adopted for Question Time questions should apply to written questions , namely that they should be within the remit of the European Union and of the institution called upon to answer them .
Questions about hospitals in the UK under the National Health Service and the moving of staff from one hospital to another , which have nothing to do with the European Union , should not be parliamentary questions costing a lot of money at European level .
This seems to me to be common sense : only UKIP and their friends can describe it as some sort of conspiracy or some sort of censorship .
Censorship ?
On criteria that we ourselves decide , that our President is called upon to rule on , not the Commission or the Council ?
If that is censorship , then my goodness ...
The second question that gave rise to some controversy was speaking time . Perhaps I did not explain this fully earlier .
We will keep the two options that we have now for organising debates , and add a third one . At the moment we can have a full debate , which can already be a short debate with one speaker per political group .
We also now have the option of the simplified procedure where the rapporteur simply makes a two-minute statement at the time of the vote : we will keep that .
What we are proposing is to add a third option : the short presentation , where the report is consensual and own-initiative , etc. and does not merit a full debate , though the latter always remains an option .
Under the short presentation procedure , the rapporteur presents the conclusions of the committee , the Commission responds and everybody else if they wish can make an extra contribution in writing .
That increases the number of options available to Parliament ; it does not restrict the rights of any Members .
It multiplies the flexibility with which we can deal with these issues , and again I commend it to the House .
Finally a couple of short questions .
In response to Mr Rübig , the questions and answers are already on line .
They are visible to all Members ; perhaps we should make more use of this , but they are there , that is a tool that is available .
To Mr Baringdorf I would say yes , the report does distinguish between different types of own-initiative report .
The type of legislative initiative to which he was referring would not come under this simplified procedure that we are proposing : that would go through the normal procedures , as that particular type of legislative initiative merits .
So we have catered for that .
As for the very strange remarks by Mr Batten from UKIP and his reference to the next European elections , we shall see .
Yes , his party won as many seats as the Liberal Democrats in the last European elections in the UK , having outspent them , I think , by a factor of 10 - Mr Duff is nodding , so I suppose that is right .
We will see how many millionaires he gets to contribute to his campaign this time ; but I hope that this time there will be greater awareness , having seen their performance in the European Parliament over these last five years , of what it actually means when you elect somebody from UKIP to this place .
And if the electorate is aware of that then I am sure they will not do so well in the next European elections .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.15 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
( SV ) Mr President , if you went into the corridors of Parliament yesterday you would have seen a great many stickers from the lobbyists ' organisation of the European chemical industry on the floor , and some of them are still there today .
I wonder whether the quaestors , when they gave permission for the exhibition , authorised the organisation to spread stickers everywhere on our floors .
If that is the case , I think it was an incorrect decision .
If the quaestors did not give any such permission , I think that Cefic has clearly breached its undertakings as a lobbyist and should therefore have its access pass withdrawn or at least receive a harsh reprimand .
I hope you can look into what actually happened and ensure that all these stickers are removed immediately .
Fine , we shall look into the matter , Mr Schlyter .
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea to link up Russia and Germany ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Libicki , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea to link up Russia and Germany ( Petitions 0614 / 2007 and 0952 / 2007 ) .
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate is very special , since it is based on a request from ordinary citizens in the European Union .
I would like to welcome those in the gallery who are the authors of the petition that formed the basis for today 's debate .
Mr Krzysztof Mączkowski is there , who represents many ecological organisations , and , I think , Mrs Morkunaite from Lithuania .
The petition was signed by nearly 30 000 people .
Signatures keep coming in to the Committee on Petitions .
This debate is , without any doubt , being watched by many millions and by public opinion in all the countries on the Baltic Sea .
The history of this petition in the European Parliament was that , first of all , we had a number of discussions on this subject within the Committee on Petitions .
These discussions were based on extremely strong presentations made by the authors of the petition .
In total we had five debates on this subject .
We also organised a public hearing .
During the public hearing world-renowned specialists discussed and upheld what the petitioners had said : that the threat to the natural environment of the Baltic is enormous and whether it is at all worthwhile to take such a gamble on such a huge investment .
While these discussions were going on in the Committee on Petitions and when the European Parliament agreed for the issue to be debated publicly , which is what is happening today , additional debates took place in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The texts put forward for approval obtained ninety percent support in the Committee on Petitions and in both the other committees .
It was only then that , suddenly , there was significant activity among the opponents and critics of this report and the arguments contained in it .
Suddenly 180 amendments were submitted to the Committee on Petitions .
Almost all of them were rejected .
A similar experience faced the advisory committees .
One could see this immense offensive - there is no other way to describe it - by Nord Stream .
We received voting instructions prepared by Nord Stream ; that was in the Committee on Petitions .
I have worked in the European Parliament for four years and this is the first time in my experience that anyone involved in lobbying actually told Members how to vote and put forward amendment after amendment : abstain on this one , vote ' yes ' to this one , vote ' no ' to that one .
Today 's debate is based on 40 different opinions and expert reports .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are three parties in this consideration : the ordinary citizens of the Union , enormous political and economic capital , and the European Parliament .
The European Parliament should speak for the ordinary citizens of the European Union .
Let us learn from the lesson of what happened in the referenda in France , the Netherlands and Ireland .
We want to gain the trust of ordinary citizens in the European Union and I hope that this will be the attitude of all the Members in this Parliament .
I would like to thank all those who helped us get to the point where we can actually have this debate today .
I would like to thank Mrs Foltyn-Kubicka , who has prepared a wonderful exhibition here in the European Parliament on the Baltic Sea , Mr Cashman , who is the first Vice-Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , and Mr Beazley , who is the Chairman of the Baltic-Europe Intergroup in the European Parliament .
I would also like to thank the Secretariat of the Committee on Petitions , including David Lowe , Karen Chioti and Silvia Cannalire , as well as those who have given me advice , help and cooperation : Szymon Szynkowski , Norbert Napierajów , Wojciech Danecki , Witold Ziobrze and Michał Krupiński .
These are the people who had the greatest input into this work .
Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , Mr Libicki , for his report , which allows us to discuss the environmental impact of this large project , a natural gas pipeline of 1 200 km in length , which will be crossing a shallow sea such as the Baltic .
This is not just because this is an important project , raising many questions on environmental protection in the Baltic area , but also because this appears to be the first of many similar projects planned for the future .
The project has already attracted considerable attention from the media and from politicians throughout the Baltic region over the last few months .
It has been discussed at many forums and in many of the countries involved .
As Mr Libicki mentioned , it was also discussed in the European Parliament in January at a public hearing organised by the Committee on Petitions , in which I participated together with Mr Piebalgs , my fellow Commissioner , who is responsible for energy matters , .
Commissioner Piebalgs gave an overview of the prospects of the European Union with regard to natural gas and stressed that the needs of the European Union in gas are rapidly increasing , while the production of gas in the European Union is falling dramatically and stocks are being used up .
Our energy policy for Europe highlights the urgent need to promote an improvement in energy efficiency and renewable energy sources , and we are working towards that goal .
Significant increases in natural gas imports will , however , still be needed to cover Europe 's energy requirements in coming decades .
Additional infrastructure , such as natural gas pipelines and liquefied natural gas terminals , will play a significant role in meeting the needs of European consumers and in ensuring a constant supply .
The Nord Stream pipeline will make it possible to increase the supply of natural gas from Russia .
As you know , the need to construct new infrastructure for the transportation of Russian gas to the European Union has been acknowledged by the European Parliament and by the Council through the guidelines for trans-European energy networks , adopted in September 2006 .
I am specifically referring to Decision No 1364 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council .
The guidelines specified certain priority projects and this project is classified as a project of European interest and , therefore , as a top priority .
Provided that the environmental impact study reaches positive conclusions , the Nord Stream pipeline will be a project of European interest .
My main point during the European Parliament hearing in January was that the project , just like any other project , must follow all the relevant environmental rules of international and Community law during its construction , operation and monitoring stages .
This is also the point I wish to make today .
According to international and Community law , then , the project owner , namely Nord Stream AG , must apply for an implementation permit or for a construction permit from the countries which have jurisdiction over the works to be carried out , these countries being Germany , Denmark , Finland and Sweden .
The grant of an implementation permit for such projects is , however , subject to the environmental impact assessment procedure .
This is also stipulated in the guidelines for trans-European energy networks I mentioned earlier .
The environmental impact assessment procedures are laid down both in Community and in international law .
There is a relevant EU directive , as well as the Espoo Convention at cross-border level .
The Espoo Convention is part of Community acquis , given that both the Community and the Member States are parties to the Convention .
In this case , the procedures of both Community and national law apply .
The project 's cross-border nature means that the Espoo Convention must be adhered to , while the Member States involved must properly enforce the provisions of the directive on environmental impact assessments before granting an implementation permit .
The environmental impact procedure based on the Espoo Convention started with the project 's disclosure in late 2006 .
According to the information held by the Commission , numerous studies , reports and matters have been discussed at various forums and meetings , both with the public and with the competent authorities in various Member States .
As is stipulated in the Espoo Convention , the contractor or project owner must provide the appropriate documentation regarding the environmental impact .
At the same time , the country with the authority to issue the implementation permit , the country of origin , the party of origin as it is referred to in the Espoo Convention , has the following two duties .
Firstly , it must hold talks with the environmental authorities and with the public affected and , secondly , it must initiate talks with the affected party or parties , meaning the neighbouring countries , which may be subject to the project 's cross-border impact .
In this case , the affected parties are the three Baltic States and Poland .
Therefore , due compliance with the environmental impact procedure means that all the concerns , questions and important issues , such as those mentioned in the report we are discussing today , must be evaluated and discussed both by the competent authorities and by the public .
At the present phase , any emphasis placed on a potential negative environmental impact which cannot be mitigated or avoided , as laid down in the environmental impact legislation , is premature .
In fact , the final environmental impact assessment report has not yet been drafted .
Therefore , the environmental authorities have not yet had the chance to analyse and evaluate all the technical data necessary for providing answers to all the legitimate questions .
The countries of origin have a legal right to demand all the supplementary information which they deem to be necessary in order for them to be able to grant , if they so decide , an implementation permit ; for instance , Sweden has already done so , when the project owner submitted a formal request in order to comply with the national legal requirements .
On the other hand , the affected parties also have a legal right to ensure that they hold all the information necessary to meet their needs .
I have been informed that all the parties involved , meaning both the parties of origin and the affected parties , are regularly holding meetings and discussions on the developments in the environmental impact procedure based on the Espoo Convention .
The final environmental impact report is expected by the end of the year .
After it has been submitted , the formal talks will take place , and these will determine the final decision on whether or not an implementation permit is granted .
I expect that the competent authorities in all the Member States , which are parties to the Espoo Convention , will perform their duties and assume their responsibilities as they ought to .
Russia , which has signed the Espoo Convention but is not a party to it , has nonetheless agreed to abide to its rules .
In conclusion , I wish to stress that we are monitoring developments and that we are in contact with the responsible parties of the Espoo Convention , with the parties involved and with the contractor .
With regard to the contractor , the Commission authorities have made it clear that all the obligations pertaining to the necessary information and to the transparency required must be honoured .
( Applause )

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Libicki , ladies and gentlemen , you will understand that this report is very important not only for this House but also for the public at large , as Mr Libicki has already said .

30 000 signatures demonstrate the concern there is around the coast of the Baltic Sea , which has been described as a sea dying of pollution .
It is very shallow .
At the bottom , it still has military vessels from the Second World War .
The question is : Is it really the most sensible thing to drive an energy pipeline along the bottom of this particular part of the European Union ?
I have the honour of writing the opinion for the Committee on Foreign Affairs , and , as well as the environmental issues which the Committee on Petitions has looked at , we were also concerned about the nature of the environmental assessment study which the Commission has just referred to .
Commissioner , in your reply could you confirm that you will accept Parliament 's paragraph 20 of the Libicki report , which calls upon you and the Commission to carry out an independent environmental assessment ?
There is some concern that if the proposers commission an environmental assessment it might lack objectivity .
We also call on all littoral states around the Baltic Sea - all nine , including Russia - to be fully consulted and also to be fully involved in the maintenance and security of such a pipeline were it to be constructed .
The Commission has already stressed the importance of recognition of international and European law and we would add that liability by the company is also necessary .
The appropriate insurance should be taken out to cover any potential risk or damage caused by the project , either in its construction or thereafter .
Finally , we insist upon the principle of reciprocity .
Yesterday 's failed attempt to remove the BP-TNK chief executive by Russian partners does not bode well for mutual understanding between EU companies and Russian companies .
We look for harmony in this exercise , but we also look for the Commission to follow this project very carefully , and as the rapporteur has pointed out , and two Commissioners to the hearing , the current proposal as tabled by Nord Stream is unsatisfactory .
I would just like to finish by saying that my group will be voting in favour of the Libicki report .
draftsman of the Opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ET ) The only argument of note on the construction of the Baltic gas pipeline which remains unresolved is the argument relating to environmental protection .
The Swiss company Nord Stream failed to submit an environmental impact assessment by the permitted deadline , leaving the European Parliament to vote blind .
It has also become apparent that the environmental impact assessment commissioned by Nord Stream only incorporated the new research problems after Parliament pointed out major failings in its research plans .
The most important problem with the EIA are the wrecks of tens of warships which were sunk in battle , with their munitions , in the Gulf of Finland in August 1941 ; this is something which was only admitted by Duma Member Andrei Klimov ten days ago .
Last year , however , it was reported that the route was fully clear .
Special focus must be placed on phosphorus released when bottom sediment is disturbed : although the EIA states that it has no bearing on eutrophication , other schools of thought beg to differ .
We must also anticipate that dioxins and heavy metals will be released .
The latter are relevant in terms of food preparation using fish which contain substances toxic to humans .
We already know that the level of these substances and radioactivity are highest in the Baltic Sea as it is .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
With regard to this project and the report by Mr Libicki , I would like to say that in general three aspects should be taken into consideration here .
The first is the economic aspect .
It is clear that energy resources are necessary both for Germany and for Europe , and from this viewpoint the gas pipeline from Russia is necessary , since Russia owns the gas resources .
The second is the political aspect .
That means the way in which this project was prepared , and we all know that it was done with great political string-pulling , before the elections , without consultations with the states that might be affected from an economic or environmental point of view .
Secondly , as we know , according to EU strategy in the energy sphere , provision has been made for the compatibility of energy channels .
Here , nothing of the kind has been provided , and so in fact it does not comply with the EU strategy for energy solidarity and energy security that we have now accepted .
Thirdly , there is the environmental aspect , which is what the Libicki report deals with specifically .
As we know , according to the Global Environment Facility 's report , 7 of the 10 most polluted locations in the world 's oceans are in the Baltic Sea .
From this point of view it seems to me that there has been very little debate - I acknowledge , of course , that the companies implementing the project have made calculations and held debates - but in public another alternative has not been debated , and that is to place the gas pipeline on a land route .
This would make it much easier to achieve compatibility and would in fact resolve two aspects - the environmental aspect and the strategic and political aspect . Thank you .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the petition that is dealt with by the report relates to the environment , but we have noticed in the discussions that have been going on that the gas pipeline project has dimensions that are not related to the environment .
It is in keeping with the authority of Parliament that we stick to the facts in the resolutions .
The fact is that the EU needs Russian gas and that Russia needs even more European customers .
The second fact is that the project being negotiated now has been approved by the EU as part of the TEN programme .
It is a large construction project , the implementation of which may have a harmful impact on the ecosystem of the Baltic .
For this reason it is important to have impartial environmental reports produced , so that the risks may be established and weighed up against the benefits .
There are no projects without risks .
Our group 's proposed amendments to the report are based on the principle that no concessions be made on the environment , but that no artificial barriers be constructed either .
It is also a fact that the greatest environmental problem facing the Baltic at the moment is agriculture in the surrounding countries , and the transportation of oil by ship , which is becoming more common , is a real risk .
However , we do not discuss these problems in this report .
It is also a fact that the negotiations on the pipeline have been politicised to such an extent that there is a danger of the matter itself remaining a side-issue .
The observation of former President Putin that the Russian fleet also has to protect financial interests does not help to create a climate of confidence .
The use of energy for political pressure is not a civilised way of holding international dialogue .
Finland has experienced pressure from Russia in the form of duties on timber , but at least for the time being the Finnish government has not bound this matter up with the gas pipeline project .
Russia has not ratified the Espoo Convention on the Baltic .
Russia should be required to do this before construction of the pipeline can begin .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this is an incredibly important multifaceted report , and it covers a very difficult bundle of European issues , not just the environmental .
It is noteworthy that it comes to us via the route of the Committee on Petitions , and it is to the credit of that committee that it manages to bring together opinions from across the spectrum of this House , through hearings and this report , to try to get a synthesised view .
The guiding principle of my group in dealing with this report has been very much to try to adopt a European set of answers to European problems .
Fundamentally , the pipeline underlines the need , if ever we needed it underlined , for a European approach to energy supply .
It is not appropriate that different countries do different things with different partners .
We need a Community response which is underlined by the principle of solidarity .
There has been much said about the environment , and the Commissioner has given some good answers to do with European environmental law , international legal obligations , but we need to build confidence here ; we need to ensure , as far as possible , that European standards are adhered to and that there is a coordinated , coherent European approach to the environmental issues .
Then of course we come to the very difficult subject of EU-Russia relations .
We have a golden opportunity here : in the Baltic Sea area , in the High North , we have the Northern Dimension Partnership .
Let us use that vehicle , which has been one of the success stories of EU-Russia relations , to help us here .
Lastly I leave you with this positive thought .
In my own constituency of Yorkshire there is a small village that is now linked with a small village in Norway by the largest undersea gas pipeline across and through the North Sea .
That has built people-to-people relationships that will last for a very long time .
That is positive .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr Libicki , Chairman of the Committee on Petitions .
Here we are certainly dealing with a petition by European citizens , representing thousands of people concerned about the construction of a gas pipeline to link up Russia and Germany .
In particular , there must be a certain amount of doubt as to the bilateral nature of the agreement between Russia and Germany , involving firms such as Gazprom and E.ON , to build one of the world 's longest pipelines .
The intention is to build the pipeline in the middle of the Baltic Sea so it does not have to go through Poland and the Baltic States .
Yes , this project is a political bypass , and yes , it is a bypass that not only gets round any of the potential political problems involved with building it on land , but it also shows utter contempt for the EU 's common energy policy and weakens its position in terms of relations with Russia .
The bilateral energy agreements with Russia with hardly any EU coordination are also bad news for a solid EU foreign policy with a single voice .
The project intends to cross a fragile sea already polluted by toxic products , with an extremely limited natural water replacement rate .
The consequences of any accidents would be catastrophic for all border states .
Above all , we must insist on decisive application of the precautionary principle , together with an exhaustive environmental assessment to examine all the alternatives , and strict compliance with all international regulations .
The best way of guaranteeing our energy security is to have a coordinated EU policy with the strictest environmental requirements .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , a gas pipeline on the bottom of the Baltic Sea means increased climate-change emissions and serious environmental risks to the sensitive ecosystem of the Baltic .
There is a risk of disturbance to the biological balance .
What could happen with all the mines dumped on the seabed ?
The projected pipeline - if it is completed according to plan - means a major departure from the commitment to which lip-service is so often paid in climate discussions .
However , all that talk on the climate issue needs to be taken seriously and translated into concrete action and measures .
Every undertaking to lock up billions in natural gas investment delays much-needed investment in renewable alternative energy and goes against all the declared intentions to rethink policy on the environment and to halt climate change .
The Baltic Sea and the climate issue must be brought into focus , which is why we demand that Nord Stream examine an alternative route over land before any decision is taken on a possible future gas pipeline - this is entirely consistent with the decision of the Swedish Government in February this year .
( PL ) Mr President , what the Russians are doing is not at all surprising , as they do not belong to the European Union and have a vested economic interest in constructing the pipeline on the Baltic seabed and making it independent of intermediaries .
However , what the German Government in Berlin is doing is scandalous and flies in the face of European solidarity .
The Germans , who are in favour of the European Union project , and , recently , the European Constitution , appear to be using the word ' Union ' very selectively .
We cannot agree to this .
You too , President Pöttering , as the most important German in the European Union , you have done nothing about this .
Instead of travelling to compatriots ' meetings , perhaps you could think about activities that do not antagonise the nations of Europe ?
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , the matter of the gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea is one of the most contentious issues for the common energy policy that is being developed .
Many people are worried that the creation of the pipeline will increase not security of supply for the continent but our defencelessness against Russia .
We cannot know whether prices will be more affordable for consumers , or whether they will rocket as a result of the enormous investments .
And finally there is no clear answer to the questions on the current agenda : what will be the environmental consequences of the Nord Stream project ?
In my opinion , it is crucial that an appropriate impact assessment precede the sinking of the planned pipelines that will determine Europe 's energy supply for decades , including the Nord Stream .
Naturally , everything must be covered by the environmental impact assessment .
In our case , unfortunately , there is not a thorough , impartial assessment that takes the environmental perspectives into account .
However , the report before us sheds much light on the environmental concerns arising in relation to the pipeline in the Baltic Sea .
I feel it is wrong that there has not been a detailed analysis of the precise environmental impact that dredging up 1 200 km of the seabed may have .
The dangers concealed by the unexploded munitions from the Second World War that can be found in the area have not been clarified either .
The fact that hazardous chemical substances would enter the sea during the laying of the pipeline also adds to the concerns .
These are such important matters that I feel it is inconceivable to bring the project to fruition responsibly without responding to them clearly and reassuringly .
I feel that protecting the environment and security of energy supplies are not mutually exclusive .
If the European Parliament really wants to become an institution that is close to its citizens , it must take into account the 30 000 signatures on different petitions which draw attention to the environmental risks of the gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea , and a real answer must be given to the questions that have been raised . Thank you .
Mr President , this report has been generated by a petition from 30 000 European citizens .
The Committee on Petitions has already played an invaluable role by putting this issue on the European agenda .
It is vital for the confidence of citizens that Europe can in fact engage with them on their behalf .
It is therefore of the utmost importance that Europe continues to be seen to be engaged with the environmental impact of this proposal , and a heavy burden therefore falls on the shoulders of Commissioner Dimas .
We need to demonstrate that we are capable of safeguarding citizens ' health and the sustainability of our environment .
The absolute need to develop energy resources , and the buying-in of energy resources , has to be based on principles of sustainability .
My group 's amendments to this report are intended to focus , or rather re-focus , the report on these principles .
I appeal to Parliament to support them .
An EIA is necessary and obligatory as Commissioner Dimas has pointed out , if permissions are to be granted legally .
How we manage this issue will set the scene for the future , and we must get the balance right .
( SV ) Mr President , at least two good things have come from the fact that the European Parliament has taken up the Nord Stream case for debate .
Thanks to the public enquiry in the Committee on Petitions in January , we can expect Nord Stream to undertake an impartial and comprehensive environmental impact assessment .
The second good thing is that the debate should also have made it clear to the owners of Nord Stream and the Russian state that permission to build the gas pipeline can only be obtained if Russia also ratifies the Espoo Convention .
It is a prerequisite that liability in the event of damage should have been settled .
However , as we have heard , other confidence-building measures will also be needed if this project is to become the strong uniting bond between the EU and Russia that we hope .
Among other things , Gazprom must also be able to give a public demonstration of its ability in practice to honour its commitments on deliveries in the future .
- ( DE ) Mr President , of course the construction of pipelines - whether they are oil or gas pipelines - has an impact on the environment , and it matters not whether this pipe runs through the North Sea from Ekofisk to Emden , as exists today , or whether it runs from Russia to Germany via Poland , which also exists .
Environmental impact audits must be carried out ; planning approval assessments must be undertaken .
All this is regulated at international level .
We have the Espoo Convention , which means that the countries through whose territory the pipeline is to run are responsible for checking whether the construction work can be carried out there or not .
I have trust in these countries and I am confident that this Convention will be observed , and only then can we debate whether there is some alternative version that will go this way or that way .
What we are now doing sometimes appears to me to be very much like a case of political partiality .
Because we have political influence we absolutely have to lay the pipeline there .
This means getting around the environmental impact assessment .
Please let the countries and their authorities decide whether the environmental imperatives are being properly met or not .
It is our job as Europeans to say that we have faith in the Member States concerned .
( NL ) Mr President , we are having this debate today because citizens and governments are worried about the construction of this pipeline .
They are worried because the environment in the sensitive Baltic sea area is at risk .
The debate has , however , become hugely politicised .
Everyone agrees that we have to respect all of the international and environmental conventions , certainly when it comes to the sensitive Baltic Sea area .
Mr President , the politicisation that is happening here has nothing to do with that .
We have to admit that we need the energy , that domestic production , in the Netherlands as elsewhere , is continuing to fall and so we need the gas from other sources .
That gas comes from Russia .
It would have been much better to transport that gas over land but that has been made impossible .
Now we have to go through that sensitive area .
My first point , therefore , concerns respect for all international and environmental conventions .
My second point - and I hope that not everyone has been deaf to this - is that a satisfactory environmental impact report has to lead to the issuing of permits .
These permits would have to be issued by Germany , by Denmark , by Sweden and also by Finland .
We will have to pass judgment on this later on another occasion , at the end of the year .
Another point is that we also need a certain degree of reciprocity .
We are dependent on Russian gas and the Russians are dependent on our willingness to purchase it .
I hope that this reciprocity will soon be properly regulated in the partnership agreement , without all the political emotions triggered by this project .
Then we will be able to resolve a great many problems .
( RO ) This report refers to the environmental issues , but it cannot and could not have referred only to environmental issues .
First of all , I would like to emphasize that we shall support this project that may improve Europe 's energy supply .
For this reason , I consider it deplorable that the European Union has not developed a common energy policy yet .
The European Union requires common environmental standards and not only when speaking about projects of the Nordstream size .
There are similar projects planned in other parts of Europe and these standards to be agreed should be implemented everywhere .
Nordstream will be an important precedent and we should make sure that we are going in the right direction .
This report is the European Parliament 's answer to a petition with more than thirty thousand signatures and we have no right to ignore the European citizens ' opinion .
The history of human development , especially in the industrial era , has left true environmental catastrophes behind .
We , the European Parliament , in the Europe of 2008 , are not allowed to repeat this history .
( DA ) Mr President , the Baltic Sea is a very vulnerable sea , and Nord Stream will affect the seabed and biodiversity in the area .
I believe , therefore , that all coastal states should jointly monitor environmental safety , and that Nord Stream must pay compensation for any damage that may occur in connection with the laying of the pipeline .
However , the environmental problem is not the only issue with Nord Stream .
There is also the lack of trust between Russia and the countries of the Baltic Sea region .
Russia has been known to use energy policy as a political tool more than once .
In addition , many of the countries of the Baltic Sea region see Nord Stream as a clear attempt by Russia to bypass them and enter the Western European market directly .
Moreover , Nord Stream can be perceived as an example of a bilateral agreement between Russia and an EU Member State .
Therefore , Europe has a special and fundamental interest in Nord Stream since , when energy supply is at issue , it is important that the EU be united in a common energy policy and that individual Member States do not conclude bilateral agreements .
That being the case , it is important that Russia show goodwill and become a party to all international agreements .
Mr President , the Nord Stream Baltic pipeline has been a controversial project since the day the former German Chancellor took a senior executive position in the company managing the venture .
It has raised justified concerns about energy security issues in several countries around the Baltic Sea .
It has become a classic example of the principle of European solidarity gone wrong .
There can surely be no doubts regarding the geopolitical importance to Russia of the Nord Stream project .
However , it is not these issues we are debating today .
Today we are discussing another very important aspect of Nord Stream 's pipeline : its environmental impact .
I was , therefore , very surprised that Commissioner Dimas first stressed the importance of the energy supply and business aspects of the project , only later referring to the environmental impact .
I would have expected a different set of priorities from the Commissioner for the Environment .
We all agree that the Baltic Sea is a unique and fragile environmental environment .
Numerous experts share the concerns of petitioners and are rightly suspicious of an environmental impact report penned by Nord Stream 's experts .
Please note that the very countries around the Baltic Sea which feel the non-environmental threats of the pipeline most keenly will also suffer any environmental damage directly .
Adoption of amendments that play down the environmental threats will , frankly speaking , add insult to injury .
- ( DE ) Mr President , of course it is in the interests of all the people of the EU , and especially of the countries bordering the Baltic Sea , that no danger should be posed to the environment .
However , once all environmental reservations have been dispelled nothing else should stand in the way of the Baltic pipeline , for the EU is reliant both on the diversification of energy sources and on the diversification of energy transit routes too .
The EU will have to import an additional 200 billion cubic metres of gas every year from 2012 .
If we are to secure our future energy supplies then every pipeline is important for the EU : the Baltic Sea pipeline represents a complementary energy route and should not therefore be regarded as being in competition with other projects .
Politically based arguments should not stand in the way of the economic interests of the EU .
Any differences between the eastern and western European Member States should have been settled in advance .
In future this task could be left to a ' Mister Energy for Europe ' .
Misunderstandings and disagreements could be avoided ahead of events by means of coordination , transparency and the exchange of information .
This discussion again highlights the need for a common and coordinated EU foreign policy .
( PL ) Mr President , for me the northern gas pipeline and the approach taken by the European Parliament towards the northern gas pipeline are a test of the real value of the European Union , a test of whether the EU really does act on the basis of solidarity .
It is also a test of our commitment to environmental protection .
If , in much smaller projects that carry considerably less risk to both humans and the environment , it is a requirement to put forward several alternative proposals so that the best one can then be selected , so in this enormous project , which , potentially , could cause a serious threat not just for the environment but also for humans , one should require the proponents to put forward several alternative proposals .
It is only then that the most beneficial proposal , which is least harmful to humans and to the environment , should be selected .
It is very strange that , in the case of this enormous undertaking , this approach was ignored .
Mr President , I hope that nobody in the EU leadership was happy in Khanty-Mansiysk when the new Russian President was mocking European solidarity .
Now we have the present challenge : are the legitimate existential concerns of smaller littoral states respected or neglected ?
If those ' limitrophe ' tribes are not respected and their destiny remains marginal , we are all drawn into a swamp of neo-colonialism inside the new Europe .
If Parliament votes against a truly independent environmental impact assessment and dislikes the prevention of real dangers because big money says bluntly ' there is no risk of a disaster ' after such positions are proposed as a matter of urgency by one national team , the EU itself as a European idea risks being dumped to a poisoned bottom .
Colleagues who are listening , go to the tombs of Adenauer , Schuman and De Gasperi and ask how you should vote , especially on the first five Gazprom amendments .
As for me , I will shake hands with every esteemed German parliamentarian in this House who votes against these amendments by 41 Members .
Those who were misguided may remedy the mistake by abstaining .
Let Europe remain our priority .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , the planned northern gas pipeline joining Russia and Germany is to be the longest twin pipe undersea gas pipeline in the world , and also the shallowest , which makes it particularly susceptible to possible damage .
There is no doubt that the scale of the extensive works on the vast area of the Baltic Sea constitutes a serious danger to the natural environment , to biodiversity and habitats , to the safety and movement of shipping , and , if there were to be an ecological disaster , also to the health of the populations of the countries that lie on the Baltic Sea .
Under the Espoo Convention , because of the serious risk to the natural environment , the first step should be to consider alternative routes for the installation of the gas pipeline , without disturbing the marine environment .
In this case , this would mean land routes for the pipeline .
Construction on the Baltic seabed is not a bilateral issue between Germany and Russia , since , if there is an ecological disaster , all the countries on the Baltic Sea would suffer .
Such an important project should be realised only in the spirit of European solidarity and with the agreement of all the states lying on the Baltic Sea , after carrying out a thorough and independent environmental impact assessment .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to start with thanks , which are directed towards the author of this report , Chairman Marcin Libicki .
He prepared this report under exceptionally difficult circumstances , as he had to face unusually powerful lobbying from the representatives of the consortium responsible for constructing this controversial project .
I hope that the final version of this report will show that the times when lobbying groups had a significant influence on the laws passed by the European Union is a thing of the past .
Next , considering the merits of the case , I would like to emphasise that , in examining projects that directly affect its members , the European Union should apply objective environmental protection standards .
Today 's report is a test of that objectivity .
The Nord Stream project will , as we all well know , have a disastrous impact on the natural environment of the Baltic Sea .
We cannot allow such a dangerous investment to take place within the European Union without the agreement of a quarter of its inhabitants .
Our objective should be to reach a consensus , not to have an environmentally dangerous and economically questionable project forced through by a giant power company .
The northern gas pipeline is uneconomical : it is over 30 times more expensive than construction over land .
According to the latest estimates , the project will cost between EUR 10 billion and EUR 20 billion .
An alternative land pipeline would cost about EUR 3 billion .
This means that the gas sent will have to cost much more , which will bring about an immediate rise in the cost of gas imports for the whole of the European Union .
A second point of this unusually controversial project is the European Union 's energy security .
The Nord Stream construction project will have a drastic impact on this security .
In response to Russia 's actions , the European Union should expand Member States ' access to gas and oil resources in Central Asia instead of making us even more dependent on gas supplies from Gazprom , as is happening at present .
The Kremlin 's activities are aimed at preventing diversification of gas supplies in Europe and Nord Stream provides the perfect way to fulfil this objective .
As I have said earlier , this is a project with absolutely no economic justification .
The Nord Stream project demonstrates the Kremlin 's capability to monopolise the market for gas in Europe .
At the same time , the problems with the European Nabucco project provide an example of the Union 's failure to guarantee its own energy security .
At this point the question arises : why is it that Germany , a country that not so long ago was a fervent supporter of freedom and security in the former Eastern Bloc countries , is now putting these countries at risk of another loss of sovereignty ?
By supporting the plans of the Kremlin , which is aimed at overall energy domination in Western Europe , Germany is putting these countries at risk of Russian political blackmail .
I am calling on all parliamentary groups to support today 's report so as to avert an enormous ecological disaster and to respect the right of all countries lying on the Baltic to give or withdraw their agreement to this type of investment .
What the European Union needs at this time is solidarity in all aspects , both as regards energy security and as regards environmental protection .
Mr President , I think this report is going to be a test case whether the European Parliament has to serve the interests of the citizens first - and citizens are really worried - or yield to the pressure of big companies , a pressure that has become really embarrassing .
I regret that this issue has been highly politicised .
But this is a result of how the thing was started through bilateral deals , ignoring all the other interested parties .
Now I think what we need - and I fully agree with Mrs Wallis - is a coordinated , coherent EU approach and strict observance of EU law .
The precondition for building the pipeline should be a truly independent environmental impact study under the supervision of the Commission , establishing liability for possible damages , and Russia ratifying the Espoo Convention .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( LT ) EU states are continuing to implement projects with potentially catastrophic consequences , while at the same time discussing the impact of human activities on the environment .
Yesterday the Nord Stream pipeline was a business project between two countries - Germany and Russia ; today it has become an EU priority .
The Nord Stream pipeline is to be constructed under a shallow sea that happens to be the most polluted in the world , the bottom of which is littered with chemical weapons from World War II along with pollutants from Russian military bases .
It is intended to pass through Natura 2000 territory .
It is imperative that we have an independent investigation into the potential environmental consequences .
In the event of a catastrophe , people living around the sea will suffer any damage directly and there will also be consequences for the economy of the countries and the environment in general .
Who will be held responsible ?
There are 10 states whose citizens live around the Baltic Sea ; it is not just Germany and Russia , countries with a history of deciding the fate of other nations .
I call on Europe to be unanimous in searching for other alternatives such as land pipelines and to consider nuclear energy , not gas , as an environmentally friendly alternative with the potential to provide the EU with secure energy .
( PL ) Mr President , over the past months I have submitted a number of questions to the Commission on this subject and always received answers that were unclear and general in nature .
I would like to draw your attention to three issues in this debate .
In practice , all the countries bordering the Baltic Sea have serious reservations concerning this project and believe there will be a negative impact on the natural environment of the Baltic Sea .
The second is the cost of this project , which , even according to the investor , is rising dramatically : initially it was estimated at EUR 4.5 billion , now it stands at around EUR 8-12 billion .
You could say that this only affects the principal , but the point is that in the end the cost will be passed on to consumers .
This is even more surprising as there are alternative , land routes for the gas pipeline that are two or three times cheaper .
Thirdly and finally , this is a project that strikes at the heart of the ideal of a common energy policy for the European Union .
It is difficult to imagine this ideal being realised in the future , when the gas pipeline project ( ... )
( The President cut off the speaker )
( SV ) Mr President , the gas pipeline project is founded on three fundamental errors .
It is environmentally wrong : billions are being invested in fossil fuel instead of renewable energy , and it will be environmentally destructive and give rise to enormous quantities of sludge .
When the 10-km-long Öresund Bridge was built , much more toxic sludge was carted away than had been expected .
This pipeline is over 1 000 km long .
It will be an environmental disaster , with PCBs , DDT and chemical pesticides on the seabed .
It is founded on selfishness instead of solidarity .
Germany and Russia are acting over the heads of other countries , which will not be offered any gas , and that too is dreadful .
Even worse : it is undemocratic .
It is being laid in the sea in order to prevent landowners from blocking the pipeline .
It is being laid in the sea because perhaps only a few governments can say ' no ' where it passes through their territorial waters .
It is you , Commissioner , who have the right according to the Espoo Convention to defend the non-territorial part of the Baltic .
It is you , only you , who can stand up for the rights of the landowners under the Espoo Convention and demand alternative routes .
( LT ) Today we have heard mention of the Espoo Convention on several occasions , mainly with regard to the need for all interested countries to observe international environmental protection standards .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fact is that the Espoo Convention has not been ratified by Russia .
Promises to maintain the standards defined in that document without ratifying it cannot be considered credible , as we have some experience of this with the energy charter .
A group of fellow Members are proposing amendments to today 's document .
In the four years that I have worked in this Parliament I have never come across lobbying of one company on such a scale .
We are perfectly aware of the need for an independent assessment of the environmental impact , and the point of view that this assessment should be carried out by a single company , which some have mentioned , as if it could be done by that company alone , is completely unacceptable .
I support the Libicki report and call on my fellow Members to join me .
Mr President , we are talking about this project as if this is the first time in the world an underwater pipeline is being built .
There are dozens of pipelines crossing our seas , with no problems whatsoever .
We have the technology today to bring gas , to bring energy , to areas that need it , and millions of German citizens need this gas and they need it urgently .
We must be honest enough to realise that the purpose of this report is not to stop gas coming into Germany or into the EU , but to stop it from crossing the Baltic Sea and to get it overland .
It is stated clearly in paragraph 25 that it is possible to transport it overland , so it can pass through Poland purely for political and economic reasons .
We must be honest enough to admit it .
It is unethical to use environmental concerns in order to achieve political objectives and , for that reason , I will vote against it .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to respond to Commissioner Dimas , who focused on political and economic issues , somewhat avoiding the question of the environment .
We all know that Russia does not intend to comply with the mutuality principle as regards investment in the energy market .
In the best case it will regulate access to its market , expelling , at any time , any European investor .
For this reason the Nord Stream project strengthens Russia 's position economically and is harmful for Europe .
We all know that Russia has no intention of stopping using energy as a tool for exerting political pressure .
Today this is principally affecting Ukraine .
Realisation of the Nord Stream project will mean that every European Union country will be similarly exposed to this type of pressure and could thus be blackmailed .
We shall wait for the negative assessments of the Baltic countries to be taken into account in this matter .
Commissioner Dimas can ignore these views .
We may even finance this project from European funds .
In that case please do not be surprised if more groups of European citizens turn their backs on the process of integration .
Some will say that this project is of no interest to them , others , that it is harmful .

Mr President , to my colleague Mr Matsakis I would say that I live close to the Baltic ; he does not .
In the name of environmental solidarity , he should show some concern for the Baltic as well .
( SV ) Mr President , sometimes in this House we hear contributions to which we listen especially attentively , and that is the case where contributions from Vytautas Landsbergis are concerned .
With the experience Mr Landsbergis has of the political preconditions for a region to be created and shaped in a climate of security , I think we all have reason to listen when he speaks .
I would like to say to Commissioner Dimas and to the Commission as a whole that I find it incomprehensible that neither the EU nor you yourself , Commissioner , or the rest of the Commission , have reacted to this huge project - in terms of security policy , energy policy or environmental policy .
I have posed the question several times and received extremely evasive answers .
I do not understand why it took so long for you to become involved in this matter , which concerns the whole of Europe , not just Russia and not just Germany .
( FI ) Mr President , the Baltic is an environmental stain on the European Union .
It really is in a bad way .
We demand and need plenty of measures to improve the condition of the Baltic , but this is not possible without Russia committing to the matter in question .
Since we know how important the construction of this pipeline is to Russia , we now have the chance to require , before we grant permission to build it , that Russia commit to certain other environmental projects in order to reduce emissions in the Baltic .
If permission is granted , we must be sure that Russia really does commit to the matter in question and initiates the necessary measures .
This is both an opportunity and , at the same time , a question of credibility for the whole European Union .
We must act as one and speak with a single voice in our relations with Russia , in order to save the Baltic .
Now we have the opportunity to do so , and we must use it .
Ladies and gentleman , we have given the floor to 10 speakers .
These are exceptional circumstances , since we normally have a maximum of five .
There are still a few Members who had also asked to speak .
I wish to remind them that they can also make their contribution in writing , and this would of course be added to the Minutes of the sitting .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the speakers in today 's debate for their interesting views .
It is true that I have referred to the public hearing requested by the Committee on Petitions in January , in which both I and my colleague , Mr Piebalgs , Commissioner responsible for energy matters , spoke , and I have repeated what was said regarding the need for natural gas imports , as my colleague Mr Piebalgs said .
I have also referred to Decision No 1364 / 2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council , pursuant to which the guidelines specified certain priority projects as projects of a European interest , including this project .
That was your decision , not mine !
Therefore , do not criticise me for placing too much emphasis on economic matters !
I have referred precisely to matters decided by you .
Other than that , the emphasis in my speech was placed on environmental matters .
These are the matters I am concerned about .
Therefore , I kindly ask you to be a bit more attentive , not only during one-sixth of my speech , but also during the remaining five-sixths .
The concerns regarding the environmental impact of projects of such large proportions , of great importance and with complex technical aspects are , of course , totally legitimate .
They imply that the general public is becoming increasingly involved in debates on sustainable development and on environmental protection in relation to large infrastructure projects .
Both the environmental impact and the views of the public and of authorities with responsibility for environmental matters are , however , included in the environmental impact assessment , which is provided for in the relevant legislation on environmental impact assessments , in the EU directive and in the Espoo Convention , which , as I mentioned earlier , Russia has signed but not ratified , although it has stated that it will implement it .
I hope it will ratify it .
We always put pressure on third-party countries to ratify agreements of environmental interest .
The findings of the environmental impact procedures must be carefully evaluated by the authorities with the power to issue an implementation permit or construction permits for any kind of infrastructure project .
Only then can these authorities have a clear understanding of the environmental issues included in the report so meticulously drafted by Mr Libicki .
For instance , the report mentions the threat of large-scale pollution from the discharge into the Baltic Sea of thousands of tonnes of chemicals needed to clean the pipeline before it enters into service ; ' specific chemicals ' , as the report says .
However , it seems that in February 2008 the contractor confirmed that it does not intend using these chemicals in the pipeline 's pressure tests before it enters into service .
This does not mean that the problem will not be there .
It is highly probable that other chemicals will be used .
Nonetheless , it means that we must wait until the environmental impact assessment procedure has been concluded , as is required by the law , in order to be able to discuss compliance with EU legislation and policy , the impact , the risks , the measures and also to decide on the terms which must be imposed on the project owner .
The transparency terms set for the environmental impact assessment procedure ensure that all the parties involved , including the European Parliament , will have access to all the relevant information .
Interestingly , various sides have today voiced the view that the Commission must have great jurisdiction , either in order to carry out environmental impact studies or in order to impose various policies .
The Commission 's jurisdiction is specific ; with regard to studies and environmental assessment studies , it has neither the means nor the jurisdiction , with the latter held by the Member States .
The role of the Commission , as stated in the Treaty , is to ensure that the Member States duly implement and fully adhere to all the rules of Community law , including the international agreements ratified by the Community .
The Commission may only intervene if there are serious grounds to believe that there have been omissions in performing the relevant legal obligations based on Community law , including the environmental laws of the European Union .
There have been no such indications so far , as the environmental impact study procedure is still in progress .
I assure you that the Commission will not hesitate to intervene if and when needed .
Finally , I can simply repeat at this point that the Commission expects the Member States to fully honour their obligations stemming from Community law .
This is a fundamental condition for any final decision of approval .
I wish to thank you once again and to thank Mr Libicki for his report and for the opportunity he gave us to discuss this crucial issue of the pipeline and of its potential environmental impact .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank all those who spoke in this debate .
I have to say that I feel proud to be a Member of this House .
Today , this House spoke with the voice of the people , which is not always the case in Parliament : the voice of the people , as in the best European traditions of the European Parliaments , which were established so that the people 's views could be put to the great and good of this world .
Commissioner Dimas , today you are one of the great and good of this world .
Please listen to the voice of the people , who spoke today through these parliamentarians .
Nearly everyone agreed that this pipeline is not just a threat to the environment , but that it will be harmful to the environment , firstly through the construction process and then , God forbid , should any disaster occur .
Many opinions were put forward on this subject , but Mr Dimas did not discuss them .
Why not build the gas pipeline overland when it would be three times cheaper and would also be safer ?
The European Commission has nothing to say yet this is an issue that was discussed .
Another issue was raised : the fact that Nord Stream is a State-owned company , that it is all part of a political plan .
There were comments to the effect that this is all politics .
Yes , it is all politics : the politics of Nord Stream and its owner , the Kremlin .
There was also talk in the House that what is needed is European solidarity .
I do not understand why the amendment was tabled to cancel the clause discussing solidarity .
It is exactly this issue that is a test of European solidarity , as was mentioned just a moment ago .
Why have you not spoken of the costs that will be passed on to consumers ?
This was raised here .
Now we are facing this test : will the great and good of this world , the great and good of the Union , to which you belong , Commissioner , listen to the voice of the people , as the great and the good listened to the voice of parliament in ages past ?
When they did not listen , things ended badly .
We have seen the outcome in the French , Dutch and Irish referenda .
Please treat this as a warning .
The great and good in the European Union should remember whom they are serving so that the outcome will be a positive one .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 p.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - The impulse provided by the Nord Stream debate represents a good start for Europe to finally speak with one voice on energy security issues and to focus on an effective common energy policy .
Energy security is a vital element in the context of overall EU security and should therefore be treated with utmost care especially in the face of a growing dependency on energy imports , expected to reach 65 % by 2030 .
Dependency on gas alone is expected to rise to 84 % of supply by 2030 .
Attention should be given to the EU 's distinctive relationship with Russia : emphasis should be placed on the creation and observance of equal access conditions and fair treatment of both Russian investors in the EU as well as EU investors in Russia .
Alas , the latter case is not yet maintained and should therefore be strived for .
Moreover , I wish to acknowledge the importance of Russia 's possible ratification of the Energy Charter Treaty and the Transit Protocol in the avoidance of potential Nord-Stream-project-related disagreements .
I would like again to bring into discussion the potentially disastrous environmental consequences that the Nord Stream project poses , given its scale and proposed route , and to present my support for an alternative inland route .
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the position that the European Parliament has adopted regarding the construction of a gas pipeline to connect Russia to Germany .
The European Union needs an integrated , common and coherent energy policy , as well as a long-term strategy to ensure the Member States ' energy independence .
The European Union should treat the environmental and geopolitical issues regarding energy security by means of a concerted effort of all Member States , and not by bilateral treaties concluded by some Member States with Russia .
This is the only way in which the European Union could achieve a strong position in the negotiations with Russia , avoiding the energy resources being transformed into a political pressure factor and could transform the EU into an equal partner of Russia .
This way , we can also provide answers to the justified frustrations of Romanian citizens regarding the continuous price increases for gas and electricity , with important negative social-economic consequences for Romanians and their living standard .
At the same time , the solution of a European common energy policy could supplement the incapacity of the Bucharest right-wing governing people to promote Romania 's energy interests in the relationship with Russia .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to express my thanks to Mr Marcin Libicki , Chairman of the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , for working on a subject that has aroused a great deal of anxiety .
Over 30 000 worried EU citizens have asked for assistance with regard to the proposal to construct a pipeline on the Baltic seabed .
It is a great shame that those who intend to undertake this investment have not as yet submitted an environmental impact assessment .
After all , this is to be the longest undersea construction project in the world at 1 200 kilometres .
The issue we are debating today has both an ecological and an economic dimension .
Of course , one cannot ignore the political background to the whole issue .
The route of the pipeline is to go through Natura 2000 areas as well as underwater ammunition dumps and sunken poisonous gas from the time of the Second World War .
We must , therefore , have some reliable research carried out , looking at the risks in four scenarios : during the construction of the pipeline , during normal use , in critical situations ( disaster ) and when the pipeline is being dismantled after use or if the supply contract is terminated .
We have no reliable analysis of this project , at a time when , according to the law , just about every building project requires an environmental impact assessment .
This is not just an issue affecting two countries : Germany and Russia .
Today , this issue is also an example of a lack of European solidarity in the field of energy .
Let us therefore listen to the voices of our concerned citizens .
They can tell that there is something here that is wrong .
in writing . - ( FI ) The decision on constructing the Baltic gas pipeline is a deal between two players : Russia and Germany .
It should be a matter for all the states that surround the Baltic .
Germany and Russia are not the only states on the Baltic .
A common decision on this matter is right as the Baltic gas pipeline will have a negative environmental impact on the Baltic .
The environmental impact of the Baltic gas pipeline must be investigated and the necessary measures must be taken .
A commitment by Russia to comply with the Espoo Convention should be laid down as a condition for permission to build .
The condition of the Baltic environment can only be improved if Russia is committed to and interested in it .
Now we have a chance to make Russia commit .
Russia 's economic welfare depends on energy exports .
On the other hand , the EU depends on Russia 's energy .
Fair , strategic cooperation between the EU and Russia that respects the environment is necessary .
There has been much criticism of the Kremlin in this Chamber .
However , there always need to be two parties to an agreement .
Now is the time for the EU to look at itself .
There are good reasons for changing EU cooperation and concern about the condition of the Baltic into action !
in writing . - ( ET ) Article 194 of the future Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ( the Lisbon Treaty ) clearly states that EU policy on energy should , in a spirit of solidarity between Member States , have regard for the need to preserve and improve the environment .
I can in no way agree that the natural environment in Europe can be made slave to EU external energy policy , when in recent years Europe has spoken out forcefully for environmental protection .
Given the fact that the Baltic Sea is already one of the most contaminated maritime areas today , it is unacceptable to subject it to any further risk factors which could lead the area to the brink of natural and economic catastrophe in the future .
I urge the European Parliament to support the ideas put forward by the Baltic Sea countries , the rapporteur and environmental organisations for the Baltic pipeline to be built on land and I therefore urge the European Commission and Council to use all available legal means at their disposal to change the constructor 's plan to construct the pipeline through the Baltic Sea .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his very successful work .
The report addresses creditably the concerns of Union 's citizens - especially citizens of the states surrounding the Baltic - about the environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline .
The construction of the Baltic gas pipeline is primarily an environmental question , and the whole project and its feasibility should be examined in this light .
The Baltic is one of the most polluted seas in the world .
Its special character makes it a particularly vulnerable sea : it is one of the shallowest seas in the world and its water turnover is slow .
The Baltic is a unique body of brackish water , and for this reason some of the plants and animals in the sea are not found anywhere else in the world .
Massive environmental damage would be catastrophic for the sea .
I strongly support the requirement in the report for an independent third party to conduct an environmental impact analysis .
The analysis should be based on extensive scientific and environmental factors .
It is also possible even to get Russia to commit to the implementation of any negative decisions from the environmental assessments , by way of internationally agreed conventions .
All the conventions mentioned in the report are relevant .
It is noteworthy that this would be the first time that the Helsinki Treaty of 1974 were to be applied in practice .
The construction work must not start before all the possible environmental effects connected with the life cycle of the pipeline have been assessed .
Routing the pipeline by land should also be considered carefully .
The energy needs of the Union are undisputed .
However , there are many ways of satisfying energy needs , and the seas inside the Union should not be decisively endangered only because other options would seem to be more expensive .
in writing . - ( PL ) The Baltic gas pipeline has many aspects to it , including economic , ecological , energy and political aspects .
Apart from the aspect of energy , none of the others stands up .
From an economic point of view , it is far better and three times cheaper to build an overland pipeline , rather than one on the seabed .
From an ecological point of view , the construction of a gas pipeline on the seabed threatens the whole Baltic Sea basin with disaster , and not just this basin .
No one has fully analysed the extent of this risk and no one can foresee its consequences .
From the political point of view it is advantageous for Russia , it brings conflict into the European Union and results in Germany breaching the EU principles of partnership and solidarity .
In these circumstances the report by Mr Marcin Libidzki , which contains convincing and specific information , should be adopted and should be taken into account when a decision is taken .
in writing . - ( CS ) I too am disturbed by the worries of the tens of thousands of citizens who in their petition highlight the risks accompanying the construction of the biggest gas pipeline at the bottom of the shallow Baltic Sea .
Their petition resulted in a public hearing and in a European Parliament report , which highlighted the need to include other countries , and the EU in particular , in the decision-making process .
The problems are due to the ecological risks that exist as a result of vast graveyards of warships and munitions at the bottom of the sea , and a risky chemical method needed to clean the pipeline before it enters into service .
I shall not express an opinion on the land-based alternative route but I firmly believe that the European Commission and the Council must take up their role as coordinators duties and consistently demand - in the interest of the Baltic and other countries - that the investors assume full responsibility for potential ecological damage .
The Commission and the Council must also request an independent impact assessment and an assessment of the alternative land-based route .
The northern gas supply route from Russia is important .
Therefore , it is imperative that the EU signs an agreement with Russia regarding the conditions for monitoring the construction of the gas pipeline and for its safe operation .
After all , Russia has not yet ratified the Espoo Convention .
Unfortunately , we do not yet have a common EU energy policy or standards .
We can clearly see that instead of a bilateral agreement between Germany and Russia , Europeans need an EU agreement and the consent of the Baltic countries to the construction .
Parliament is now sending a clear political signal in this regard .
in writing . - ( PL ) The debate on Mr Libicki 's report shows almost total unanimity in the assessment of the Nord Stream project .
It is economically unsound , threatens horrendous additional costs in the future price of gas , constitutes an ecological threat to Baltic countries and also increases the dependence of some Member States on supplies from Russia .
The question arises - who benefits ?
The voice of Mr Matsakis , who in this context spoke of opposing the report and called for ' honesty ' , can hardly be taken seriously .
It is difficult to understand what Mr Matsakis understands by the concept of honesty .
Voting on this report will be a test of the extent to which the European Parliament is really guided by the views of economists , ecologists and ordinary EU citizens , and how much by pressure from the Russo-German lobby , which is intent on reducing energy security and ecological safety for some Member States and on destroying EU solidarity .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , constructing the gas pipeline as a project buried in the ground would be a cheaper , safer option than sinking it in the sea .
The planned Baltic pipeline will undoubtedly have an impact on the environment , and this must be investigated .
It must be done in order to minimise the risks .
However , Nord Stream does not fall within the EU 's powers , and even Parliament is only debating the matter on the basis of a report by the Committee on Petitions .
It is Polish internal politics , which is being brought before a Community institution in this roundabout way as an environmental issue , without any reference to the political motives of Poland and the Baltic States .
If I were a Russian gas salesman and a German buyer , I would not be able to rely on the security of supply , especially in the event that the gas pipeline is routed through Polish territory .
In Europe we have bad experiences of Ukraine 's mediation , when it stockpiled gas or failed to pay for it and then , when it came to the crunch , it kept for its own use gas that had been sent from Russia to Central Europe .
The same kind of danger has not been ruled out in the case of Poland .
So logically it works against the development of trade and economic relations between Russia and the EU .
And the countries of the Baltic support it .
Unfortunately , there is no land-based alternative to sinking the pipeline in the sea , but it demands that the marine environment be protected .
Stabilisation of Afghanistan : challenges for the EU and the international community ( debate )

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Jouyet , ladies and gentlemen , yesterday in Kabul saw the bloodiest attack since 2001 with more than 40 Afghans and Indians killed and 140 injured .
We wish to extend our deepest sympathy to the victims and express our outrage at the murderers who were responsible .
Those who follow the European media and those who , for example , have read today 's edition of Daily Outlook Afghanistan will know that violence in Afghanistan has now become much more widespread and commonplace .
Teachers are being shot practically every day , which is one of the most cynical aspects of the Taliban strategy .
Schools , and especially girls ' schools , are being burnt down or forced to close , bridges and roads are being blown up .
What was not reported in Europe was the attack by the US-led coalition forces on a wedding party in the province of Nangarhar on Sunday that left 23 people dead , including the bride .
A similar incident also occurred in the neighbouring province of Urusgan .
President Karsai has now ordered an investigation .
It is clear that the security situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated in the last three years .
However , there are many distinctly positive developments to be considered too : advances in education and health policy , regional success in the rebuilding programme and in the eradication of drugs , the creation of a critical and independent media thanks to a number of incredibly courageous journalists , and the establishment in many areas of an active civil society along with spirited women 's organisations .
However , there are also negative aspects to report , such as the fact that the growing of opium poppies has now reached record levels nationwide and that this crop has become increasingly linked to the general economy as well as to the escalating levels of crime and corruption and to the activities of the insurgent groups .
The international food crisis has had dramatic consequences for millions of Afghans .
Corruption is widespread in government circles and indeed originates from this source .
The rule of law is not properly established and can be compared with Guantanamo or the US prison in Bagram , as well as being fundamentally questioned by international governments .
Fundamentalist ideologies have clearly been gaining ground in recent years , even in key areas of government and parliament , and this poses a threat to the freedom of the press and media and , more particularly , to the hopes of Afghan women and girls for an equal role in society .
The terrible violence being committed every day against women and girls on a domestic , family and local level is for me still the most serious and glaring problem and one that is most being ignored by our media .
It pains me that due to lack of time I am unable to go into this in any more detail .
Afghanistan and its people have deserved our fullest commitment .
After 30 years of war , with more than one and a half million people killed , the international community is duty-bound to show its full solidarity with Afghanistan .
The country and its society have been destroyed by the policies and war of occupation waged by the Soviet Union , by the internal warfare of the Mujahedeen groups who were armed by the US , Pakistan , Iran and other countries , and by the sinister rule of the Taliban .
Our report presents a discriminating and realistic picture .
It recognises the significant successes of the Afghan people and identifies the political shortcomings of the Afghan and other international governments .
It expresses our fullest support and makes clear that we are absolutely committed to establishing democracy and human rights , especially the rights of Afghan women and children .
This is not only a matter of general principle but also a specific requirement as far as Malalai Dschoja , Pervez Kambasch and Latif Petram are concerned .
With this report the European Parliament is calling for a new strategy for the international community and for the Afghan Government that has as its central focus the rebuilding of civil society .
This is the policy being promoted by the UN Special Representative for Afghanistan , Kai Eide .
This is a most important move and I am pleased that we in this House have sent out such a signal .
I should like to express my thanks to my colleagues from the other political groups , to the Commission - and Commissioner you have a wonderful team in Kabul and in Brussels dealing with the Afghanistan problem - and to the Council 's Special Representative , as well as to the many Afghan and international NGOs that have been involved .
I must therefore say that this makes it all the more difficult for me to have to withdraw my name from the report .
I was unable to persuade a majority that the problems of Afghanistan cannot be solved by military means .
If a majority in this House should now then call for troop levels to be strengthened and in so doing ignore the national reservations of the Member States , this would defeat the real issues raised in the report and would run counter to my own personal concerns .
The fact that the majority wishes of all the peoples of Europe should be disregarded is unacceptable for Afghanistan - the events of recent days bear this out - and is absolutely the wrong policy .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am honoured and privileged to be speaking here before the European Parliament for the first time .
Before beginning , like Mr Brie , I , too , wish to strongly condemn , on behalf of the Presidency , yesterday 's attack on the Indian Embassy in Kabul , which killed more than 40 civilians , including a number of embassy personnel , and injured hundreds .
This attack sought to destabilise the consolidation and reconstruction process under way in Afghanistan .
The European Union is fully determined to support the Afghan Government and the Afghan people in their efforts to build a stable and democratic state , and these tragic events highlight the importance and urgency of our discussions this morning .
Like Parliament , the Council is convinced of the need for a long-term commitment in Afghanistan .
Our objective must be to help the government to develop the structures needed for a modern and democratic state that can function properly , guarantee the safety of its citizens , respect the rule of law , and promote economic and social development .
I should point out that the combined effort of the Afghan authorities and the international community has produced some impressive results that should be highlighted : 25 % decline in the infant mortality rate and 6 million children attending school , a third of whom are girls .
In this respect , I must pay tribute to the work carried out by Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and by the Commission in general in this area and in all aspects relating to the restoration of the rule of law .
We must build on these successes , but we must be aware , too , of the extent of the challenges that lie ahead , especially those highlighted by Mr Brie : governance , insecurity , corruption and drugs , which go hand in hand and have a negative impact on the normal functioning of the institutions and the sustainable development of the country .
We must therefore work with our other partners in the drugs field to ensure the application of Security Council Resolution 1817 , adopted on 11 June , which should enable the international community to step up the fight against trafficking in the precursor chemicals used to produce heroin .
Like Parliament , the Council places the utmost importance on the democratic process in Afghanistan .
During the 2004 and 2005 elections the Afghan people opted very clearly and very determinedly for democracy and stability , and we must help them to establish the best possible conditions for the preparations for the forthcoming presidential election in 2009 and general election in 2010 .
The Council was extremely interested in the report on Afghanistan presented by Parliament and summarised by Mr Brie , and wishes to highlight three specific aspects .
The first is that the Council hopes that the Afghan Government will assume a greater share of the responsibility for Afghanistan 's reconstruction and development process .
Moreover , in all areas emphasis should be placed on the Afghan people assuming their responsibilities and the need for guarantees in the area of good governance , hence the obligation on the Afghan authorities to fulfil their commitments in this respect .
Secondly , the Council underlines the importance of moving forward in close cooperation with the Afghan Government towards a single vision within the international community of how to achieve common objectives , ensuring in particular that the actions carried out are coherent in terms of their military and civil dimensions .
That is the mandate given to the new United Nations Special Representative , Mr Kai Eide , and the Council wishes to express its full support for him in his mission .
It is in the same context that the Council feels that it is necessary to strengthen the capacities of UNAMA ( United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan ) in order to extend its presence throughout the territory , notably in the south and west of the country .

Our third and final observation concerning Mr Brie 's report is that it is essential to improve cooperation and relations between Afghanistan and its neighbours in order to ensure permanent stability in the country , especially given the multi-dimensional nature of some of the problems clearly highlighted by Mr Brie , notably drug production and trafficking .
In any event , these brief comments on the report presented by Parliament should not take away from the fact that in general the Council and Parliament have very similar views on the policy to be implemented in Afghanistan .
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome and encourage the initiative presented in Mr Brie 's report aimed at strengthening the cooperation between the European Parliament and the Afghan Parliament .
For all these reasons the Union will continue to act and play a major role in mobilising the international community to assist Afghanistan .
That goal formed the basis of the Council conclusions of 26 May , which were largely inspired by the worked carried out at the International Conference in support of Afghanistan held in Paris on 12 June .
This Conference was a great success for Afghanistan , as it was for the European Union , which succeeded in putting across in full its positions on key aspects of the country 's development .
I should point out that a few months earlier , at the NATO Summit held in Bucharest from 2 to 4 April , the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy , together with President Karzai and the UN Secretary-General , attended the meeting of Heads of State and Government on Afghanistan .
The countries contributing to the IFAS , for which the EU Member States provide almost half of the personnel , adopted in Bucharest a new strategy for their common commitment guided by four principles , which I will mention here : a firm and shared long-term commitment ; support for enhanced Afghan leadership and responsibility in security matters ; a comprehensive approach by the international community to reconstruction ; and a shared political strategy involving Afghanistan 's neighbours , especially Pakistan .
In conclusion , I would like to highlight certain areas where the European Union makes a significant contribution and where its action is essential for strengthening State capacities and consolidating the rule of law in Afghanistan .
First of all , as you know , the Union has had a Special Representative since 2002 and that post is currently held by Mr Francesc Vendrell .
The difficulties initially encountered when setting up the EUPOL mission , which were logistical in nature , have now been resolved .
EUPOL is particularly involved in the reform of the Ministry of the Interior and in the development of a strategy for the Afghan police .
Finally , I wanted to point out that by deciding at the last General Affairs and External Relations Council on 26 May that its goal was to double the number of personnel involved in its Afghanistan police mission , the European Union sent a clear message to both its Afghan partners and the international community regarding its enhanced commitment to Afghanistan .
This increase in the size of the EUPOL mission should improve the visibility and effectiveness of our action in the key sectors relating to police reform , in spite of the violent events that have taken place in recent days .

Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , honourable Members of this Parliament , Mr Brie , I should perhaps first like to say a few words in German and to thank you for this very important and first-rate report , and for the excellent way in which you cooperated with my staff both in Kabul and in Brussels .
I would also endorse the words expressed both by you and by the President-in-Office of the Council .
It truly tragic that yesterday we again witnessed such a calamity as this terrorist attack .
On one hand we of course have to express our clearest condemnation , but on the other there are also the victims to consider .
This is precisely the setting in which this debate unfortunately has to take place .
Let me say that I think this very comprehensive report is very important in this difficult and precarious security situation and we cannot , and will not , allow those who wish to take Afghanistan backwards to prevail .
Over the last months , and particularly during the preparation of this report , we have been working very closely with the rapporteur .
I wanted to thank you for your interest as witnessed , firstly , by the two visits the European Parliament has made there and , secondly , in November 2007 , when you again received parliamentarians from the Wolesi Jirga in Brussels , which was an important sign for them .
We have worked with a dedicated Delegation for relations with Afghanistan ; you are following developments on the ground very closely , and we try to help where we can .
Finally , your report addresses the central issue : how can we stabilise Afghanistan , what are the challenges facing the international community , and how can we deal with them ?
In the same spirit , at the important conference in Paris we said clearly that we want to overcome the threat of terrorism ; but , at the same time , we also have a challenge in our public opinions everywhere , because they do not always appreciate the challenges , and do not always embrace all the efforts that it takes to combat this threat .
I think the Paris Conference was also a very important and good opportunity to review our strategy , to focus it even more clearly .
The Commission has committed EUR 1.2 billion from 2002-2007 .
We have particularly worked on the following : firstly , providing better security in Afghanistan by financing police salaries , closely linking this to support for Afghanistan 's police and its reform ; secondly , providing alternative livelihoods to the opium poppy and thus helping to eradicate drugs ; thirdly , improving the lives of Afghans - we have focused here particularly on healthcare , where we already have been part of the undeniable success of recent years , and I would also say that we have worked on the infrastructure and regional integration with transit links , such as the important road from Jalalabad to Kabul .
However , the Paris Conference also delivered a distinct political message about overdue changes .
These changes are indispensable if we want to realise mutual obligations under the Afghanistan compact and turn international efforts - all our efforts - into success on the ground .
Therefore , we all know that more and better coordination is needed among all the actors involved .
I can also praise Mr Kai Eide , whom I have known for many years , who is an excellent person .
He will play a central role and I can assure you we will all work with him very closely .
But , of course , we also see the necessity for a genuine commitment by our Afghan partners .
They really have to go for more ownership in their state-building process , and this comes , of course , with its own responsibility and with a vision for a stable country for the future .
We are heading towards the elections in 2009 and 2010 ; undoubtedly for the Government it will be crucial to regain legitimacy , which has been dented by corruption and weak governance , notably in the provinces , and therefore we are looking into ways of how to best support the election process .
Afghanistan is at a crossroads .
Many of the early achievements of democratic state-building - notably human rights , freedom of expression and the media - are somewhat under pressure .
It will be hard under such circumstances for a civil society to emerge .
In this context , your commitment here in Parliament - and I thank the rapporteur once again - and your cooperation with the Afghan Parliament , the Wolesi Jirga , are invaluable .
I think you can contribute to this fostering of a democratic process .
As the EU - and I close with that - we have the responsibility to support Afghanistan in the interest not only of the people of that country and of the stability of the whole region but also of Europe .
This is what we also have to clearly tell our taxpayers .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I knew I had two minutes but shall not dwell on that .
I wish to thank Mr Brie for the commitment and enthusiasm he has invested in this report , and would appeal to him not to withdraw his name from it because he did a very good job of work , along with the other shadow rapporteurs and myself .
To say what ?
To do what , at such a crucial moment for Afghanistan ?
What happened yesterday demonstrates that the commitment of Europe and others to Afghanistan is of the utmost importance .
What we demand in this report is , firstly , a stronger commitment in terms of military presence , because without that we shall get nowhere ; secondly , a stepping-up of the commitment to improve democratic structures in the new Republic of Afghanistan , which has fallen into a situation of total lawlessness over the past 30 or more years and , worst of all , lies at the heart of international terrorism .
When we began to turn our attention to the phenomenon of international terrorism after September 11th , we went into Afghanistan and then Iraq and found that we had entered a viper 's nest .
The last outpost - like Hitler in his Berlin bunker , as it were - of terrorists in the world at the moment is Afghanistan .
They are trying to regroup , taking revenge in Afghanistan for the defeat they have suffered and are still suffering in Iraq .
We in the European Parliament can send out a message along these lines if as many of us as possible vote in favour of this report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) I congratulate the rapporteur , André Brie , on his careful analysis of the serious problems that we are facing in Afghanistan and , in particular , on his efforts to find a wording that would allow all the political groups to vote in favour of the compromise amendments .
Unfortunately , during the vote in committee , two important ideas contained within the compromise amendments fell victim to the political prejudice of colleagues who prefer to ignore the problems facing the international community in Afghanistan , problems horrifically illustrated by yesterday 's suicide attack on the Indian Embassy in Kabul .
As a result , the reference to the need for the international community to reassess its civil and military strategy fell by the wayside , as did the passage underlining the growing popular discontent at the corruption spreading through government institutions .
In this respect , I call on my fellow Members to support the amendments reintroduced by the PSE Group in order to rebalance the report .
How can a report of this House on Afghanistan refrain from mentioning the role of Pakistan and its military regime that for so many years has misgoverned that country ?
How can we , as Members of the European Parliament , ignore the secret prisons of our US allies in Kabul and not only that ?
Why do some Members reject legitimate criticisms of the Afghan judicial system ?
The position of the PSE Group is clear : it is possible to support the increased presence of international troops in Afghanistan while , at the same time , defending the need to reassess the military strategy of the ISAF ( International Security Assistance Force ) .
It is possible to be in favour of close cooperation between Europe and the United States in Afghanistan , without closing our eyes to the crimes committed by the Bush Administration in the name of the fight against terrorism .
Finally , it is possible to support the Afghan institutions while , at the same time , drawing attention to their severe limitations .
Europe will only be able to assume a strategic role in Afghanistan when it stops being afraid of presenting its own vision for the future of the country .
Why not start here and now with this report ?
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I would also like to congratulate Mr Brie on a good report .
He has dealt with this difficult topic thoroughly and from various angles .
The primary challenges for Afghanistan are restoring security and establishing a functioning state .
It is a difficult task , because the security situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated rather than improved .
Improving the security situation is an essential requirement for all development , but a military solution alone will not remove the complex problems of the country , as the rapporteur stated .
Reconstructing the entire society , implementing the rule of law , improving democracy and human rights , promoting equality and building a functioning government , educational institutions and healthcare for the whole country are enormous tasks .
Afghanistan also needs a programme for the comprehensive development of rural areas and the creation of alternatives for opium farmers .
All this also requires greater contributions by the European Union to supporting and reconstructing Afghanistan .
The EU must also strive to make the activities of the international community more effective by coordinating them .
I would still like to emphasise the significance of the civil society that is developing in Afghanistan for strengthening the rule of law and democracy and for defeating the culture of violence .
The development and freedom to act of independent , pluralistic means of communication are extremely important in this work .
There is still a lot of work to do in this area in Afghanistan .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the last 30 years of Afghanistan 's history have seen Soviet occupation , civil war and then the Taliban in power .
For this reason Operation Enduring Freedom , which was begun by the US , the United Kingdom , Poland , the Czech Republic , France and Romania , together with the present ISAF mission , which brings together a military coalition of almost all the Member States in the European Union , should be treated as a success .
The education system is working better , the healthcare system is working better and the Government of Mr Hamid Karzai is in control of a significant part of the country under very difficult circumstances .
The terrorist revival in 2007 can only mean one thing for us : what Afghanistan needs from the European Union and NATO is increased financial , political and military support .
A different approach , which can be seen in the amendments put forward by the left , would be a demonstration of selfishness , hypocrisy and short-sightedness .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are in a paradoxical situation .
My Group will recommend that everyone reads the original report produced by Mr Brie so that they will understand the nature of the challenges facing us in Afghanistan .
What then happened was that a majority in the Committee on Foreign Affairs simply amended and deleted the measures that were so urgently needed .
We simply cannot say : more troops , everything to continue as before , everything is going well .
Nothing is going well !
Yesterday 's attack showed that .
We need to revise the military strategy ; we need to bring all the different initiatives together .
This was actually what we wanted to achieve together .
My group tabled the amendments in conjunction with the Socialist Group in order to fight now to achieve this important objective , Mr Brie .
I say this with all the respect that I have had for the work that you have done in recent years : we are arguing here about what is the right position to take and it is cowardly on your part - just because your Group has stabbed you in the back , and all over a subtly different position that also states that we need troops , but we need to do it properly - to simply duck your head and say that you are withdrawing your name .
This is not helping the Afghan people , neither is it helping this Parliament to develop a coherent strategy for Afghanistan .
I would call on everyone to vote for the amendments , then we will be fulfilling our responsibilities : our responsibilities to those we are sending over there , the policemen and the soldiers , and to those we want to help , namely the people of Afghanistan .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am extremely grateful to André Brie for the work he has done and fully support his decision to withdraw his signature .
The resolution has been altered and now describes a country where there was reportedly a massive turnout at the elections , forgetting that the population voted under continuing threat from armed groups .
No mention is made of the presence of warlords in the Karzai Government ; there is no all-out condemnation of Operation Enduring Freedom , which is claiming civilian victims throughout the country .
NATO action is supported , ignoring the fact that its presence in Afghanistan is a major cause of the total lack of security in that country at the moment .
Moreover , faced with the ongoing rise in opium production , no reference is made to the possibility of launching pilot projects on the use of opium to produce morphine , even though a specific resolution to this effect has been adopted by the European Parliament .
One positive aspect is undoubtedly the concern expressed about the fate of Malalai Joya and other activists , but that alone is not sufficient to prevent my delegation from voting against the report .
Citizens from the Member States of the European Union and far beyond our borders are answering for the pacification and reconstruction of Afghanistan with their lives .
They all deserve the greatest respect and the full support of Parliament , not least our prayers for divine protection , because their mission continues to be extremely dangerous .
The murderous attack in Kabul yesterday morning provides new evidence of that .
I would ask the Council and the Commission to address two specific problems of the complex situation in Afghanistan .
Without an effective strategy against the ' Talibanisation ' of northern Pakistan , the stabilisation of Afghanistan remains little more than a Western wish .
NATO forces are in fact operating with their hands tied because of this .
The second problem in Afghanistan is the urgent need to modernise agriculture .
Its greatest handicap is the persistent insecurity in large parts of the country .
UN statistics make it crystal clear : the more insecure the region , the more profuse the annual blooming of the poppy fields .
Council and Commission , I wish you all possible wisdom and perseverance in the active stabilisation of Afghanistan .
- ( NL ) We are all agreed that the situation in the fourth least developed country in the world remains tragic , despite a number of encouraging signs since the start of the reconstruction of the country .
Of course , the problems are not only military and strategic , but a total victory over the Taliban remains , of course , the conditio sine qua non for the construction of a viable state with an independent judiciary and critical media .
As far as this last point is concerned , I applaud the fact that this report points out that the Afghan Constitution still does not guarantee freedom of religion , because unfaithfulness to Islam remains a criminal offence .
The regime that is being supported by the West must , therefore , make further efforts .
What I do miss in this report is a statement that victory over the Taliban requires a strategy with respect to Pakistan , whose territory continues to be a safe haven for terrorists : everyone knows that it gives logistical support to those terrorists , as became evident again yesterday in the attack on the Indian Embassy in Kabul .
A policy for Afghanistan must therefore be an integrated policy for the whole region ; otherwise , it will be doomed to failure .
Mr President , let me begin by adding my voice to the condemnation of the attack on the Indian Embassy and extend our condolences , particularly to Brigadier-General Mehta and Mr Rao from the Indian Embassy and their families .
I hope that this attack will not deter India , an important ally in the reconstruction of Afghanistan , from continuing its assistance .
There is a greater tragedy in Afghanistan than the destruction of the buildings , and this is the destruction of human life and individuals over the last 35 years .
It will take a greater effort than we can imagine and a longer time to reconstruct and help rebuild those lives in such a shattered country .
The first thing , however , which Afghanistan needs is more security , not less security .
I welcome the fact that the report reflects a consensus , which also exists on the ground in Afghanistan , that a political solution is only possible if we sustain the military pressure on the Taliban and the insurgency .
We have to sustain that pressure if we are to ensure a political solution to the situation .
We have to support the policy of the Afghanistan Government that talks with Taliban elements are possible only with those who accept the constitution and put their weapons down .
They can return to the political process .
We have to support Mr Karzai and the Afghanistan Government in retaking control of their country and in retaking control of the policy initiatives in their own country .
Therefore I welcome very much what Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner said about focusing on the elections next year .
Afghanistan needs a strong government , a committed government that looks forward and does not look backwards towards its past .
Finally , let me again say that I believe that the Commission is making an excellent effort in organising our assistance programmes in Afghanistan .
In particular the Ambassador , Mr Kretschmer , and of course the Special Representative , Mr Vendrell , are doing an excellent job representing the European Union .
We need today to send a strong signal of support to our people in Afghanistan , to our services and to the Council to continue their work .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in order to successfully overcome the security , political , economic and social problems from which Afghanistan suffers , more is needed than just a military solution .
The military pressure on the insurgents must be matched by an intensive political process , and by a dialogue with all segments of the population that recognise the Constitution and are willing to lay down their weapons .
I am of the opinion that the European Union should play an increasing role in supporting Afghanistan in building its own state , with stronger democratic institutions capable of ensuring territorial integrity , state unity , and economic and social development .
At present , support is urgently needed for the south of the country in particular .
Strengthening of administrative institutions and a gradual takeover of the responsibilities for running the country by Afghan authorities must , however , be accompanied by effective human rights protection for all , under the rule of law .
Permanent and sustainable success cannot be assured without such protection .
Mr President , we all remember why Afghanistan was invaded in the first place : it followed the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks on the USA , masterminded by al-Qa 'ida from bases in Afghanistan under the protection of the Taliban .
The USA , along with its allies , most notably the UK , launched a successful attack to displace al-Qa 'ida from its stronghold .
The West 's serious military forces did what was needed to be done to confront terrorism .
This report states that the presence of NATO is essential in order to ensure the country 's future .
It is true that only the combined military force of the free and democratic world united in NATO can defend our democratic freedoms from attack , but I am very dubious about the chances of grafting democracy onto a country that has no history of it , especially where the monopoly religious ideology is one that is antipathetic to the West 's view of liberal democracy .
( BG ) Colleagues , Afghanistan has been the scene of military action for nearly seven years now .
In June 2008 the European Union is supporting a military staff of more than 23,000 .
The international community provides considerable economic aid to Afghanistan , constant efforts are made to restore the infrastructure in that country .
As a result of all these efforts , the government has control over only one-third of the territory of Afghanistan .
Considering these results , I cannot understand the desire to increase European Union financial assistance for Afghanistan .
Why should the money of European taxpayers be spent for initiatives of proven little effect ?
The desire to provide supremacy of the law and improve the judicial system , but will the present government be able to uphold them , considering that it cannot ensure supremacy of its own power in the country ?
We are helping restore the police force of Afghanistan , but why are officials who do not respect human rights and misuse their official position the result ?
Obviously , if we want one day Afghanistan to stop being a source of tension and to take its place of merit in the international community , we in the European institutions should seriously reconsider our present policies and the strategies that are being used .
Mr President , I refer back to point 16 in the resolution where we say that ' Afghanistan 's security problems are more complex than just a war on terror and that they therefore require more than a military solution ' .
This is the point that I think my colleagues Mr Rouček and Mr Pohjamo made earlier on .
We know of many examples in history showing that military power can in many circumstances force an end to conflict and create a quasi-peaceful solution , but we also know from those historical lessons that only democratic institutions , with the support of the people of these countries , can secure a lasting solution .
We were making progress in this area in Afghanistan , and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner is right when she says that the Afghanistan Government must now show a clear respect for human rights and freedom of expression if this is to be restored .
In the last elections I saw women voting in Afghanistan , which is a major step forward .
These are the sort of things we have got to build on , and we must work with Pakistan so that we can restore peace in that area .
( ES ) Mr President , more international troops died in Afghanistan in June than in Iraq .
Also in June , the visibility and power of the Taliban was increasingly obvious in Peshawar , a key Pakistani city in the conflict .
It has been claimed in Pakistan that the armed forces have arranged secret peace agreements with the Afghan and Pakistani Taliban leadership , and that the Pakistani army would appear to be more concerned with the Indian border than the Afghan border .
Moreover , as a number of speakers have already mentioned , forty people were killed yesterday at the gates of the Indian Embassy in Kabul .
My question is : has the time not come to contemplate a different kind of strategy ?
- ( DE ) Madam President , the month of June was the bloodiest for foreign soldiers since the end of the Taliban regime in 2001 .
More than 48 coalition troops were killed , which is more than lost their lives over the same period in Iraq .
Since the beginning of the year violence in Afghanistan has cost the lives of more than 2 200 people .
What we have in Afghanistan is not a solitary conflict but a regional war that could develop further .
The situation is now more serious than it was in 2001 .
In view of this alarming state of affairs , Afghanistan must remain an absolute priority for Europe .
The presence of European troops and the EU 's civil operations in the country is playing a key role .
After lengthy negotiations in committee , I support the final version of our motion for a resolution , which contains many key elements , including the systematic training of the Afghan security forces , greater focus on the rebuilding of civil society and enhanced coordination between the international bodies .
( SV ) Madam President , having listened to the debate today and read all the amendments , I get the feeling that certain people believe that only dialogue is good and helpful and that any military presence is bad and counterproductive .
I do not know how many Members of this Parliament are war refugees , but I am one .
I know that both civilian cooperation and a military presence are needed .
My experience of war is that those who are best prepared for dialogue have no power and that men of violence , traffickers and warlords who do have power are seldom ready to pursue any dialogue .
What is needed therefore is a combination of military and civilian deployments if we seriously want to break the vicious circle of violence and poverty in Afghanistan .
( SK ) We are witnessing a sharp rise in terrorist acts and violent insurgency in Afghanistan .
The international community must not tolerate and give in to terrorist organisations financed through the drugs trade .
The main objective of these terrorist organisations is to sow discord among the NATO allies , thereby creating the impression that it is impossible to bring peace to Afghanistan .
In doing so , they are threatening the safety of not just the region but of the whole world .
The EU 's security policy towards Afghanistan therefore needs to be more dynamic and flexible , and include concrete short-term and long-term measures aimed at restoring Afghan society , institutions and the rule of law , and supporting President Karzai .
The European Community should continue to support the measures that have already contributed to progress in the country , especially those that help to provide for the basic needs of the population and make health care available .
( RO ) Afghanistan remains the greatest challenge for the international community due to its terrorist activity , the increase in drug production and the number of violent acts .
In this context , I request the Commission and the Council , as well as the international organizations , to take into account three major actions as priority for the short-term action plan : to identify and isolate the drug distribution channels in Afghanistan , greater involvement of the countries in the region in implementing international strategies , taking into consideration the cultural and religious closeness , greater financial allocation and involvement for the reconstruction and human and administrative food assistance .
I also believe that the intensification of political , cultural and religious dialogue with Afghanistan is a viable solution for achieving the stability objectives in the region .
I congratulate Mr. André Brie on the report he drafted .
Madam President , I have just returned from Helmand and Kandahar .
I agree that there will be no progress without stability ; stability means good governance and it means troops and it means police .
I think that some of our European allies are merely paying lip-service in terms of what they are doing in Afghanistan .
We need more combat forces there ; we need greater flexibility ; we need greater support for the ISAF mission in Afghanistan .
As far as the police mission is concerned , the EU is doing a good job there , but it is doing nothing in comparison with the scale of the American effort .
There should be proper coordination between what the Europeans and what the Americans are doing in terms of police training .
Finally I should like to condemn the remarks that were made by Mr Brie when he talked about the Taliban and the Americans in the same breath : I think that was disgraceful .
The Taliban are murdering their own people , the Allies are there supporting the local population .
Mr President , paragraph 11 of the motion for a resolution states that the European Parliament ' supports the efforts of NATO forces to improve security in the country and tackle local and international terrorism , and considers the presence of these forces to be essential in order to ensure the country 's future ' .
Amendment 9 , tabled by the rapporteur , is against this position and suggests that the paragraph be deleted .
It would be much better if the rapporteur instead stated clearly that Parliament supports local and international terrorism and considers the presence of NATO forces to be an obstacle to ensuring the country 's Taliban future .
Such an Amendment 9 would be a fair anti-Afghan and anti-NATO game .
( PL ) Madam President , today one of the most important challenges facing the Union is the creation of an effective mechanism for project coordination and information exchange among participants in Afghanistan .
Such a mechanism is vital in order for the projects undertaken by entities working in Afghanistan to be mutually complementary .
International and local terrorism has to be countered in order to improve safety within the country and , by so doing , further its development .
For this reason we should act together to support Afghan society and reconciliation projects .
In addition we should work toward stabilising the situation in Afghanistan by strengthening local institutions and satisfying the basic living requirements of the population .
An important step on the path to the democratic reconstruction of the country is to achieve media independence and freedom .
This should be supported .


President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Brie , Commissioner , my friend Benita , ladies and gentlemen , I would once again like to express my support for Mr Brie 's report and my satisfaction that there is such a wide consensus on the fact that Afghanistan needs more security in the broad sense and more governance at what is a particularly difficult time , as you all pointed out .
Our discussion has highlighted the fact that we are dealing with a very complex situation , which requires more than just a military solution ; that we are facing an extremely difficult situation ; that the international community needs to make a long-term commitment , which is necessary and a critical element for the European Union , as you said ; that it will take a long time to raise the people 's hopes ; and that when it comes to governance in particular , as the Commission pointed out , we must concentrate on the preparations for the forthcoming elections .
For its part , the Council is of course going to continue to monitor the election preparations very carefully .
As regards the governance-related aspects , respect for the rule of law and for everything related to our traditions is not a dividing element ; we must also tell the Afghan authorities this .
As regards the security rules and presence on the ground , I should point out that EU personnel account for more than 50 % of the IFAS and the Council will concentrate on four priority areas over the coming months .
The first priority will be to implement the substantial increase in EUPOL personnel decided on at the Council of 26 May .
Clearly , all aspects relating to police effectiveness are important and Parliament is right to be concerned about this .
Secondly , the Council will endeavour to monitor the implementation of the conclusions of the International Conference in support of Afghanistan : the European Union must play a key role in this respect given its financial contribution .
Thirdly , the European Union must stress the need to improve relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan - as several of you mentioned - and to encourage both countries to continue to work actively to strengthen their cooperation , notably in the fight against the common challenge posed by terrorism and in all matters relating to drug trafficking .
In conclusion , it is important for the Council and the Commission to have the European Parliament 's full support in this matter , which is critical for the international community and - as several of you also highlighted - for the future of Europe .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I will try to be brief .
I will just make three remarks .
The first is on Pakistan .
It is absolutely clear that it is very important to work on the border area also , and I think also to exploit this window of opportunity that is there following the new formation of the government in Pakistan .
But at the same time we already see rising tensions there , and hopefully these will not , of course , jeopardise the somewhat improved bilateral exchanges at grass-root level .
We are also working , therefore , in the border areas and we see that regional cooperation , including border management and regional trade facilities , is important , and we also support the G8 dialogue initiative that has been started with Germany on Afghanistan and Pakistan .
This is my first remark .
My second remark is on justice .
Indeed , we think that good governance is of course important and this goes hand-in-hand with police and justice .
If there is impunity the police can do what they want .
There has to be a good system of justice .
Therefore , together with the Council , which has been working on police , we the Commission have been working very strongly on justice and we have , therefore , contributed substantially to shaping Afghanistan 's national justice strategy and programme and again this has to be a sustainable programme which means for the long term .
There is a dedicated window , this is the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund ( ARTF ) for the justice sector to which we plan to contribute also from Afghanistan 's bilateral programme and we have delivered on the process and promise already at the Rome Conference , but of course a lot of reforms are necessary .
My third and last remark is on rural development .
The Paris Conference has clearly shown that our focus has to be very strong on rural development .
I must say we have from the beginning also had this as one of the important sectors and have worked on that .
We are strongly engaged in continuing and in providing economic alternatives to opium poppy production .
We also - and this is so to say , the news spin - improve rural infrastructures through river-basin management and irrigation and improve local seeds and animal breeding .
And I personally think it is highly interesting to look into a regional approach , for instance in the north , with cooperation with Tajikistan on hydro-power for electricity and for gaining water for irrigation of fields , thus of course giving much better food production for the Afghan population , which could bring them away from drugs .
Thus we are indeed looking forward to a continued close and fruitful joint cooperation with Parliament because it will be for the long haul that we are there , and I do hope we get your support for the policy as such - for the strategy , but also for the implementation .
We know it is taxpayers ' money but I think we have to be there and work together with you for the stability of Afghanistan .
Madam President , allow me to make three further comments .
Firstly , I would like to say to Mrs Beer that I am not afraid of my own group and would be fully up for this debate .
One of the most dreadful amendments to my report in committee came from my group : it stated that there had been no positive changes in Afghanistan .
The arrogance of this really incenses me .
I believe that we all need to take a very realistic and discriminating attitude towards Afghanistan .
That country has a society that is not only rich but also contradictory and multifaceted , and the problems facing us are even more so .
Secondly , many colleagues and fellow Members have said to me that we need to shoulder our responsibilities towards Afghanistan when it comes to dealing with terrorism , opium growing , corruption and so on .
Many of my left-wing colleagues would possibly say that this applies to the occupation too .
My own personal viewpoint , which I have tried to make clear , has to do with the interests of a people who have lived through 30 years of war .
I think that much of this is in the report and for this I would again thank all those persons and all those groups involved .
Thirdly , while I disagree with important parts of the text I am happy to continue to work on the report as part of my ongoing commitment to Afghanistan .
There is no question of that .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Afghanistan is a country faced with many problems .
It is a country that experiences many terrorist attacks , with worsening internal security , and where human rights are not respected .
The country is a producer of an enormous quantity of opium , which also has a negative impact on security and politics , as an economy based on opium production is a source of corruption , weakening public institutions , particularly the legal system .
Over half of the Afghan population lives below the poverty line , with unemployment reaching 40 % , and renouncing Islam is still a punishable offence .
Despite the fact that this country embarked on a complicated and painstaking process of reconstruction , it needs to satisfy its inhabitants ' needs much better in areas such as education , health , housing , food and public safety .
Help given to Afghanistan should involve short-term and long-term measures made possible by far-reaching improvements to the system of government .
The support of the European Union should be based on the experience and knowledge of the missions of Member States that are present in Afghan territory , using civilian or military forces as intermediaries .
The presence of NATO forces is also vital to combat terrorism .
The large-scale participation of the population in elections should have a positive effect on the country 's future , as this shows a desire to create a democratic state .
It is also extremely important to continue the battle against corruption and to encourage the creation of new structures in Afghan institutions .
Restructuring and the joint international effort can have an enormous impact on pulling Afghanistan out of the difficult situation it is in , caused by the long-running internal conflict .
Amendment of Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community ( debate )
The next item is the recommendation for second reading , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Council common position with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community ( 05058 / 3 / 2008 - C6-0177 / 2008 - 2006 / 0304 ) ( Rapporteur : Peter Liese ) .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , I would first of all like to express my gratitude to the Slovenian Presidency , to Parliament 's rapporteur and to the Commission , who combined their efforts to reach an agreement on the inclusion of aviation in the European emission allowance trading scheme , and I know that it was difficult .
This agreement is a very important political signal and an instrument for achieving the ambitious objectives we have set in order to combat climate change .
It is also an ambitious undertaking that is part of a wider political context , namely the current negotiations on the energy / climate package in Europe and the current negotiations taking place around the world on the fight against climate change .
The international economic and political context is difficult and it made the negotiation of this text especially tricky .
Several factors had to be taken into consideration : first and foremost , the rising price of oil , as well as the need to preserve the global competitiveness of European airlines , the Union 's desire and commitment to combat climate change , and the conclusion of an international agreement in Copenhagen in 2009 .
It was vital to take account of the interests of each party , including the interests of the regions that , as a result of their geographical situation , are extremely dependent on aviation for their development or for their links with mainland territories .
We also took into account the airlines in the new Member States , where the mobility rate is low at present but is growing quickly .
Finally , the specific situation of small and medium-sized enterprises is also taken into consideration , with the result that the compromise before you today is a balanced yet ambitious package of measures .
This compromise recognises that the aviation industry will have to contribute to the efforts to reduce CO2 emissions , and at the same time it enables that sector , which is obviously very important , to prepare for , and adapt to , the new environmental requirements .
The proportion of allowances that may be auctioned is moderate , very moderate , and the limit used to calculate the allowances allocated to the various operators is realistic .
This agreement has a global scope : it concerns European companies but also companies from third countries .
On the one hand , it will have to take into account the equivalent measures that these third countries could implement and , on the other hand , it will , above all , have to be seen as the precursor to a future global agreement on the participation of international aviation activities in the carbon market .
That is our ambition .
The Member States and the Commission thus wish to pursue the discussions in the various international bodies to establish the conditions for such a global agreement , or bilateral agreements , with a view to forging links between the European system and other national or regional systems in the future .
Finally , we took care to send a specific message to the developing countries , many of whose airlines could be exempt from the scheme due to the de minimis clause incorporated in the text of the agreement .
To conclude , in this same spirit the text indicates that the auctioning proceeds should be used to tackle the effects of climate change within Europe and outside Europe through a whole series of measures that are set out in the text .
Particular emphasis was placed on the measures aimed at facilitating adaptation to climate change in developing countries , aeronautical research and low-emission forms of transport .

Member of the Commission . - ( EL ) Madam President , first of all I wish to thank and congratulate the rapporteur , Dr Liese , for his excellent work on the proposal for the inclusion of air transport in the EU emission allowance trading scheme , as well as the European Parliament for its positive and constructive contribution .
I am satisfied that it has been possible to reach an agreement at second reading .
The MEPs have played a decisive role in safeguarding the integrity of the Commission 's proposal and in setting higher objectives for the environment on certain important points .
By reaching an agreement on the directive , the Community institutions have demonstrated that the European Union is able to adopt specific measures to accomplish its ambitious objectives on climate change .
This directive is the first of a series of measures aiming to achieve the EU target on greenhouse gases for 2020 .
Adopting it sends a positive message for the upcoming negotiations on the package of climate and energy measures .
All sectors of the economy have a duty to contribute to the accomplishment of the EU climate change targets .
The inclusion of the air transport sector in the emission allowance trading scheme is an indispensable element of the European Union 's overall approach in dealing with the impact of air transport on climate change .
Air transport emissions are rapidly increasing ; they have almost doubled since 1990 and are expected to double once again by 2020 .
It is therefore necessary to take decisive action , which is feasible only at European Union level , not at Member State level .
Reaching an agreement at second reading also confirms the power of the EU emission allowance trading scheme , which is the largest one in the world .
Through the international negotiations aimed at establishing an international agreement on climate after 2012 , the emission trading scheme may constitute the foundations on which the global carbon dioxide market will be built .
Participation in the EU emission allowance trading scheme will allow airlines to gain the experience that will be required for future restrictions on carbon dioxide emissions at global level .
In addition to adopting and implementing the directive , the Commission will continue its efforts under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and with the International Civil Aviation Organisation to reach an effective global agreement designed to deal with air transport emissions .
We will continue to press for the inclusion of air transport in an international climate change control regime after 2012 , when the Kyoto targets expire .
However , no global agreement can be reached if no one is willing to lead this worldwide effort .
By including air transport in the EU emission allowance trading scheme , we are assuming this leading role , but we are at the same time stressing that we are open to discussion with our partners , which we hope will lead to a worldwide system .
On certain crucial points , the European Parliament has been successful in its negotiations and , therefore , the final legislative act goes beyond the Commission 's initial proposal , especially with regard to the maximum limit and to the proportion of allowance auctioned .
I am particularly pleased that the European Parliament insisted , throughout the negotiation process , on the need to ensure an ambitious directive to deal with the impact of air transport on climate change .
The agreement on this directive is an important step forward in fighting climate change .
The European Commission is , therefore , able to accept the compromise package in order for an agreement to be reached at second reading .
Madam President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , greenhouse gas emissions from aviation have in fact doubled since 1990 , and possibly even more than doubled , for the most recent figures are not yet available .
This does not fit in at all with the European Union 's target of a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gases by 2020 , which is actually to be increased to 30 % if others join in .
The decision to include aviation in emission allowance trading has therefore been overdue and it is good to see that we have now reached a compromise at second reading .
This agreement is an important signal for the general climate and energy package that we still hope to conclude this year , if at all possible .
I would like to thank all those who have contributed to this successful outcome , namely the shadow rapporteurs , the representatives of other committees , such as Mr Jarzembowski of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , the various staff members , the representatives of the Commission and the Council , and especially the Slovenian Presidency , which in my opinion delivered a master-stroke in view of the difficult discussions that were taking place at Council level .
We had to argue and wrestle over many important issues , but at the end of the day we came up with a workable compromise containing many elements that can generally be regarded as positive .
Emission allowance trading for the aviation sector will now be able to function smoothly right from the off , which was not the case for the power generation and energy-intensive industries .
There will be no national allocation plans and therefore no related problems such as over-allocation , distortion of competition and such like .
We shall put in place a standardised European distribution system based on benchmarks and auctioning , which means that undertakings that have already invested in clean technology will be rewarded and not in some cases penalised , as in the past .
It is important that we persuade the Council of Ministers to agree to a formulation involving the earmarking of revenues , which goes further than anything the Council has yet been prepared to accept elsewhere .
This is all to do with climate protection : we do not want to introduce any new taxes here but rather to ensure that the revenues are earmarked .
It particularly appeals to me personally that we should focus support on those who use environmentally-friendly means of transport such as trains and buses , for they too are suffering from the high oil prices and , compared with the airlines , sometimes have to cope with all kinds of different taxes , which in my country also means having to pay an ecotax .
We really need to think about making some changes to this and we now have an opportunity to do so .
The revolutionary aspect is that flights and airlines from third countries are included .
This is necessary for environmental reasons , for two thirds of the emissions covered by our system originate not from internal European air travel but from intercontinental flights .
We also want to incorporate third countries for competition reasons .
We are convinced that our regulations are compatible with international law , for example the Chicago Convention , and there is much legal opinion to bear this out .
We shall have to live with the fact that the present administration in the United States sees this differently .
I am not someone who criticises President Bush in everything he does - I tend to be more discriminating - but in this case I find it really intolerable that the Government of the United States is saying that we should still be negotiating at international level , which means at ICAO level .
The ICAO has been in charge of reducing aviation emissions since 1997 , in other words since Kyoto , and it has so far achieved nothing , absolutely nothing , and one of the main reasons for this is the resistance that has been put up by the current American Administration .
For this reason I would like to say something once again quite clearly : we want to see an international agreement , but realistically it has to be said that we shall only achieve this when someone enters the White House , whether it be John McCain or Barack Obama , who really takes climate protection seriously .
Then we will be able to make some progress here too .
All in all I think that everyone has to make concessions , but this is a good compromise and I would be pleased if this House could now vote for it with a large majority .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Liese , most sincerely for what has been achieved .
There are two aspects to this : firstly there is the well-balanced and successful outcome of the negotiations between Parliament and the Council , but secondly we also have a balanced result as far as the environmental lobby and the interests of the transport industry and commercial sector are concerned , and we can see that this is a very complex set of issues .
I am particularly pleased that we have agreed on 2012 as the date for introducing the scheme .
This gives us an opportunity to make progress in our negotiations with third countries .
I would at this point make an appeal to you , Commissioner : we cannot simply take the position that we are right and everyone else should follow us , for then we shall have other countries taking retaliatory measures against our airlines .
This is not on .
We should not be sacrificing the airlines , and the European airports too because of the translocation effect , to a one-sided environment policy .
I would also call on you to take seriously the task that the Council and Parliament have been set and to act quickly in the negotiations over the next few years .
I admit that with America you can leave things until 2010 , but with the other countries - such as Russia and China - we need to talk things through so that our non-integrated solution does not endanger our airlines and our airports with their many thousands and millions of employees .
I am also pleased that things have been kept in balance , for we are in fact going back to the years 2004 to 2006 as the reference date for the allocation of certificates , but we have been very reasonable in setting the cap at 97 % and 95 % and by initially allocating 85 % of the certificates free of charge , with only 15 % to be put to auction .
We thereby hope to achieve the intended effect of reducing the environmental burden imposed by the aviation industry .
At the same time we shall be able to keep airline costs and passenger charges within reasonable bounds .
Given the dramatic increase in the price of jet fuel we have to ensure that we balance the interests of our citizens between the environment on one hand and their transport and mobility needs on the other .
For this reason I would once again congratulate the rapporteur on his achievement .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first let me thank Mr Liese , the rapporteur , for his helpful and considerate collaboration .
This gives me great hopes for the forthcoming energy package that we shall be producing here in this House and then in association with the Council , and all to be done in this legislative term .
The present compromise shows that Europe is now taking climate change seriously .
This compromise , which transcends national boundaries , is also an indication that internationally we are making progress when it comes not just to climate protection but to energy efficiency too .
I am particularly pleased that all aircraft above 5.7 tonnes are included in the measures and that certain aircraft , such as corporate jets , are not excluded .
The public would not have understood it if we had provided exemptions for privileged groups .
We have had many hearings in this House in recent weeks and months on the subject of climate change .
Every single expert has said that we need to halt the trend for emission levels and we need to do it in the coming decade .
With this compromise we have succeeded in stopping the trend in the aviation sector .
In 2012 we shall introduce an upper limit of 97 % in the allocation of certificates , which will be reduced to 95 % from 2013 .
This will halt the trend in this specific sector , where emission levels have been rising rapidly , increasing by 73 % between 1990 and 2003 .
We can then set about achieving a trend reversal .
Some of my fellow Members have already mentioned this : 85 % of the certificates will be allocated free of charge , while 15 % will be auctioned .
I would have preferred a more ambitious approach here .
However , this is a compromise that everyone can now live with and a compromise is better than going to third reading .
The revenue should be used to combat climate change and to fund adaptation measures .
This is explicitly stated in the directive .
I would once more call on Member States to actually employ the money for this purpose and not to use it for plugging holes in some budget or other .
These revenues must be allocated appropriately , otherwise they will be perceived as an additional tax .
I particularly welcome the fact that the directive is to be reviewed in 2014 , which will allow us to establish whether we need to make readjustments somewhere or can adopt a more ambitious approach .
During the legislative process for NOx emissions I supported the introduction of a multiplier system .
That is now my question to the Commissioner : when will the Commission be presenting a legislative proposal in this regard ?
Madam President , I am surprised , pleased and concerned all at the same time .
My surprise is at the speed at which Parliament 's rapporteur , in a back-room meeting with the Council Presidency , managed to sweep practically everything from the table that Parliament has considered to be of importance to this dossier over the last two years .
This should not be the benchmark for our debate of the energy package that is before us , for that is back-room politics not transparent democracy .
However , I am pleased that we have kept our feet on the ground .
In our inclusion of the airlines it is especially important to keep the cost of the system down , for any airline today that does not operate an efficient fuel management regime pays for it with their own demise .
Finally , I am concerned at the wishful thinking that seems to be affecting many of us as regards the international situation .
Mr Liese , emissions trading in the US was not rejected by the President but was defeated in the Senate , in which the party that holds the majority could well be providing the President the next time round .
We really need to be realistic in our assessment of the situation , for even if we succeed in convincing the Americans to join in the emissions trading system we shall still be faced with a list of other countries around the world and I personally am not sure how we are ever going to start talking to them .
I am thinking for example of the Emir of Dubai .
In commercial terms this region is for us a much greater challenge and the competition from that particular source is much more significant than that which comes from a couple of - if you will forgive the word - bankrupt US airlines .
This is something that we have completely ignored .
It is very important to keep a sense of proportion , a sense of perspective when debating that we should certainly move ahead but not make so much progress that the others can no longer keep up with us .
We are provoking a trade war here .
This is something , Mr Liese , that you must have been made aware of one-to-one during your hearings in the US Congress , though funnily enough you will never say that openly here .
For this reason we now have a compromise that is fairly realistic but , it is to be hoped , in terms of procedure is not ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to start by thanking Mr Liese , the rapporteur , for his good cooperation with the Council in order to achieve this fine compromise .
I will mention only two points .
One is , of course , an achievement - the fact that from 2012 quota trading will begin throughout the sector , and also in the three state companies that operate flights within the European Union .
Secondly , though , I would like to emphasise the special 3 % quota that offers additional opportunities to young and very quickly growing EU companies , with an average growth of more than 18 % in four years .
I think this will give them the opportunity to compete on those markets and at the same time it will also establish a quota ceiling of one million for such companies .
This is therefore an excellent achievement , and an excellent compromise . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to start by thanking Mr Liese for his excellent work on this file .
I am only sorry that despite his best efforts the agreement we have before us today is one that my group can support only very reluctantly .
That is a direct result of the deeply disappointing lack of ambition shown by the Council .
For years now , governments have been talking with such enthusiasm about the ETS as the great answer to ensuring that aviation makes a real contribution to emissions reductions .
Trading does indeed have the potential to play a useful role , but everything depends on the design of the scheme .
Because of the Council 's intransigence the agreement we have today is a far cry from what is really needed and represents starkly the enormous gap between our governments ' rhetoric on climate change and the degree of political will that they are actually willing to muster .
This agreement lacks crucial aspects , like a gateway to limit the degree to which aviation can just carry on business as usual by buying up emission permits from other sectors .
It lacks full auctioning of emission permits despite the fact that it fulfils the Commission 's criterion of being able to fully pass on the costs , and it lacks a cap which is anywhere near as demanding as that required of other sectors .
Now Parliament has done its best , and the agreement before us does at least represent some improvements on the common position .
It is a small step in the right direction , but it is also a truly missed opportunity for what could have been .
In order for it to become meaningful and for aviation emissions to be genuinely addressed we must now make sure the efforts are rapidly scaled up and given the environmental integrity they urgently need .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , this summer may be the first without ice in the Arctic .
Some of the world 's biggest glaciers are now sliding from the inland ice in Greenland out into the North Atlantic .
Never before have so much ice and snow melted as over recent years .
I saw it with my own eyes on a visit to Greenland last year .
Everyone , including the experts on the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , are amazed at the melt which is taking place .
This frightening development is of course directly linked to our emissions and to global warming .
It is we in the rich world - the USA , Australia , Japan and of course the EU - who are to blame for this .
That is why we must subject all sectors which contribute to emissions of carbon dioxide and greenhouse gases to a critical examination .
The air transport industry has increased its emissions by around 100 % since 1990 .
The air transport industry has got off lightly so far .
Aviation fuel is exempt from tax , and local and regional authorities often subsidise airports in Europe .
Here in the EU we fly as never before .
The compromise on which we now have to decide unfortunately falls far short of the necessary action that we in the GUE / NGL Group wanted .
The reduction targets for aviation should have been higher ; emissions other than CO2 should have been included ; emission rights should not be distributed free of charge .
This is at all events an agreement which is a small step in the right direction .
Aviation will be forced to reduce its emissions , and a small proportion of emission rights must be put out to auction .
The auctioning process will also generate revenue , which will be used for climate measures in Europe and in the developing countries .
Finally I would like to put a question to the Commission : can you give a pledge that countries which want to adopt parallel measures to reduce the emissions from aviation , such as the United Kingdom 's Air Passenger Duty , can continue to do so ?
The agreement on including the aviation sector in the emissions trading scheme is before us for a second reading .
I would like to warmly thank the rapporteur , Peter Liese , for the way he conducted the negotiations with the Council and for his efforts to reach this result .
What lies before us now , it is true , is not as ambitious as what Parliament proposed .
The emission cap , for instance , is higher than Parliament proposed , while the auctioning percentages are lower .
All the same this agreement shows more ambition than the original Commission proposal and that , I believe , is a good thing .
The aviation sector also has to become a cleaner sector and to reduce its emissions of greenhouse gases .
This agreement is an important step in the right direction in our fight against environmental pollution and climate change , certainly in the light of the progress on the climate package in which Parliament is now actively immersed .
( FR ) Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing a negotiated compromise that allows aviation activities to be included in the emissions trading scheme .
This is a positive move , for we all support the European commitment to climate change and we all agree that we need to reduce CO2 emissions , although not at any cost .
We thus need an international agreement and without doubt the ICAO must play its part .
The European Union must play a decisive role in the debates held within the framework of the ICAO in order to ensure a realistic approach .
We still want to see a more competitive Europe ; surely we do not need to shoot ourselves in the foot and thus be determined to include airlines from third countries .
We need to be careful not to damage our low-cost airlines or even our large airlines , which could decide to stop serving certain markets that are too costly .
In the end , it will be the consumer at the bottom of the chain who will suffer and who might begin to see air travel as a luxury .
We therefore have a compromise that is essential for the talks in Poznań at the end of 2009 and , of course , for our Copenhagen commitment in 2009 .
However , there is one very important point : the proceeds generated by the auctions .
The European Parliament will be very vigilant about the use of these proceeds , which must be used for clean transport , which must be used for research and development in the aviation sector , but which , above all , must not be used for other purposes ; otherwise , the effects will be particularly devastating and could hinder the conclusion of an international agreement .
It will therefore be important to step up the fight against CO2 emissions by ensuring the simultaneous implementation of the other elements of the policy : the technological element and the ' single sky ' element .
Madam President , thank you to Peter Liese , Matthias Groote and the other shadow rapporteurs for getting us what I consider to be a good agreement .
It could have been better but it does establish some very important principles about auctioning and about the use of the resources .
It also shows that Europe is serious about climate change .
Madam Minister , you said that we want to show the world that we can tackle climate change , that we do not just talk the talk at European summits , but that we walk the walk in legislation in the European Union .
I think the agreement here today is a good sign that we can , if we want to , get the agreement on the climate change package before the end of the year .
But you will have heard , as will the Commissioner , people in this House suggesting that they are not so happy with the agreement put together by Mr Liese .
I would ask them what the alternative is .
What are they suggesting instead if they do not think Europe should take a lead on aviation ?
What are we going to take a lead on ?
What are we going to do about the emissions trading scheme ?
Are we going to wait until something in the White House changes ?
Minister and Commissioner , I hope that you will both stick to your guns and that we will work together with Mrs Doyle on the emissions trading scheme .
This is an agreement on aviation .
We want to work on shipping as well .
If we are asking citizens to play their part in tackling climate change , we have to do our bit here in this European Union on legislation .
So I ask those on the other side of the House , who are not here now , but who have expressed doubts , to come up with alternatives if they have better ones .
( PL ) Madam President , numerous research studies have shown that today 's aircraft have little climatic impact , due to low levels of anthropological carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxides in their emissions , plus just a 0.1 % effect on cloud formation through contrails , or cirrus clouds .
Rising oil prices have significantly reduced the extent to which air carriers are able to raise prices of transport services , which , together with the additional requirement to cover the costs of purchases under the emissions trading scheme , will put a brake on growth in this sector , as well as delaying or even making it impossible to introduce ecological solutions .
For this reason it would be sensible to avoid sudden and risky measures in the air transport sector , especially in new Member States , which are only now beginning to catch up .
There is no point in restricting air transport without providing a practical alternative , or providing the time necessary for systematic adaptation .
( LV ) Thank you , Madam President .
The inclusion of aviation activities in the European Union 's greenhouse gas emissions trading scheme is a logical step .
There will be free distribution of 85 % of the permits , but at the end of the day it is the polluter who pays .
This gives us the opportunity to rein in climate change .
We will have greater opportunities to retain our quality of life in Europe .
I am very grateful to Mr Liese , the rapporteur ; working together with him we have found an excellent solution for the special reserve , which has been provided for rapidly growing aviation companies .
Latvia 's accession to the European Union made it one of the fastest growing states , and I am also proud of our national airline , airBaltic , whose growth in recent years has been as high as 50 % .
The European Parliament is developing a high-quality environmental policy , in conjunction with a responsible transport policy .
Of course , this will also have an effect on the European tourism industry .
I am convinced that responsible tourism can lead to a much better quality of life .
Responsible , high-quality tourism forms the basis of Europe 's tourism policy and is a driving force for the economy , and it causes far less damage to the environment , infrastructure and culture .
The adoption of the directive on the inclusion of aviation activities in the ETS certainly undermines the status of the aviation industry , and most of all the ' holy cow ' status of national airlines .
Perhaps it was high time for this , though .
Once again , I would like to thank Mr Liese , and I call upon you to support his report , the first raft of compromise amendments and the special 3 % reserve for newly arrived and rapidly growing companies .
On behalf of rapidly growing companies , I thank you .
( PT ) Madam President , we are debating an issue that is extremely important for the outermost regions .
In these regions , in these distant islands , the price of an airline ticket is the price of the distance to freedom and that is something we must understand .
I want to thank our rapporteur , Peter Liese , for his obviously deep understanding of the positions of the outermost regions .
However , I regret the Commission 's insensitivity towards the situation of our regions and I must say that , despite having reached a compromise which is positive and which has in fact taken a few steps in the right direction , we feel that the issue is in no way settled .
I therefore want to make an appeal , particularly to Avril Doyle who is responsible for the report that we will shortly be considering , that we take account of the positions of the outermost regions and that we bear in mind that being in a region completely cut off from the continents is completely different from being here in the centre of Europe .
If we fail to understand this , I believe that we will fail to achieve good legislation , so I want to call on Mrs Doyle to take inspiration from the spirit of Peter Liese 's report so that we can send a positive message to these regions .
Madam President , first of all I would like to thank my colleague Peter Liese for all his tremendous work on this dossier .
He has succeeded in reaching a compromise with the Member States at Council and , although it may not be as ambitious as some might have hoped for ( perhaps that is the sign of a good compromise ) , it does deliver the framework for including the fastest-growing transport sector in the EU ETS from 2012 .
As rapporteur on the review of the EU ETS proposal , I understand the complexities behind this issue and the difficulties in negotiating a good and balanced compromise .
Peter has shown that it can be done , and my challenge will be to replicate his success in my report .
Since the EU-sponsored deregulation of the sector , EU citizens have spent around EUR 80 billion a year on flight tickets , and this figure does not even include the low-cost carriers .
There can be no doubt that access to lower fares , even zero fares in recent times , has made travel more accessible .
However , given the problems we face in the light of global climate change and the 2 ° C target , it would seem irresponsible to exclude the aviation sector , and indeed the maritime sector , from contributing to the urgent solution of the fastest-growing global problem .
We need to move towards a thriving low-carbon economy and to drive innovation and new technologies , and emissions trading is the most cost-effective way of achieving these goals .
Since the aviation sector is able to pass on costs to the consumer , it makes sense that allowances should be allocated via auctioning , even in the present fuel price climate , which makes any talk of passing on costs especially sensitive .
The new system will apply to both intra-EU and international flights , including third-country airlines , ensuring that the competitiveness of EU airlines is secured .
The management of airports , air traffic control and a single European sky all have a huge contribution to make in decreasing fuel consumption and thereby reducing costs of fuel and carbon credits for the airlines .
Madam President , the ETS with cap and auctioning should replace all aviation taxes , air passenger taxes and any potential tax threatened on aviation fuel .
ETS is much more effective than taxes in actually reaching our emissions targets .
The cost to passengers , freight forwarders and airlines will be related directly to the emissions they cause and governments will not be able to justify padding out their treasury shortfalls with spurious green taxes on aviation and the travelling public .
ETS is the honest way to achieve our emission targets , and aviation ETS is the honest way for aviation and its customers to play their appropriate part , and only their appropriate part , in this important purpose .
( NL ) Is this a perfect agreement ?
No .
Is this a step in the right direction ?
Absolutely .
I would like to thank the negotiators for that .
The fact is that we want the aviation industry to contribute to the achievement of our ambitious climate targets .
The emissions trading scheme will give the airlines incentives to improve their organisation and to bring in more economical aircraft and more new aircraft to avoid extra costs .
The project does not stand alone of course .
It has to be seen in combination with a number of other measures , such as the proposals launched last month to organise European air space more efficiently and many others .
Finally , I would also like to say that it is obvious that from now on we also have to make efforts to involve third countries in this and to get them to introduce similar schemes , to give us a worldwide emissions trading system for aviation .
Only then will we achieve real results .
( PL ) Madam President , thank you for this report and for the negotiations that have been undertaken , although I must say I feel somewhat dissatisfied .
The measures taken have to be carefully considered and must take into account both environmental protection and the cost to air transport .
It would not be right for this to be just discrimination against European carriers and European passengers , particularly in the new Member States .
Let us also remember that airspace covers the whole globe , so our actions must be coordinated with those of other countries .
Otherwise we will experience losses and other carriers will just laugh at us .
Let us hope that this will also encourage action leading to the construction of new aircraft engines , a new generation of engines , as well as to a search for other sources of propulsion for aircraft .
We should act with prudence in these matters .
( PT ) Madam President , it should be borne in mind that including aviation activities within European emission allowance trading creates problems for those countries in economic difficulty , particularly where there are outermost regions , as is the case with Portugal , which has the Azores and Madeira .
We must not forget the importance of air transport in providing a link with the continent and between these islands so that their populations do not feel trapped .
It is therefore essential to guarantee that , at the very least , there is an exemption scheme for the outermost regions .
We therefore insist that the air links of the outermost regions , not only between themselves , but also with the continent , are excluded from the application of this scheme .
( RO ) The compromise text drafted by Peter Liese represents a step forward in achieving the European Union 's climate change programme .
First of all , I emphasize the agreement for establishing a reserve of free allowances for fast-growing airlines .
This measure is meant to consolidate this sector in the new Member States , namely exactly where expansion and development are most needed .
I also emphasize the possibility to use a part of the revenues obtained through auctions to develop the air transportation sector .
For a single , clean and safe sky , we need to develop and implement cooperative technical and operational measures , which would make costs effective .
The fast reunification of the European airspace will determine the shortening of routes , implicitly the decrease of fuel consumption and , consequently , the reduction of emissions , therefore lower costs in the ETS , and consequently , lower prices .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as several of you pointed out , no compromise is perfect .
However , this compromise represents a balance between the environmental requirements and the quality-related economic constraints .
If you approve this compromise , you will be taking an important step for European Union .
You will be proving firstly that Europe is capable of developing its own legislation to combat climate change and , of course , it augurs well for the discussions on the climate / energy package .
You will be strengthening Europe 's role as a leader in the global policy against anthropogenic carbon emissions , which also augurs well for the international negotiations in Poznań in December 2008 and Copenhagen in December 2009 .
Finally , you will encourage the figures and political forces among our international partners who wish to give fresh impetus to the efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions .
I am thinking , of course , of the bilateral talks we could have with countries that wish to implement the same type of system , but also the multilateral discussions within the framework of the ICAO .
For all these reasons I ask you to support this agreement .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank all the contributors for their very positive positions .
By reaching an agreement on this directive the Community institutions are demonstrating their determination to adopt the concrete measures which are necessary to implement the European Union 's ambitious climate change goals .
This directive is the first of a series of measures which are designed to deliver on the European Union 's greenhouse gas objective by 2020 .
Its adoption is a positive signal for the forthcoming negotiations on the climate and energy package and the international negotiations in Poznań and Copenhagen .
I have just been informed that the G8 have agreed on a long-term reduction target of 50 % in 2050 .
Although we welcome this , it is only a partial step forward because they failed to agree on a mid-term target despite the fact that both the European Union Member States and the Commission insisted on the necessity of a mid-term target .
Today , on the basis of the agreed text , all flights to and from the European Union airports will be fully included in the European Union emissions trading scheme from 2012 .
This means that from 2012 aircraft operators will need emission allowances to cover their flights into and out of the European Union .
In 2012 the number of emissions allowances allocated to the aviation sector will be 3 % below the sector 's average annual emissions for the years 2004-2006 .
From 2013 the number of allowances will be 5 % lower .
Like other industries in the scheme , they will be able to sell any allowances they do not need on the market , but if their emissions are higher they will need to buy more allowances or emission credits from clean energy projects in third countries .
This is how the emissions trading scheme creates an incentive for participants to minimise their emissions .
The majority of allowances to airlines will be free but 15 % of allowances will be auctioned .
The revenues from this auctioning should be used to tackle climate change in the European Union and third countries , especially developing countries .
This level may be increased from 2013 as part of the ongoing discussions to revise the emissions trading directive .
In January this year the Commission proposed that 20 % of allowances for aviation should be auctioned in 2013 , increasing to 100 % in 2020 .
While supporting this agreement , the Commission position in the context of the revised emissions trading directive remains that the auctioning level in the aviation sector should be 20 % in 2013 and increased in line with sectors other than the power sector .
For these sectors it is proposed to auction 20 % of allowances in 2013 , increasing to 100 % in 2020 .
As regards the issue of nitrogen oxide emissions , the Commission indicated in its original proposal that a separate measure would be proposed to address nitrogen oxide emissions and can make the following declaration :
' The Commission recalls that it intends to issue by December 2008 a legislative proposal to introduce measures to limit nitrogen oxide emissions from aviation , in particular to address effectively the climate change impact and to avoid any negative incentives to reduce carbon dioxide emissions at the expense of nitrogen oxides . '
In conclusion , the Commission is very pleased .
I would like to particularly thank Dr Liese for his excellent work and results .
We are very pleased with the outcome of the negotiations .
The Commission can accept the proposed compromise amendments in full .
( Applause )
Madam President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you for your compliments and would in turn pass them on to all those who have helped in this project .
I would also like to thank you for the criticisms that have been expressed in some quarters .
Allow me to clarify some things again : one of the speakers said that we had been indulging in back-room politics .
I do not believe this was the case .
The whole process was very open and the speaker himself was present at every stage , the shadow rapporteur was kept informed of all the details and in my group we also discussed matters among ourselves .
I do not know if that also happened in the speaker 's group , but in any case for us it was all very open and above board , even on an internal level .
We managed to get the Council of Ministers to accept many of our proposals .
The Commissioner said that it was more ambitious than the original Commission proposal and the number of amendments alone that we succeeded in putting through - some 30 in all - shows that we were able to alter the common position , and in some cases quite substantially .
Mr Lucas , Mr Holm and others have said that all this falls short of the expectations of the environmental groups .
That is correct , but neither would it have been a good compromise if we had incorporated everything that the environmentalists and Greens had been demanding .
In two areas - and the Commissioner also referred to these - there is still some room for adjustment .
With the report presented by Avril Doyle we again have an opportunity to adjust the cap and the auctioning level so that they are fair to other participants in the emissions trading system We need to look very closely at this in the second half of the year .
In conclusion I should again like to stress that what we want is equal terms of competition .
We want a global agreement and we also want to include in it flights from third countries .
However , it is about time that the airlines helped us out .
I see a letter from the AEA - the Association of European Airlines - stating that even after the compromise has been reached other governments will understandably reject it .
We need to consider whether we should still be engaging such people , as they make very poor lobbyists .
We shall now be adopting this agreement with a very large majority and will then join forces to plead our case before third countries .
Then we will all be working together .
However , if Parliament 's democratic decision is not accepted we will have to tell the airlines that they are only harming themselves .
I ask you to approve the recommendation and would like to express my thanks for the broad support I have received .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing - ( GA ) Since 1990 , greenhouse gas emissions from EU international aviation have more than doubled and now account for 5 % - 12 % of the total EU CO2 emissions .
Although the compromise measure is far from perfect , it allows us to set limits to the aviation industry 's emissions beginning in 2012 .
By including aviation in the EU 's Emissions Trading Scheme ( ETS ) , we are sending out a message that we are serious about the causes of climate change .
The next ten years will be crucial in combating climate change and avoiding irreversible damage .
It is important that the general review includes a stricter demand on the aviation sector along with stricter reduction targets as and from 2013 .
Under the new regulations , Member States may use revenue form the auctioning of allowances for climate change mitigation and adaptation within the EU and developing countries and for promoting climate-friendly transport research and development .
This investment is necessary if we are to fully reap the benefits of including aviation in the ETS .
, in writing . - ( HU ) Dealing with the major challenges of climate change , making the measures instigated in this area more stringent and speeding up their creation are crucial tasks .
Reducing gas emissions from air traffic which cause the greenhouse effect , and setting the exact upper limit for emissions after 2012 are crucial .
A visible result can only be achieved in reducing gases that cause the greenhouse effect if it is also about the stringency of the emissions trading system .
Revenue from auctions needs to be used pragmatically ( for example for the development and use of environmentally friendly technology ) , primarily in sectors that are funded by the European Union , and in connection with this it is worth investigating the creation of a separate monetary fund .
The complex implementation of the Galileo , SES and ETS programmes as soon as possible would also promote the efficient use of fuels .
Climate change is a global phenomenon .
All possible political instruments and negotiating methods must be used in order for us to involve all the world 's biggest emitters of greenhouse gases in reducing pollution levels worldwide .
in writing . - ( RO ) This directive represents an ambitious initiative , by which the aviation sector could play an important role in the fight against climate change .
Negotiations for this compromise have been difficult because they had to take into consideration the oil price , the competitiveness of European airlines and environmental protection , attempting to create a model system on the international scene for including aviation into the ETS .
Nevertheless , the system should not endanger precisely the European airlines , which could lose their competitiveness in relation to the competing aviation sector in the US or Dubai .
Penalizing the internal aviation industry will cause the occurrence of the " carbon leakage ” phenomenon , namely the orientation towards markets with less strict rules than those imposed by the EU , thus starting a commercial war .
We need to find a balance between environmental protection , consumer protection and the aviation sector if we want the European airspace to be more efficient .
Also , revenues from auctioning allowances shall have to be used for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and adjusting to climate change , without giving the possibility to Member States to use such money for other purposes .
If we manage to correctly use such revenues from auctions and only as an environmental instrument , we will avoid penalties under an international agreement .
Budget calendar : see Minutes
1 .
European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument : general provisions (
2 .
Direct support schemes under the CAP (
3 .
Minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment (
4 .
Adaptation to the regulatory procedure with scrutiny - conservation of wild birds (
5 .
Common system of value added tax (
6 .
Protocol on Strategic Environmental Assessment to the 1991 UN / ECE Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context (
7 .
Protocol on the Accession of Liechtenstein to the EU / EC / Switzerland Agreement on Switzerland 's association with the Schengen acquis (
8 .
Protocol on the Accession of Liechtenstein to the EC / Switzerland Agreement for establishing the State responsible for examining asylum requests (
9 .
Protocol to the EC / Switzerland Agreement for establishing the State responsible for examining asylum requests (
10 .
Numbering of visas (
11 .
Renewing the Agreement for scientific and technological cooperation between the European Community and the Government of the Republic of India (
12 .
Request for waiver of the immunity of Witold Tomczak (
13 .
Defence of the prerogatives of the European Parliament before the national courts (
14 .
Approval of the Commission ( amendment of the Rules of Procedure ) (
- Before the vote :
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission thanks Mr Duff for his report .

We support Parliament 's decision to reform the hearing procedure in a way that will further increase the transparency and the democratic legitimacy of the appointment procedure by establishing clear , transparent and uniform procedures and evaluation criteria .
However , the Commission considers that the procedures to be applied in the different cases covered by the report have to fully respect the relevant provisions of the Treaties , notably Article 215 , and of the Framework Agreement , so as to reflect the legal and institutional differences between them .
Specifically the procedures applied for portfolio reshuffles should be lighter than those applied for approving the whole Commission , and should respect the prerogatives of the President of the European Commission for the allocation of portfolios .
We believe that this is in the interest of both institutions .
Furthermore , the Commission is legally bound by the Treaties and the Framework Agreement and therefore reserves its right to agree the relevant procedures to be applied in each of the different scenarios on a case-by-case basis and in a constructive spirit of cooperation , as has so far been the case .
This approach has proved successful for both institutions .
15 .
Common authorisation procedure for food additives , food enzymes and food flavourings (
16 .
Food additives (
17 .
Flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties (
18 .
Food enzymes (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , due to transport difficulties in reaching Strasbourg , I was not in a position last night to thank colleagues , particularly fellow rapporteurs Åsa Westlund and Mojca Drčar Murko , and indeed my colleague Pilar Ayuso , who stood in for me in the debate , and all our respective assistants and staff for their cooperation over the last 12 months , in reaching a very satisfactory second-reading agreement on this important package on food measures .
I hereby thank them all .
19 .
Amendment of Directive 2003 / 87 / EC so as to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community (
20 .
The work of the Plenary and initiative reports ( amendment of the Rules of Procedure ) (
21 .
2009 budget : First reflections on the 2009 PDB and mandate for the conciliation (
22 .
Environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea to link up Russia and Germany (
- Before the vote on Amendment 23 :
- ( NL ) Mr President , there is a problem with your announcement board .
We are only getting a zero for the result of the vote , so we cannot see how many people voted for or against .
All right , thank you , Mr Sterckx .
I cannot see because I have my back to it , you understand .
The House services tell me that we do in fact have a problem with the electronic vote-counting procedure , and thus I would ask you to be patient for a few seconds until the problem has been solved .
- Before the vote on Amendment 50 :
Mr President , we have full trust in you , but I would be very grateful if you could announce the exact figures of who voted for and against and who abstained .
Now then , since the large screen is not working , I will read out the numbers , if that is all right .
This will be a better solution for you .
( Voting was interrupted for a few minutes for repairs to be made to the screens showing the outcome )
Mr President , I was trying to catch your eye just now , but you did not see me .
When we checked the voting on Amendment 49 , it was 474 in favour , 181 against , and you said , ' Approved , as I said ' .
However , you had not said ' approved ' : you had called it ' rejected ' .
I cannot remember .
If you say so , OK .
- After the vote on Amendment 51 :
rapporteur . - ( PL ) Mr President , I think we can agree , however unwillingly , that the displays are not working .
It is scandalous not to be able to see the results in the European Parliament .
In these circumstances I would ask that when you check the results , you give us the precise results , how many were in favour , how many against , and how many abstained .
If this is not shown on the screens , I would ask you to read this out and for your staff to note it down .
- ( DE ) Mr President , may I point out that the indicator system is working properly at each individual Member 's seat , that we just introduced these mysterious screens one year ago , that it all worked well beforehand and that anyway our trust in the President is a prerequisite for the proper conduct of affairs .
( Applause )
- Before the vote on Amendment 30 :
Mr President , it is very simple .
We are simply asking for a split vote at the semicolon , in other words just following the words ' it is of great importance that Russia show good will regarding cooperation in the European energy policy ; ' . We would like a split vote there .
We , on this side of the House , consider that it is unnecessary and the first part of the amendment could be misinterpreted , but we would like to support the second part , which stresses the importance of Russia ratifying the Energy Charter .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
- Before the vote on Amendment 37 :
Mr President , recital Q concerns the algae population , whose blooming poses a particular risk to Finland , Sweden and Germany .
I suppose that algae does not differentiate between Sweden , Latvia or other nations , as it is driven by the wind .
So the text of the oral amendment is as follows : ' whereas the performance of works under the special conditions obtaining in the Baltic Sea will result in a sudden increase in the algae population , which could pose a particular risk to Finland , Sweden , Germany and the Baltic States , ' .
It stops here .
I regret that Poland was excluded , but it was due to technical reasons .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- After the final vote :
rapporteur . - ( PL ) I would like to say thank you very much to all those who supported the report .
I hope that Commissioner Dimas , the Commission , the Council and all the great and good in the European Union will take this opinion of the European Parliament into consideration .
It has been expressed here in a clear and transparent manner .
The issues of energy solidarity , a solidarity in a wider political context , as well as protection for the environment are all extremely important for the European Parliament .
This report and this vote , in which 90 % of those voting were in favour , should give a clear signal to the authorities in the European Union not to ignore the views of the European Parliament and that this resolution , although not formally binding , should be treated as binding .
23 .
Stabilisation of Afghanistan : challenges for the EU and the international community (
- After the vote on Amendment 11 :
Mr President , in view of yesterday 's appalling terrorist attack in Kabul , and on the basis of today 's discussion , I should like to propose as an oral amendment that a new section 3a be inserted as follows : ' condemns in the strongest possible terms the terrorist attack against the Indian Embassy in Kabul on 7 July 2008 , which caused more than 40 deaths , including those of four members of Embassy staff ; expresses its sincerest sympathy for the relatives , the wounded and the Afghan and Indian Governments ' .
( Applause )
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
President . - Voting is closed .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes ) .
Explanations of vote
Mr President , I am very disappointed that in Mrs Westlund 's recommendation for second reading it was not possible to impose a ban on azo-dyes .
This is indeed very disappointing because labelling does not guarantee safety .
Parliament has now lost control in this area and has simply given in , and has unfortunately not applied the precautionary approach .
That is very regrettable .
In exactly the same way we find it very disappointing that we were unable to include and regulate genetically modified additives , which would really have signalled how seriously we take the subject of consumer protection .
However , the most regrettable thing is that we have failed to protect children from azo-dyes .
The alarming findings of the Southampton study make it quite clear that we must call for a ban and that we need a ban .
What indeed does the precautionary principle state other than that we have to accept the conclusions when there is an indication of risk ?
In this case the conclusions clearly point to a ban .
Moreover , while the general ban ultimately failed I find it very regrettable that we have still not succeeded in obtaining a ban on products that are mainly intended for children .
Mr President , I voted in favour of this report , because I support the approach that has been taken .
I welcome the harmonisation of the use of food additives in flavourings across the EU .
A single regulation on food additives will help monitor , update and amend existing legislation in this area and contribute towards greater food safety .
I am concerned very deeply about the risk that such additives and flavourings have on health and also the impact on children , with some E numbers damaging to their intelligence , and they can also cause allergies and other diseases .
However , whilst we need greater transparency and better food labelling , we need to be mindful of the diverse populations who live in Europe and who are used to using ingredients from across the globe , such as herbs and spices , where entire contents may not be readily available .
So we need to ensure that we do not restrict consumer choice and allow people to continue to be able to use herbs and spices that have been used for centuries .
( PL ) Mr President , this report is of enormous importance for our everyday lives .
People want to have food that is healthy and safe .
For this reason it is important that the procedures for issuing licences for the use of food additives , enzymes and flavourings should be transparent .
To strengthen consumer protection , particularly for those people who have food intolerances to certain substances , consumers should be fully informed where these substances are used in food .
For this reason it is important for the information on the label to be easily understood by the average consumer , including allergic consumers .
Authorised and competent authorities should decide whether or not to permit the use of substances that enhance the flavour , appearance or nutritional properties of products on the basis of scientific knowledge and a risk assessment .
Compliance with these guidelines and requirements should be monitored and must be subject to ongoing controls for the good of consumers in our single common market .
( SK ) I support the proposal in question aimed at ensuring correct and clear labelling of foodstuffs , including aromatic additives .
I also give my full support to the objective , which is to protect consumer health .
In order to meet this goal , it is clearly necessary to prevent products that have dangerous toxicological effects from being placed on the market .
It is equally important to protect the public , especially vulnerable groups , from the negative consequences of the excessive use of some aromatic constituents , such as obesity or the distortion of taste preferences in children .
I believe that these proposals enhance the quality of the regulation , strengthen its internal logic and the practicality of the solution .
This applies in particular to the committee 's position that the maximum levels of certain constituents shall not apply where a compound food contains only herbs and spices in which these constituents are naturally present and no added flavourings .
( SK ) Harmonisation of the legislation governing the use of enzymes in food processing is in the interest of the entire European Community .
Our main objective is to guarantee a high level of food safety in order to protect human health .
At the same time it is necessary to ensure equal conditions for all producers and thus support fair trade in the area of food additives .
I strongly support the provisions on consumer protection .
The use of food enzymes must not mislead consumers as to the quality , nature , freshness or nutritional quality of products .
Consumers must be informed of the physical condition of the food or the specific treatment it has undergone .
Information concerning food enzymes and additives must include a proper description and must be clearly legible and it must also be easy for consumers to understand .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
The European Council and the European Parliament have jointly decided to cut carbon dioxide emissions by 20 % by 2020 , and in fact its international agreements stipulate a reduction of 30 % , then 60 % or 80 % by 2050 .
In order to achieve these targets , all emitters , all industries and even we humans , on behalf of our households , have to make major efforts .
If we lived in a perfect world where the fuels available to us were unlimited and cheap and where there were no ever-increasing environmental problems , I would not have voted for this present legislation .
I would not have voted in favour of it because it is clearly restrictive and it is disadvantageous to the new Member States and to the Hungarian airline .
However , we do not live in a perfect world , the amount of fuel is falling and the price of fuel is rising , but we have to do something today in order to halt climate change .
And so , albeit in the knowledge that this legislation will put the airlines of the new Member States in a difficult position , I have voted in favour of this legislation because I feel , in the interests of the future , that the targets we have adopted jointly must be met .
We must halt climate change .
( CS ) Mr President , I commend the work of the rapporteur , Mr Peter Liese , who , when dealing with the Council , managed to push through most of what Parliament had already proposed at first reading in November of last year .
The result is an integrated conceptual text that is perfectly valid for the inclusion of aviation in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading , thereby abolishing by the end of 2012 today 's system of giving advantages to air traffic in relation to ground-based traffic .
In addition to that , the motion for a resolution is kind to new enterprises thanks to the 15 % auction allowance and it broadens the scheme in regard to flights from and to Europe .
Continuing my line of thought from last November , I would stress that in order to lower emissions in the atmosphere we must persuade the rest of the world of the necessity to regulate .
I believe that soon we will manage to sign an agreement with the US and other countries .
I welcome the limit on exemptions .
I personally cannot see why the flights of heads of state or monarchs ( in contrast to flights for rescue purposes ) should not be subject to the same rules on environmental protection .

- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am against the common position on including aviation activities in emission allowance trading for all kinds of reasons .
Aviation accounts for less than 5 % of the total emissions in the transport sector and in this respect we are to some extent playing token politics here .
Besides , we have not been able , as Europeans , to find a global approach to this issue , which means that our measures will put European airlines and airports too at an unfair disadvantage .
What is more , we have basically failed - as would have been made clear - to carry out a proper cost-benefit analysis .
This means that the measures we have agreed on today are neither sensible nor necessary and we have created here a situation that is not convenient and that basically runs counter to the Lisbon Strategy .
We have not in fact strengthened Europe 's position ; we have handicapped it and we have done it one-sidedly , which is why I am against the common position .
We would have done better to put more into our infrastructure and create a common European airspace .
This could have produced cost savings that would have been much more beneficial than the measures we have now set in motion here today .
Mr President , I , along with most Conservatives , take the view that there is an urgent need for reform of this Parliament .
I have had the great privilege during my life of serving not just here but in the House of Commons and in local authorities in the United Kingdom .
I have to say that in those other bodies - local authorities and the national parliament - there is greater democracy and participation than here in this Parliament .
What we need to see is an engagement of Members of this Parliament in the procedures in the debates .
There is no debate here , there is no argument , there is no fire , there is no enthusiasm , and the problem with this report of Mr Corbett - well intentioned , I am sure - is that it will give the President of this Parliament even greater powers .
That is wrong !
What we should be about , if we are sensible in the years that lie ahead , is giving the Members greater powers and the President reduced powers .
That is the reason why I voted as I did .
- ( DE ) Mr President , like lemmings the majority of the Members of this House stumble from one Corbett reform to the next and each of these Corbett reforms means less democracy and fewer rights for the Members of this Parliament .
Yet the opposite is being claimed .
It is being maintained that people want to see more debates , while at the same time the debates on the own-initiative reports are being abolished and are being replaced by written statements .
However , the word Parliament comes from parlare and not from ' minute keeping ' .
That is for bureaucrats .
People talk about having more time for legislative work .
We could have this on Thursdays and on Fridays .
The problem is that we do not use it .
That is the reason why we do not have enough time for legislative work .
True parliamentary reform - and here I concede to Mr Sumberg - would be something completely different .
We are taking away our own rights , we are reducing the amount of speaking time , we can no longer table amendments , which means that we are giving up our own capacity to compromise .
There will henceforth only be ideological arguments over rigid texts .
I consider this to be a decidedly black day in the history of this Parliament , where I have worked for some 29 years : 15 years as a staff member and journalist and 14 as a Member of the House .
I think that this process of Parliamentary self-castration has gone far enough .
Even the Committee on Foreign Affairs has now lost much of its powers and potential .
I regret this profoundly .
- ( NL ) Under the guise of reforms to make the workings of Parliament more efficient , the Corbett report introduces a number of measures that have nothing to do with that .
On the contrary , it is about modifications of Rules of Procedure that will merely impose constraints on normal parliamentary activities .
The most striking example is the amendment of Rule 110 ( 4 ) , which would restrict the number of normal written questions to three per month .
In his explanatory statement the rapporteur argues that this limit is being introduced to prevent so-called abuse of the right of Members to ask questions .
The submission of written questions is one of the most important means by which we , as Members of Parliament , perform our supervisory role .
Suggesting that this can lead to misuse is in fact an insult to every Member of Parliament who takes his or her duties seriously .
This typical example of Socialist faultfinding is in any case unworthy of this Parliament and indeed of any parliament !
- ( NL ) This Parliament really does pull out all the stops to reinforce the image of the Eurocracy , as a kind of totalitarian doctrine that no longer tolerates any opposition .
This time it is about the drastic curtailment of the right of Members of Parliament to address questions to the Commission .
Apparently the Commission , that giant with its 10 000 civil servants who interfere with all kinds of things , with far too much , is said to be complaining loudly about the workload that those parliamentary questions bring .
In God 's name , what arrogance on the part of an institution like the Commission , which is revealing its evident disdain for any form of democratic control by scarcely answering parliamentary questions , usually answering them completely inadequately and always being wide of the point .
The fact that Parliament goes crawling before the potentates of the Eurocracy is simply shameful !
Mr President , you might well ask yourself why I stand up and give explanations of vote on most things in this place : it is simply because of things like the Corbett reforms .
As an individual with slightly different views to the big group that I sit within , I am pretty much excluded from giving speeches in the course of the main debate , and that surely is a reason why in this place we should encourage more democracy , more smaller groups , and giving powers to individual Members .
Every time I see a Corbett report , I think to myself that in reality Richard Corbett is to the European Parliament what Wormtongue was to King Théoden in Lord of the Rings .
Every time he says we are having more democracy , we take a step backwards .
There is something seriously wrong going on in this Parliament at the moment .
It is sinister , it is anti-democratic and it is badly wrong .
That is why I voted against this report .
Mr President , a few months ago a number of parliamentarians , including myself , thought to use existing parliamentary procedure to delay the vote on the Constitution , dressed up as the Lisbon Treaty .
At the time , the President ignored the Rules to curtail explanations of vote .
Later , he granted himself arbitrary powers via the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Now the Corbett report seeks further restrictions on the democratic rights of Members to ask questions to the Commission and to the Council .
How can this House claim to fill the so-called democratic deficit when the rights of Members are curtailed by anti-democratic forces ?
Surely , the test of any democracy is tolerance of dissenting views or of minority views .
What steps , we have to ask , will be taken next ?
Who will stop this us going down this slippery slope in the name of so-called efficiency ?
Maybe dressed-up dictatorship is preferred over democracy .
Please , open your eyes : let us fight for democracy .
Mr President , it is perhaps surprising that Conservatives and myself had a separate whip on this and in the end took the view that although we are all in favour of firm budgetary control of the European Union - in fact we have suffered for far too long from the auditors refusing to sign off the accounts of the European Union - nevertheless we took a different view on this report .
Why ?
Because it makes repeated references to the Lisbon Treaty .
The message has to be sent to those who are influential in these matters : the Lisbon Treaty is dead .
The Irish people in their great wisdom have rejected that Treaty by democratic vote , and although people in Brussels and people here in Strasbourg will work and cajole and bribe and intrigue to try and persuade the Irish to change their minds , the decision of the people should prevail , and in this case Ireland has stood for the people of Europe .
Let their voice stand .
Mr President , as your colleagues beside you will tell you , I always try to take the floor on budget matters .
I very much enjoyed working with Jutta Haug , the budget rapporteur , this year .
It was when she had the budget the last time that I managed to table just under 500 amendments to her budget for discussion in committee , and a number of those came forward to plenary .
She is a good person to work with and she understands many of the problems that I have with those elements of the Lisbon Treaty that are already being budgeted for , supposedly under the legal basis of financial perspectives agreed at Council - although I am pretty sure that is not correct .
She understands that I have a big problem with lots of NGOs being funded by the Commission budget to lobby the Commission to do more things in a bizarre symbiotic relationship that should no longer go forward , and she knows I have a very special relationship with the Special Olympics movement , which should benefit from the European budget at some point in the future .
In all those matters I have great respect for the rapporteur , but I wonder whether anybody else in this place pays any attention to the budget , apart from the small number of budget geeks who exist in just a couple of committees in this place .
( LT ) As you know , more than half a year ago several hundred thousand EU citizens submitted a petition to our Parliament on the environmental impact of the Nord Stream gas pipeline and today , more than half a year later , they have received the European Parliament 's answer , learned its position on this important issue .
Thank you to everyone who voted in favour of this document , many thanks to Mr Libicki and Mr Beazley , and also to my other fellow Members for their contribution to the preparation of this document .
I am truly grateful to all Members who , with their votes , have made it clear that , firstly , the European Union needs gas and , secondly , EU citizens living near the Baltic Sea are responsible for preserving the sea for future generations .
( RO ) First of all , allow me to thank all the colleagues who have voted for the Libicki report today .
This report does not speak about Russo-phobia or gas-phobia , it refers to the fact that the European Parliament cannot deny and turn its back to the petitioners ' complaints regarding a sensitive political issue .
The issue of the common energy policy should be solved by bringing it to the European Community level .
Nevertheless , until that moment , bilateral agreements should be integrated into an authentic internal policy in the field of energy , in order to ensure the achievement of two essential objectives :
1. the result of all negotiations should be profitable for each Member State ;
2. thus , the vulnerability of Member States involved in bilateral agreements with third countries could be avoided .
In my opinion , these are the requirements for any European Union energy strategy and this is the great challenge that the European Parliament shall deal with in the next period .
in writing . - ( CS ) I too am disturbed by the worries of the tens of thousands of citizens who in their petition highlight the risks accompanying the construction of the biggest gas pipeline at the bottom of the shallow Baltic Sea .
Their petition resulted in a public hearing and in a European Parliament report , which highlighted the need to include other countries , and the EU in particular , in the decision-making process .
The problems are due to the ecological risks that exist as a result of vast graveyards of warships and munitions at the bottom of the sea , and a risky chemical method needed to clean the pipeline before it enters into service .
I shall not express an opinion on the land-based alternative route but I firmly believe that the European Commission and the Council must take up their role as coordinators duties and consistently demand - in the interest of the Baltic and other countries - that the investors assume full responsibility for potential ecological damage .
The Commission and the Council must also request an independent impact assessment and an assessment of the alternative land-based route .
The northern gas supply route from Russia is important .
Therefore , it is imperative that the EU signs an agreement with Russia regarding the conditions for monitoring the construction of the gas pipeline and for its safe operation .
After all , Russia has not yet ratified the Espoo Convention .
Unfortunately , we do not yet have a common EU energy policy or standards .
We can clearly see that instead of a bilateral agreement between Germany and Russia , Europeans need an EU agreement and the consent of the Baltic countries to the construction .
Parliament is now sending a clear political signal in this regard .
( PL ) Mr President , I fully support Mr Libicki 's report .
There is no benefit in the amendments , which only weaken the conclusions .
The gas pipeline is dangerous for the environment , for the sea and for the countries on the Baltic Sea .
Another issue is the cost of construction , which is several times more than if Nord Stream built the pipeline overland .
It would be the population of Germany and Europe that would have to pay for these additional costs , as the costs of construction would be added to the price of every cubic metre of gas sold .
Who will earn from this ?
Lobbyists , the construction company and Russian politicians .
For this money you could build several nuclear power stations , which would reduce the use of gas and CO2 emissions .
We have a responsibility to look after the safety and the funds of people in the European Union .
This is our moral responsibility , and I say to Mr Matsakis that I am opposed to the construction of a pipeline through the Baltic Sea .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to express my very great satisfaction at this House 's almost unanimous approval of the report on the effects of the planned construction of the so-called Baltic pipeline , linking Russia and Germany through the natural environment of the Baltic Sea .
The Baltic Sea is a typical inland sea , with a shallow basin and a limited exchange of waters with world oceans .
In addition , there is a large amount of chemical weaponry sunk on the Baltic seabed and this could lead to an ecological disaster during construction in this basin , which is a very important one from the European point of view .
However , there is another , more important issue raised in this report .
Energy investments involving EU Member States should be the subject of the combined attention and care of Europe and all the EU and its citizens , not just of one country , in this case Germany .
We must think first and foremost of European solidarity and ensuring energy security for the whole of Europe .
This is not what is happening today .
I hope that this report will send a clear signal from the European Parliament to the Council and the Commission but , especially , to the Government of Germany , that it should not be just two countries taking decisions on the Baltic pipeline , but this should be done with the understanding and agreement of this House and all Member States .

( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this important report by Mr Libicki , as the North European Pipeline is a project that could have repercussions on as many as eight European Union Member States .
I believe therefore that the Union should prepare its own standpoint on this subject .
For this , what is essential is reliable , independent research and analyses setting out the ecological risks and establishing proper mechanisms for monitoring activities in this area .
What we need today is a joint and united energy policy , without blaming each other for trying to look after our own national interests at the cost of the whole Community .
We must prepare a joint position on this matter , which takes into account both energy and environmental issues , as well as issues relating to the security of individual Member States .
Particularly on this issue , Europe should show a united front .
- ( DE ) Mr President , the former German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder , who is now being paid to head the advisory committee of the Baltic Pipeline scheme , was already pushing for this project when he was head of government .
He callously agreed the details of the operation with Moscow over the heads of his European neighbours and in so doing not only aroused historical fears but also raised quite justifiable ecological and economic questions to which there is no satisfactory answer .
I would therefore say quite clearly that this project can only be realised if the fears and concerns of the neighbouring European countries , and EU partners , are taken seriously and if they agree to it .
Taking decisions of this kind above the heads of neighbouring states is un-European and therefore in my eyes unacceptable .
What is more , and the Polish and Czech Members can take my word for this , the same goes for other issues such as missile sites and the issuing of visas .
All sides have to take a good look at themselves and recognise that when it comes to foreign affairs we in Europe need to maintain solidarity in these vital policy areas , for only then will we be taken seriously by our international partners .
As a German Member of this Parliament , I therefore voted in favour of the Libicki report and against the ill-considered construction of the Baltic pipeline .
- ( DE ) Mr President , I believe that we now at last have found a text that we can reasonably accept .
However , I regret that a number of coherence problems still exist .
Most of all I regret the actions of those , in particular , who today complained that the display panel was not working .
Four weeks ago we saw in committee how voting ruthlessly went ahead in spite of the fact that 22 languages were not present .
I am therefore particularly opposed to the procedure that we have found .
This all has to do with economic matters and with historical issues , and it also certainly involves energy and probably the environment too .
However , the environment is being paraded like a monstrance and it is indeed remarkable that the European Parliament 's Committee on the Environment , which really should have been the first to take action , refused to deliver any opinion at all .
The procedure that we have opted for was not right .
We should have been able to produce a better text .
For this reason - and more especially on procedural grounds and because of the various dealings in the Committee on Petitions - I ultimately did not vote for the report .
Mr President , I wanted to give an explanation of vote on this issue simply to make one point .
In Afghanistan today the United States and Britain and one or two other countries are making a stand .
They are making a stand against what I believe to be the greatest threat to Europe since the Second World War , and that is the threat of international terrorism .
The problem is that there are a number of European countries which are not making that stand .
Yes , they are in Afghanistan .
Yes , some of their forces are there , but the brunt of the attack is being taken - I have to be frank - by the British and American troops , and I pay tribute to the bravery particularly of the British troops and to the young men and women who have sacrificed their lives in this cause .
We should have learnt the lesson in Europe that you cannot appease those who wish to destroy you .
That lesson should have been learnt in the 1930s ; it should have been learnt in relation to Soviet Communism - but I am afraid to say it has not yet been learnt , and it is important that it is .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , I think many of us are aware of the problems that heroin abuse brings to individuals , their families and their communities globally but also in Europe .
Europe has used many enlightened policies at a Community level to tackle heroin abuse , and in many ways it is leading the world on how to tackle the problem through its treatment and other such programmes .
However , at the moment 90 % of the heroin that is reaching the streets of Europe is coming from Afghanistan .
I believe that the policies we are undertaking there at the moment are not really working .
The open economy in Afghanistan and the insurgency are mutually reinforcing .
Drugs finance the Taliban , while the resulting lawlessness and violence facilitate poppy cultivation .
Many attempts have been made to try to persuade farmers to change from poppies to other crops but unfortunately they have failed .
It is not surprising that there are still fields of poppies in Afghanistan , particularly in Helmand and Kandahar , as this lucrative business is worth about USD 500 million per year to opium farmers and about USD 3.5 billion to the smuggling and refining business .
By not effectively addressing this problem at source and by not providing sustainable and alternatives to opium farmers , we are failing not only the citizens of Afghanistan but also the citizens of Europe .
What is happening at the moment , unfortunately , is that Afghanistan is turning into another narcostate , and look at all the problems that emerged from Colombia when that was allowed to develop .
I recognise that it is not easy .
I recognise that to try and tackle this within Afghanistan is extremely difficult for all the people who are trying to tackle it , but I believe that the policies we are undertaking at the moment are not really working .
I do not know what the solution is .
I have read a lot about it and I realise that there are people out there who are putting their lives on the line to try and tackle this problem .
I believe that the heroin problem in Europe is beginning to increase .
In Ireland this year the authorities have seized a record amount of heroin and recent reports have shown a big problem for young women with heroin-abuse problems in the state .
As a former minister responsible for drugs , I believe that greater coordination to effectively combat illegal drug trafficking is needed among all EU Member States and also with other states surrounding Afghanistan .
( IT ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report because one would have to be blind not to see that a vipers ' nest of opposition to the democratic world exists in Afghanistan .
The democratic world is attempting to defend itself against terrorist attacks , which have occurred in various major states around the globe , and , having secured several victories against the terrorists , now finds itself fighting the poisonous tail of an organisation which must be wiped off the face of the earth and is now trying to regroup in Afghanistan , following the decisive defeat that it is suffering in Iraq .
That is why Europe must stand shoulder to shoulder with the United States in this venture .
- ( DE ) Mr President , the brilliant foreign-policy strategist Franz Josef Strauss , whose death exactly 20 years ago we shall be commemorating on 3 October this year , always said that if you button up your jacket wrongly you have to undo it again in order to button it up correctly .
That is exactly the situation that we now have in Afghanistan , for we have been using the wrong political strategy .
We have built our efforts around the minority groups of the Northern Alliance and have ignored the representative powers of the majority population , namely the Pashtuns .
That is why politics and democracy are simply not working there .
If we do not succeed in winning over the majority of the representative Pashtun community to the side of the West , to democracy and to commitment to our cause then we shall most dramatically fail in Afghanistan , as now seems to be a distinct possibility .
I would therefore simply appeal to all those involved to adopt a fresh political approach in Afghanistan and not to drive the Pashtuns into the arms of what is left of the Taliban by lumping Pashtuns and Taliban all in together .
That would be a big mistake .
We need a new political strategy , one that is more discriminating .
As Europeans we know all about the problems of nationality , possibly even better than others .
We should be applying this experience wisely and competently in Afghanistan .
Mr President , I would like to thank the interpretation staff once again for hanging around for so long , eating into their lunch breaks , listening to our explanations of vote .
If we had not had the Corbett report and all these things that make us give explanations of vote at these times , we could all have gone to lunch a lot earlier .
Firstly , I would like to associate myself with the words of Mr Eoin Ryan .
I thought he eloquently put one of the biggest problems that we have with Afghanistan .
I was also going to make the same points as my wise colleague , Mr David Sumberg .
I cannot believe the general cheek of this place even talking about this subject , when you consider how many of our Member States have got their troops in frontline action in Afghanistan .
I have lots of constituents , two of whom have recently come back in body bags from Afghanistan , and I promise you , no one wants to put troops in harm 's way , but this really is a vital cause for us .
I detest the general anti-Americanism of this place .
I certainly do not understand the anti-military feel of this place and there are some people here who are pretty gutless in their actions , who throw stones from the safety of this place , while others are actually putting their lives at risk to improve a situation for us all .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed Polish colleague Jacek Saryusz-Wolski , who proposes approving at first reading of the codecision procedure the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the 2006 Regulation laying down general provisions establishing a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
Given the funding needs , it was important to clarify the existing provisions on Community funds managed by financial intermediaries because the current text is ambiguous about the possibility of continuing to re-invest such funds .
Moreover , it seems logical to authorise the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) to re-invest within the Facility for Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Partnership ( FEMIP ) the funds reflowing from past operations .
As the earlier Regulations did not provide for the possibility of re-investing the funds , the ' reflows ' are returned to the Community budget .
With the proposed amendment , the EIB can be allowed to re-invest such funds in the context of FEMIP until the Commission decides to close the operation .
in writing . - ( RO ) I supported the adoption of the general provisions regarding the establishment of a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
I think this instrument should evolve and the European Union 's financial and budgetary priorities should move towards the Eastern dimension of the Neighbourhood Policy , which should include the Republic of Moldova and Ukraine as well .
I supported the adoption of the report in order to speak more about a solution regarding the European vocation and the EU integration of the Republic of Moldova , obviously correlated with democratic progresses in the fields of freedom of mass media , justice reforms , guaranteeing the fundamental rights of citizens and ensuring the rights of opposition parties in the electoral competition of 2009 .
in writing . - I refer to my position regarding the establishment of common criteria that are clear regarding grant schemes made directly under CAP .
Also I would like to refer to the establishment of aid and rights and duties of farmers and herdsmen .
The proposal which is being made is to crystallise criteria so that Member States will be authorised to pass on aid to herdsmen producing beef and veal .
This system is technically referred to as ' coupled ' and as Malta has opted for the implementation of fully decoupled payments I voted in favour on the basis of an issue which is in the national interest .
People are feeling insecure about food because of BSE , meat scandals and the rest , where the EU has not always left a very good impression .
If the Bavarian authorities were really kept in the dark for years about a police bust involving Italian criminals dealing in rotten cheese , and if there was a breakdown in cooperation over the recent wine scandal , this all highlights the serious weaknesses in the European reporting system , which have to be put right immediately .
The current crisis in the food sector also clearly shows how important agricultural self-sufficiency is for any country .
We should therefore be providing greater support for our own small farmers and more especially for our organic farmers too .
The need to boost agricultural output should certainly not be used as a pretext for a general EU-wide endorsement of GM technology by the back door .
If the public rejects genetically modified foodstuffs then the EU must abide by this decision and not yield to the interests of a few major corporations .
in writing . - Malta 's historical industry is ship repair .
Working in the dockyards is dangerous .
Together with the construction industry , they are two main areas prone to accidents .
Whereas the construction industry has been slow on the uptake relating to the use of safety work equipment , the dockyards pay great attention to safety and security at work .
Today Malta 's dockyards are facing their greatest test .
The Nationalist Government wants to privatise them at all costs .
It appears that no other alternatives are to be considered .
Diversification , niche industries or specialisation such as refurbishing cruise liners don 't appear to be on the agenda for discussion .
This notwithstanding , that the Government has been told both by the Malta Labour Party and the General Workers Union that they are prepared to play their part to save the yards .
These dockyards have been continuously providing not only for themselves , but also for Maltese industry , highly trained tradesmen .
Their excellence is second to none .
I have personally assessed their excellence when towards the tail-end of the last Labour Government the Prime Minister gave me responsibility for the yards .
I may also add that I have a personal soft spot for the yards as my father was a dockyard employee in the 1950 's .
in writing . - ( FR ) On the basis of the report by my Polish colleague Dariusz Rosati , I voted in favour of the legislative resolution that amends , in accordance with the consultation procedure , the proposal for a Council directive amending various provisions of Directive 2006 / 112 / EC of 28 November 2006 on the common system of value added tax .
Pursuant to Article 171 of the EC Treaty , the Community may set up joint undertakings or any other structure necessary for the efficient execution of Community research , technological development and demonstration programmes and will be very likely do so increasingly in the future .
It was therefore logical to define a suitable tax framework for these types of undertakings by treating them like international bodies .
Moreover , in the context of their accession Bulgaria and Romania , like other new Member States , have been authorised to apply derogations regarding the tax exemption granted to small and medium-sized enterprises and the VAT scheme applicable to the international transport of passengers .
For the purposes of transparency and consistency , these exemptions should be incorporated into the VAT Directive .
in writing . - ( FR ) As my group 's shadow rapporteur , I voted in favour of the Rosati report on the amendment of certain provisions concerning the common system of value added tax .
The amendments to the VAT Directive that the Commission is proposing are , in my opinion , important simplifications and improvements .
The clarification of the scope of the VAT system for the supply of natural gas , heat and refrigeration will enable the Member States to apply reduced VAT rates to the supply of these goods as envisaged by the Directive .
In the current climate of exploding energy prices , I believe that it is essential to allow the Member States to counteract the excessive increases in energy prices by decreasing indirect taxes .
This measure helps to relieve inflationary pressure , which has a negative impact on the economic situation and on consumer spending power .
I must also point out that the Member States that wish to reduce their VAT rate on energy supply are free to do so under the existing Directives , particularly as regards the minimum rates .
We do not need any new European legislation in that area ; the European governments that wish to act quickly have all the necessary means at their disposal .
in writing . - I support the recommendations contained within the Rosati report .
Further clarification of elements of the VAT Directive such as the Right to Deduct will benefit SMEs who could have been faced with unnecessary bureaucracy under old provisions .
I therefore , voted in favour of the report 's proposed changes .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report aims to further the 2003 Protocol on Strategic Environmental Assessment to the 1991 UN / ECE Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context ( SEA Protocol ) .
The Commission signed the SEA Protocol on behalf of the European Community on 21 May 2003 at the fifth Ministerial Conference ' Environment for Europe ' held in Kiev , Ukraine , in May 2003 .
The objective of the SEA Protocol is to provide for a high level of protection of the environment , including health , by ensuring that environmental and health concerns are integrated into measures and instruments designed to further sustainable development .
In this context , the European Community intends to implement Article 13 of the SEA Protocol to the Espoo Convention through the impact assessment procedures set out in the Communications on Impact Assessment which address , in a balanced manner , the economic , social and environmental components of sustainable development .
in writing . - Boguslaw Sonik 's report " Protocol on Strategic Environmental Assessment to the 1991 UN / ECE Espoo Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary Context " is to be supported .
Environmental and health concerns need to be taken into account when promoting sustainable development .
I voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( PT ) When the Agreement on Switzerland 's association with the Schengen acquis was signed in October 2004 , it was not possible to associate Liechtenstein due to the lack of an agreement on savings taxation ( this agreement was only reached a year later ) .
Bearing in mind that for several decades there has been a policy of free movement of persons between Switzerland and Liechtenstein , it was vital to associate Liechtenstein with this Agreement .
I therefore support this initiative which , through a Protocol annexed to this Agreement , associates this country with Schengen .
Liechtenstein will have to accept and apply the whole of the acquis , except for any provisions of new acts or measures that relate to the enforcement of warrants to search for and / or seize evidence within investigations or proceedings for offences committed in the area of direct taxation ( which are not punishable by imprisonment under Liechtenstein 's national law ) .
I support the position of the rapporteur , Ewa Klamt , that the European Parliament should give its assent , as happened in relation to the Agreement with which this Protocol is associated .
However , the European Parliament should be given access to more information about any ongoing international negotiations in order to be able to properly and uniformly exercise its competences .
in writing . - I voted against this report as a gesture to protest against the failure of the Commission and the Council to act to deal with the problems of tax havens in Europe .
Of course Liechtenstein is not alone as a tax haven in Europe , but the only way these microstates will be persuaded to act will be by putting them under political pressure .
Yet we continue to treat them and their citizens with kid gloves , even as their banking rules and secrecy deprive Member States of billions of euros every years .
Hitherto Switzerland and Liechtenstein have maintained a privileged partnership with the EU through various bilateral agreements , which is something that could certainly be commended to any state that wishes to preserve its sovereignty and its identity .
It does not exactly say much for the EU that Liechtenstein 's participation in the Schengen programme was made conditional upon agreements relating to the taxation of savings income .
This is reminiscent of the Schengen-Dublin threat that was intended to make the Swiss see reason .
It cannot be right to use millions in aid and various illusory promises to lure in new members or bind countries closer to the EU in order to deprive them of the opportunity of going their own way outside the Community .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current Regulation lays down a uniform format for visas but has not led to unique visa numbering in the Member States .
The number is inserted in order to identify the individual visa issued to a third-country national by one of the Member States .
Despite certain differences existing between Member States , until now these have not been that important as the visa is only visually inspected at the border or checked by reading the machine readable zone .
However , once the Visa Information System ( VIS ) becomes operational , verification at external border crossing points must be performed using the visa sticker number in combination with the fingerprints of the holder .
The numbering of visas therefore needs to be changed in order to have a unique visa sticker number which will guarantee , during the verification process , that only the relevant application file will be retrieved , in which the fingerprints of the person presenting the visa at the border will be verified .
I therefore support this proposal to ensure coherent and unique numbering of the visa stickers to be used in the VIS , thus guaranteeing that , when this visa data exchange system enters into force , it can operate as correctly as possible , thereby reducing the risks of undue access to personal data .
in writing . - President , I voted in favour of this report and I hope that the renewal of the science and technology agreement between Europe and India will be more meaningful , as to date , scientific cooperation has not fulfilled it 's full potential .
Up until now , this has been a paper agreement and I hope the new agreement will really translate into concrete actions on both sides .
Science and technology is a key component of the EU-India strategic partnership and one of the most promising areas for cooperation , where both parties set to gain from collaboration .
Strengthening the existing agreement is a positive thing , however , this new agreement should focus on the key challenges that we are faced with , in particular climate change , energy security and health epidemics .
There is a real opportunity to pool resources in research and development to achieve common solutions .
Finally , I would also like to highlight this agreement offers an opportunity not just to collaborate on major global issues but also to make a significant difference to people 's lives in India who still do not have access to basic technology .
Europe , by transferring some of its existing technology , can aid India 's economic and social development .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the light of the confusion during the vote , I would like to make clear that my intention was to support keeping Mr Witold Tomczak 's immunity and that is how my vote should be counted , that is , as being opposed , not in favour , of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal is contradictory , which is why we abstained .
Admittedly , certain aspects are positive , specifically the possible amendment of the Statute of the Court of Justice to give the European Parliament the right to submit its observations to the Court in all cases in which , directly or indirectly , its prerogatives are called into question , so that the involvement of the European Parliament , where the latter is not formally a party to the proceedings , is not left to the discretion of the Court of Justice .
However , the fact is that other aspects may simply reinforce federalism , which is why we disagree with this proposal .
Furthermore , we regard as fundamental the principle of respect , by the European Parliament , for the sovereignty of the Member States and therefore also of the national courts .
While we do accept that a policy of cooperation between the European Parliament and the national courts may be of interest , we must insist that this cooperation cannot be used to challenge national rights , including the sovereignty of the national courts , and the principle of subsidiarity .
in writing . - Mr Gargani 's report investigates possibilities for the European Parliament to defend their prerogatives before national courts .
Currently , the Parliament is unable to defend its decisions before a national Court of Justice to defend its decisions .
I welcome this own-initiative report that aims to find ways to improve coherence in policy implementation among member states .
in writing . - Today Parliament voted in favour of the health and protection of EU consumers .
Consumer protection and our citizens ' health are at the centre of this Food Package regarding regulation of additives , enzymes and flavourings which was voted through Parliament by a large majority .
Additives , enzymes and flavourings will be pre-authorised before being added to food .
This is also good for industry as there is more consistency in terms of harmonisation and clarity across the EU Member States .
Food colourings in products will be clearly labelled .
Two important issues for consumers involve intolerance to certain substances ( for example azo dyes ) and misleading labels regarding the product 's nature , freshness , quality of its ingredients , naturalness and nutritional quality .
Regarding food flavourings , the desire is that food should be as natural as possible .
Parliament voted to protect against any limitation of herbs and spices .
These have been used for centuries without any clear adverse effect .
With regard to new scientific information from Southampton attesting to the harmfulness of some food additive substances for children , I take this study and its implications seriously and await the Commission 's support of it .
in writing . - I welcome Asa Westlund 's proposal for a regulation establishing a common authorisation procedure for food additives , food enzymes and food flavourings .
Improved transparency in the authorisation procedure for such ingredients would further bolster consumer protection across Europe .
The consumer should be equipped with all the tools necessary to make an informed choice on the food available on our shelves .
I voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have chosen to vote against Amendments 14-19 .
This is a second reading decision .
The Member States in the Council of Ministers opposed both labelling and a ban on azo dyes , but were finally forced to accept a compromise on labelling .
This is a major victory which we do not want to jeopardise by voting for populist amendments which do not offer any prospect of a real improvement .
We Swedish Social Democrats have pressed for a ban on azo dyes and will continue to do so , but we have no intention of going along with populist initiatives or a populist vote by which we may end up endangering children 's health unnecessarily .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I supported the report by Mrs Westlund , as I agree with the rapporteur that the laws on artificial food additives need to be consolidated .
I believe that we should place greater emphasis on consumers receiving clear information about the preservative content in food products purchased .
in writing . - ( PT ) We must strive for greater transparency in the process of approving food additives as well as strengthen consumer protection and , in particular , the protection of those consumers who are intolerant to certain substances .
Equally , environmental protection must be one of several factors to be taken into consideration when approving the use of an additive .
As agreed at first reading , it is essential to clarify what misleading the consumer entails as well as to include environmental protection as a factor to be taken into consideration when approving the use of an additive .
The amendments now adopted at second reading are basically intended to strengthen those aspects in the final text , further strengthen consumer and environmental protection as well as clarify the conditions for the approval of additives .
After this regulation enters into force , food additives will have to meet these requirements .
in writing . - I voted in support of Ms Westlund 's report on food additives .
A recent study by Southampton University has alerted this chamber to the potential dangers of azo dyes , used to colour certain sweets and drinks .
Including these dangers on labelling is an important step to protect consumers from the adverse effects these additives can cause , such as hyperactivity in children .
EU-wide regulation on such additives is essential and I commend the rapporteur on her report .
in writing . - ( SK ) Azo-dyes are added to foodstuffs and drinks in order to alter the way they look .
However , they represent a needless risk to citizens ' health .
A study from Southampton University has shown that azo-dyes are dangerous to children 's health because they may cause hyperactivity and increase the risk of learning difficulties .
I support the initiative of European manufacturers in Denmark , Sweden and the United Kingdom to gradually and voluntarily do away with the use of azo-dyes in food products .
Consumer protection , in particular protection of children , who are the most vulnerable group , is a priority for the European Parliament .
This is the reason why I welcome and voted in favour of the report by the rapporteur , Ms Åsa Westlund , which offers a new approach to the European policy for the protection of human health and prevention of illnesses , especially in children .
in writing . - I support wholeheartedly attempts that are being made by this report to label products that use additives containing Azo colours .
I believe that if consumers are to be given a choice to end the use and consumption of such additives in their own families then a labelling process is a fair compromise .
The contribution the Azo colours have to poorer health and possible behavioural problems is becoming clear .
It is right to act now to promote the best standards we can .
in writing . - The need for proper labelling of food additives and the phasing out of some is essential to protect , in particular , children 's health .
I welcome Åsa Westlund 's reports and commend them to the House .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report places particular importance on those aspects which aim to ensure food safety , bearing in mind consumer interests and , prominent among them , the desire for food to be as natural as possible .
It is well-known that not all flavourings which are safe from a toxicological point of view are actually beneficial to consumers , hence the need to guarantee the right of the consumer to choose .
In the procedure for the approval of flavourings , ' reasonable technological need ' is combined with other EU strategies , such as the fight against obesity , as the addition of excessively potent flavourings can mask the poor quality of prepared food .
The Council and Parliament take a different stance on the issue of certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods , and on the maximum levels of those ingredients laid down in Annex III .
We know that the principle of herb and spice producers having to disprove a legal presumption of harmfulness for each product individually is contentious .
It would be more logical to turn the procedure around .
This issue will continue to be a matter of controversy .
in writing . - I welcome Mojca Drčar Murko 's report on flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties for use in and on foods .
I believe the report safeguards the concepts of food safety and consumer protection .
It is important that consumers across Europe are not misled as to the nature of the flavouring present in their food .
' Natural flavouring ' should mean exactly that and I support the report 's recommendations in ensuring that this is the case .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report concerns a regulation that aims to lay down rules and procedures for authorising food enzymes , except for those considered to be food additives .
The European Commission says that industry has been pressing for harmonised legislation with a Community procedure for authorisation of food enzymes as the absence of EU legislation in this field has led to unfair commercial practices .
Parliament insists on including several important amendments that it made at first reading to the draft regulation proposed by the Commission .
For this reason , it reiterates its view that the precautionary principle should be at the centre of any risk assessment and therefore needs to be emphasised in this proposal .
It also previously strengthened the provisions for consumer protection to ensure that the use of a food enzyme does not mislead the consumer as to the nature , quality and substance of a product , which is why this concept is reintroduced .
Furthermore , food enzymes are not , and cannot be , genetically modified micro-organisms ( GMOs ) .
We must also avoid these being derived from GMOs .
However , if this does happen , it must be clearly identified so as not to mislead consumers .
It is essential to guarantee a high level of food safety .
in writing . - Ms Doyle 's report seeks to harmonise the control of food enzymes .
Obliging industry and Member States to inform the Commission of any possible safety issue with regards to enzymes is a positive step in securing the maximum possible standards of food safety across the Union .
I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - I have abstained in order to bring to attention that this report does not take into consideration the difference which exists between island states and mainland .
Malta is not connected by rail to the continent and its only connection is either by sea or air .
In addition , Malta 's economy is heavily dependent on tourism , which attracts over one million persons a year by air and close to half a million by sea .
The effect on families , for instance , from the UK has been estimated to increase by 160 £ as a result of the legislation coming into force .
It is important to control emissions but it is also important to distinguish between the different aspirations and realities of the component countries within the EU .
The principle of one suit fits all is discriminatory when special circumstances occur .
in writing . - ( FR ) I supported the report by Peter Liese on the inclusion of aviation in the ETS system because I feel that the compromise reached between Parliament and the Council is balanced and realistic .
The need to act rapidly and effectively to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , and in particular the impact of transport on global warming , is no longer in any doubt .
However , for this legislation to be a success it was essential to reconcile the environmental requirements with citizens ' mobility .
The efforts required of the aviation sector must be great enough not to compromise the reductions made by other sectors , but balanced enough not to impede the growth of the industry .
I welcome the legislation we have adopted as it respect these imperatives .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Peter Liese 's report on the recommendation for second reading of the proposal to include aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading because I feel it is essential and urgent to limit the global temperature rise to + 2 ° C.
The aviation sector is expanding .
Carbon dioxide emissions from aircraft have risen by 87 % since 1990 and it is estimated that they will double by 2020 .
Measures are therefore needed in order to give a clear signal at international level that the EU is committed to the fight against climate change , bearing in mind the conclusion of an international agreement before the Copenhagen Conference in 2009 .
The compromise reached includes many positive aspects , such as : the exemption scheme introduced for the outermost regions ; the use of revenues generated by auctioning emission allowances in the fight against climate change , and measures to combat deforestation .
in writing . - ( PT ) The proposal voted on by Parliament is already a compromise , albeit unsatisfactory , on the Commission 's original proposal and does not take account of the problems of countries in economic difficulty , particularly the outermost regions .
We know that pollution must be reduced , but we must also take account of the difficulties faced by countries with more fragile economies .
The compromise voted on today does not avoid all the negative consequences of this trading scheme , but it does minimise a number of them , by postponing the date of entry into force with regard to Parliament 's original proposal and by reducing the scope of auctioning and the pressure on weaker companies .
The negotiation of an exemption for the outermost regions has become a very important issue in this House as the Commission 's original proposal did not provide for any exemption for these regions , as you well know .
This meant that all flights originating from or destined for these regions would have been covered by the general scheme .
In the text finally adopted , the possibility of an exemption has been maintained , but its scope is not as broad as it should have been .
We therefore insist that not only flights between islands , but also flights between the islands and the continent should be excluded from this allowance trading scheme .
in writing . - ( RO ) It is clear that , for each commitment period in the Union 's programme in which aviation is included , it is required that the objectives assigned to this sector be established in convergence with and according to the average efforts required of all the other fixed-source sectors in all the Member States .
The non-participation of the aviation sector in this system could cause important compensatory costs on long-term .
I voted in favour of this report being convinced that an integrated approach of the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading is required in the Community .
Since aviation contributes to the global impact of human activities on climate change , it is normal that this sector benefits from an equitable treatment and rules and provisions harmonized at Community level .
It is clear that , for each commitment period in the Union 's programme in which aviation will be included , it is required that the objectives assigned to this sector be established in convergence with and according to the average efforts required of all the other fixed-source sectors in all the Member States .
The non-participation of the aviation sector in this system could cause important compensatory costs in the long term .
in writing . - ( FR ) I abstained during the final vote on the Liese report .
I believe that the European Union is taking a unilateral step outside the Kyoto Protocol , which excludes the aviation and maritime sectors .
Even if there are a number of reasons for considering the climatic impact of the two most important sectors for international trade , the European Union cannot unilaterally change a multilateral agreement , while demanding , for example , that the United States ratify the Kyoto Protocol .
The EU 's proposals concerning aviation could at best target the post-Kyoto period , i.e. 2013 , and only then following an international agreement in Copenhagen .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Liese 's report on the inclusion of aviation in the European Emissions Trading System .
The Parliament needs to make clear its commitment to combating climate change and introduce ambitious environmental legislation .
The decisions reached in discussions with the Council appear to move in the right direction .
15 % auctioning for aviation emissions with a view to increase this in 2013 appears a satisfactory compromise .
While I support the report 's recommendations , the Parliament must continue to be ambitious in setting targets for aviation emissions in the EU ETS and look ahead to building upon Mr Liese 's proposals for the general review of the ETS .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( SK ) Gas emissions from aircraft have doubled since 1990 and are continuing to increase .
If the EU is serious about tackling climate change , it must become the global leader in this area .
We cannot just talk about it ; we also have to adopt legislative measures .
I see the directive aimed at including aviation activities in the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading within the Community as a positive step .
The report by the rapporteur , Mr Peter Liese , is a balanced and realistic solution , a compromise between protecting the environment on the one hand , and ensuring the competitiveness of the European aviation industry on the other .
We must not discriminate against European aviation companies , in particular those from the new EU Member States that are trying to catch up with the general trend .
Consequently , the rules of healthy economic competition must apply in equal measure to aviation companies from third countries .
It is necessary to conclude an international agreement , and for that reason the EU must negotiate with the US , Russia and China .
We also have to remember that sometimes aviation is the only possible transport mode , linking the EU with remote regions .
It contributes significantly to the development of tourism and therefore must not come to be seen as a luxury .
I believe that the common position of the European Parliament and of the Council will contribute towards clean aircraft and the introduction of new technologies in the aviation industry , and that is why I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) By adopting today a directive aimed at including air traffic in the European emissions trading scheme , the European Union is continuing to score points in the fight against climate change .
It would be impossible not to welcome this agreement between the European Parliament and the Council , which will provide for a gradual and real reduction of greenhouse gases from 2012 for all flights taking off from , and landing on , European soil .
I welcome in particular the adoption of two specific measures that demonstrate , fortunately , that Europe still often adopts very balanced legislation that takes account of the smaller parties involved : charter flights , research airplanes and small airlines will be able to continue to fly without having to worry about the binding provisions in the Directive ; the proceeds generated by the auctioning of 15 % of the CO2 emission allowances will be used for research and development in the aviation sector .
This is all the more important because if , as it seems , the EU has to put its hopes in innovation , the engineers will have to show a great deal of ingenuity in order to reduce the pollution caused by planes at a time when air traffic is growing at a rate of 5 % per year .
in writing . - I will be supporting the Liese report today because the report is balanced and practical , if somewhat complicated .
Civil aviation has to recognise that it needs to be involved in an emission trading scheme , and environmentalists need to recognise that people want to fly and the aviation industry contributes greatly to the economic well-being of many of our regions as well as national economies .
I still believe that this agreement has problems .
I still believe the provision of the 100 % auction by 2020 could cause serious problems for small and regional airlines .
However , what we have here is a compromise solution .
I still believe this regulation will face challenges , legal and otherwise by countries outside the EU , particularly the USA and Russia , making a worldwide agreement difficult to achieve .
But this is a start and for that we must congratulate the Commission for its courage and foresight .
The aviation industry is struggling at the moment mainly due to high fuel prices , which is why a compromise on ETS was essential .
I know the airlines are unhappy ; I know the environmentalists are unhappy .
Maybe then our rapporteurs got it about right !
in writing . - ( NL ) If the EU wants to achieve its climate target of a 20 % reduction in CO2 emissions by 2020 , then the aviation sector also has to be involved in an emissions trading system for greenhouse gas emissions .
Emissions from aviation have increased by almost 90 % over the past few years .
At the same time aviation gets away without paying excise duty on aviation fuel and VAT on flight tickets .
Legislative measures are therefore necessary .
The report aims to have the trading system start from 2011 for all flights arriving at or departing from European aerodromes .
From 2012 the sector will have to emit 1.5 % fewer greenhouse gases per year .
The proposed level of free auctioning rights is far too high .
I think that the aviation sector should start auctioning at least 25 % .
Ultimately the goal is not the trading itself but the reduction in emissions .
Parliament has also expressed a view on the use of the proceeds generated by auctioning : it wants that money to be used to reduce taxes on environmentally-friendly forms of transport and to invest in research into technology for less polluting aircraft .
The compromise before us is far from ideal but it is a step forward , so we Greens can also support the agreement that has been reached .
in writing . - The inclusion of aviation activities in the greenhouse gas emissions trading scheme should be welcomed .
in writing . - ( FR ) I regret that the outermost regions ( ORs ) were not totally exempt from the inclusion of civil aviation in the ETS scheme even if their remoteness from the European continent would to a large extent have justified it .
However , I am pleased that some progress was made , thanks to determined efforts .
As a result , the negotiated agreement gives special consideration to the means of reducing , or even eliminating , the problems of access and competitiveness that face the ORs .
In addition , following fierce debates , intra-OR flights will be subject to a derogation and will not be affected .
I am pleased that the ORs are included in the revision clause concerning the evaluation of the impact of the ETS scheme on air transport .
I would especially like to thank the European Parliament , which from the outset listened to my plea for special treatment for the ORs , a position eventually taken over by the Member States .
I would also like to pay tribute to Jacques Barrot , the European Commissioner formerly responsible for transport , for his unfailing support .
Finally , I regret that the final agreement did not include any proposals to benefit the ORs , which would in particular have allowed the proceeds of allowance auctions to be used to eliminate the difficulties specific to the outermost regions .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my British colleague Richard Corbett on the amendment of Parliament 's Rules of Procedure concerning the work of the plenary and initiative reports .
I share the concern expressed in this report that Parliament 's work needs to be simpler , more streamlined and faster .
Nonetheless , Members should be free to put written questions to the Commission and the Council , although I agree that it is important to prevent abuse of this system .
I welcome the fact that Members attending a sitting will be given greater opportunity to speak .
The idea that 40 Members can present an alternative resolution just as the political groups can is , in my opinion , a step forward for democracy , too .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have today voted against the report on changes to the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
We have chosen to do so because own-initiative reports having a bearing on legislative activity can have an appreciable effect on the ongoing work .
Members of the European Parliament should therefore be given an opportunity to influence such reports in plenary , in line with the procedure applicable to legislative reports .
Although a review of the procedures for written questions is needed , we consider that it is of the utmost importance to safeguard Members ' independence and right to put questions to the other institutions regarding their decisions and responsibility .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this report because its central objective is to weaken the democratic and pluralistic functioning of the European Parliament .
Starting from a principle that is not even true - the existence of the Reform Treaty - a majority of this House actually want to reduce the rights of Members and prevent them from acting on their own initiative , increase the power of the President of the European Parliament and , as a result , reduce the pluralism of parliamentary debate .
This desire to weaken democracy and Members ' capacity to act is also clear in the establishment of guidelines on the procedure for written questions put to the Council and the Commission .
However , this decision is only one element in the more general anti-democratic line taken by a majority of this House , particularly among the larger political groups ( PPE and PSE ) .
Another fundamental element is the demand for new and more restrictive criteria on the formation of political groups which also merits our rejection and strong protest .
in writing . - Mr Corbett 's proposals to amend the Parliament 's rules of procedure concerning the work of Plenary and initiative reports allows for the Parliament to work more effectively and efficiently .
I voted in support of Mr Corbett 's recommendations .
As a democrat I am particularly struck by two amendments relating to the Corbett report , for I do not think these could have been meant seriously .
It is part of the democratic rights of a member of parliament in practically every country that is democratic in character to be able to question the elected rulers on their jurisdiction and responsibilities .
Restricting the number and content of these questions notionally derives more from the procedures of a court hearing than from the rules of a democratically legitimate institution and the proposal should therefore be totally rejected .
For this reason I can only vote against the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my German colleague Jutta Haug on the first reflections on the preliminary draft budget ( PDB ) and mandate for the conciliation , which provides a framework for reflection on the structure of the EU 's future budget .
The PDB totals EUR 134 395 billion in commitment appropriations , which corresponds to 1.04 % of GNI , an increase of 3.1 % compared with 2008 , and EUR 116.7 billion in payment appropriations , leaving a margin of EUR 2.6 billion under commitments and EUR 7.4 billion under payments .
Given the need for a Europe of results , I cannot understand the low level of payment appropriations .
In addition to the priorities , it will be important to ensure that adequate funds are allocated to the cohesion policy , the financing of the European policy for small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) , and external action .
Finally , it will be crucial not to forget the major European infrastructures ( transport networks , energy , space , water , new technologies , health , etc . ) , which are regularly under-financed despite the fact that they form the backbone of Europe 's competitiveness within the framework of global economic and social competition .
in writing . - ( PL ) According to the planned ratification timetable for the Lisbon Treaty , in 2009 Parliament and the Council would have equal rights as regards the creation of laws as well as in budgetary matters , on the way to giving the European Union new powers and making fundamental changes in the budgetary procedure used to date .
For this reason it is even more important for the European Union to have the financial resources required to implement current policies and activities in different areas , while at the same time having sufficient flexibility to deal with new political challenges .
For this reason the unusually low level of funds proposed for payments in the initial draft budget ( EUR 116 736 billion ) , which is 0.90 % of GNP , or a decrease of 3.3 % in relation to 2008 , is very surprising .
Also worrying are the budget decreases proposed by the European Commission for information campaigns that were planned a long time ago for 2009 , for the European Parliament elections or for the possible entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
The priority for the July conciliation meeting on the budget should be to ensure an appropriate level of funds for payments and for the Union 's information policy .
It is also vital to present the Commission with funding proposals for pilot projects and preparatory works , in order to avoid financing them from the reserves of multi-annual financial frameworks .
In addition , we should ensure that there are sufficient financial resources for the European Union to be able to react to new challenges in the area of ' competitiveness for growth and employment ' , without reducing the existing funds for important programmes that are currently being implemented .
in writing . - I believe that no EU budget programmes should be funded by my country under any actual or potential circumstances .
The European External Action Service and all other aspects of the Lisbon Treaty are completely anathema to me .
Therefore , whilst any delay to the funding of such programmes is welcome , I cannot support an amendment which accepts in principle that the EEAS , together with other new budget programmes contained in the Treaty , should indeed be funded at " such time as the Treaty is ratified by all 27 Member States " .
Whether ratification by all states is probable or not , it remains possible , I cannot condone an amendment which establishes certain circumstances under which the proposers will recognise as legitimate , in principle , the funding of the EEAS and other new budget programmes contained within the Lisbon Treaty .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Haug report on the 2009 PDB and mandate for conciliation .
This report sets out Parliament 's priority for next year .
I welcome in particular the call for an adequate response to food aid and food security requirements , given the very sharp increase in food prices and production costs at farm level .
I hope this response will be considered , appropriate and includes a serious investment programme in the agriculture sector both in the developing world and within the EU .
I also voted in favour of Amendment 15 , which notes the margin under heading 2 .
However , efforts to include mechanisms to move unspent funds from the CAP to other budget headings cannot be endorsed .
In 2007 , unspent money from the CAP was diverted to the funding of the Galileo project .
This cannot become the norm .
in writing . - I could not support this amendment because I completely oppose the creation and funding of the EEAS and other such programmes reliant on the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
It is indeed an important point to make that programmes to be established by the so-called Lisbon Treaty have no legal basis until that treaty is ratified by all 27 Member States : however , I reject all such programmes in their entirety and do not believe they should be created or funded at any point .
in writing . - ( SV ) Mrs Haug 's report asks for an extensive mandate for the budget negotiations with the Council .
The reasoning is that there is a need to guarantee sufficient funds for the expenditure items proposed by the Commission .
There seems to be no limit to the amounts the European Parliament is prepared to spend .
In my opinion , it is the wrong approach .
The starting point should be the overall framework which has been decided ; the necessary priorities should then be established among the various expenditure items .
There is a need for greater flexibility within the existing multiannual financial framework .
I therefore support the idea that the margins which have arisen on the agriculture side should be used for other purposes .
in writing . - ( RO ) As Rapporteur on the Black Sea Synergy , I would like to express my support for the LIBICKI report for the simple reason that the theme it approaches has a strategic nature , exceeding the Baltic Sea area and the environmental protection field .
In fact , we discussed an issue that is common both to the Baltic Sea region and to the Black Sea region and which affects all of Europe : the issue of energy security and the European policy in this respect .
Taking into consideration EU dependence on a limited number of sources , suppliers and transport routes , it is vital that their diversification represent the fundamental principle of the European concept of energy security .
It is not less important to develop a coherent European policy in the field of energy , which would be based on solidarity and coordination in order to avoid the conclusion of a bilateral agreement that might affect the interests of other Member States and , especially , might undermine major projects such as the Nabucco project , acknowledged at European level .
Consequently , I reiterate and insist on the call to the Commission and the Council to double efforts for the successful implementation of the Nabucco project , as well as for the clear articulation of a common energy policy .
Both the situation in the Baltic region and the situation in the Black Sea region indicate the urgency to start taking concrete and firm actions .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats have chosen to vote for Marcin Libicki 's report on the planned gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea , although we wanted a clearer call for the investigation of an alternative route over land .
However , we think that Parliament has set a clear line as regards an environmental impact assessment , which we support and welcome .
We expect that further decisions will be conditional on an exhaustive and independent investigation .
The Baltic Sea is sensitive and is already under severe environmental pressure .
It is therefore of the utmost importance that the environmental impact can be kept to a strict minimum if permission is to be given for the pipeline to be built .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , the construction of the Nord Stream pipeline could result in interference in arms dumps from the last war .
In the sea there are around 40 000-60 000 MT of chemical weapons and the exact location of these weapons is unknown .
Interfering with these dumps could result in an enormous ecological disaster .
I supported this report because I agree with the rapporteur that it is scandalous that a cross-border project of such a far-reaching nature should be treated as a bilateral issue between Russia and Germany .
Protection of the Baltic and the populations of Baltic countries should be one of the EU 's main priorities .
in writing . - ( RO ) I welcome the position that the European Parliament has adopted regarding the construction of a gas pipeline to connect Russia to Germany .
The European Union needs an integrated , common and coherent energy policy , as well as a long-term strategy to ensure the Member States ' energy independence .
The European Union should treat the environmental and geopolitical issues regarding energy security by means of a concerted effort of all Member States , and not by bilateral treaties concluded by some Member States with Russia .
This is the only way in which the European Union could achieve a strong position in the negotiations with Russia , avoiding the energy resources being transformed into a political pressure factor and could transform the EU into an equal partner of Russia .
This way , we can also provide answers to the justified frustrations of Romanian citizens regarding the continuous price increases for gas and electricity , with important negative social-economic consequences for Romanians and their living standard .
At the same time , the solution of a European common energy policy could supplement the incapacity of the Bucharest right-wing governing people to promote Romania 's energy interests in the relationship with Russia .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Marcin Libicki .
This is an important report .
I would , however , like to remind you that it is incorrect to say that this issue came to the European Parliament as a result of petitions from citizens .
My colleague Mr Bogusław Sonik proposed holding a debate on the North European Pipeline many months before the petitions were received .
I am surprised by the opposition to this report .
We often talk about ecological matters and this does not arouse any opposition .
However , in this specific example , some Members do not want there to be any research into the impact of the project on the natural environment .
Why ?
The answer is simple : for some countries and politicians this particular project is more important than the environment .
Perhaps for this very reason we should consider the political and economic context of the planned investment .
I am aware of the argument that this is a private project .
We should not forget , however , that former politicians figure on the board of the company that is to build this pipeline .
For Russia , using private projects to further political objectives is no problem at all .
in writing . - I voted against this amendment as it basically changes the idea of the original text .
The original version calls for considering alternatives to the existing gas pipeline project - alternatives which would be at least three times less costly and would not impose high environmental risks .
I cannot agree with the amendment which prioritizes the demand for gas at the cost of neglecting EU environmental legislation and citizens ' worries .
I would also like to point out that the gas pipeline in question is originally meant to bypass the seven other countries around the Baltic Sea , supplying only one or two EU Member States , therefore the argument of meeting an increased demand for gas cannot be regarded as relevant .
in writing . - ( FI ) I strongly support the environmental impact assessment for the Nord Stream gas pipeline proposed in the Committee 's report .
However , it is not only about this : its aspects relating to energy policy must not be forgotten either .
We cannot pursue an energy policy that is separate from climate policy .
They fundamentally belong together , like taxation and the budget or law and justice .
There can no longer be an energy policy without financial or other such instruments that make its components possible .
The White Papers that discuss the energy matters of the Union and its Member States have repeatedly demanded clean , independent and competitive forms of energy - but there is only a functioning market mechanism for the last criterion , competitiveness .
I still do not see any market mechanisms that would reduce our dependence on energy - and especially not on gas from Russia .
This week , the European Energy Forum will hold discussions with OPEC .
It is not a weakness for OPEC that it is an indispensable cartel that has too great an influence on our economy .
The dependence on energy resulting from the mistakes of previous generations has been allowed to grow and flourish at our expense .
It is a factor that we should remember when we make decisions on future solutions , even in the case of gas pipelines and other economic dependence .
Is it sustainable development , and is it the right direction , when we are striving for a low-carbon economy ?
Climate change is a reality , and energy costs are also rising .
Dependence on gas is increasing and is giving the EU 's neighbour the power it lost 20 years ago .
We certainly do not want to repeat the mistakes of our political predecessors .
We have a lot to do in a short time .
in writing . - ( PL ) I completely agree with the view of the rapporteur , Mr Marcin Libicki , that the realisation of the project commonly known as the ' Baltic Pipeline ' could pose an ecological risk to eight European Union countries : Germany , Sweden , Finland , Latvia , Lithuania , Estonia , Denmark and Poland .
It could also have a negative effect on consumers through increased prices to cover the cost of the pipeline 's construction .
It is an important point that , as an alternative , the North European Pipeline could be built overland through European Union countries .
This would fulfil all the strategic and economic requirements contained in Decision 1364 / 2006 / EC .
The alternative proposal is safer from the point of view of the environment and it is also cheaper .
I am particularly in favour of carrying out independent reports and researching the impact of the pipeline construction on the environment .
in writing . - A project on the scale of the Nordstream gas pipeline requires full and thorough examination of the environmental implications involved .
Before the project can start , we must make sure that the project meets stringent environmental criteria .
These views are reflected in my vote on Marcin Libicki 's report on the environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea to link up Russia and Germany .
in writing . - ( PL ) Today we shall be voting on a very important report on the impact of the planned construction of the so-called Baltic Pipeline linking Russia and Germany on the natural environment of the Baltic Sea .
The planned project is one of many gas infrastructure projects that are necessary to satisfy growing EU requirements for gas .
However , special attention should be given to a number of factors relating to its construction .
This , the longest and shallowest gas mains pipeline in the world , poses a serious threat to biodiversity and natural habitats , as well as to the safety and movement of shipping in this region , not to mention the approximately 80 000 MT of ammunition sunk here during the Second World War .
As a member of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , and also a rapporteur on the Espoo Convention , I would like to underline that every investment of this type , which has an international dimension , should be the result of prior and thorough consultation with all interested parties .
We should pay attention to assessments of any alternative solutions , such as land routes , which should take into account construction costs as well as ecological safety .
With the growing dependence of the EU on a small number of energy sources and their suppliers , it is important to support initiatives aimed at diversification ; we should stop to think whether the Russian company Gazprom , which holds 51 % of the shares in the Nord Stream consortium , is the best solution in this context ?
in writing . - I welcome the fact that the Committee on Petitions took this initiative to bring this report on the environmental impact of the planned gas pipeline in the Baltic Sea to a vote .
MEPs need to inform themselves of the consequences of this proposal .
in writing . - ( PL ) I support Mr Marcin Libicki 's report because of the serious ecological threat posed by the pipeline to the Baltic Sea , the attempt to bypass the obligation to obtain the approval of all the coastal countries and the lack of an independent and positive assessment of the impact of the pipeline on the environment .
What is particularly important here is to keep to the solidarity principle in European Union energy policy .
The pipeline is planned in such a way as to make EU countries politically dependent on Russia , which will use its natural resources to exert pressure on purchasers .
I would also draw your attention to the fact that choosing the sea route for the pipeline means an increase in the price of gas , due to the fact that this route costs many times more than construction overland .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party welcomes this Parliament report .
When the Taliban fell in 2001 there were only 900,000 children in school .
That figure is now 6 million and rising .
Five million refugees have returned home and 82 % of the population have access to healthcare , nine times the figure in 2002 .
However we share Parliament 's deep concern about continued problems on security , and that without security there can be no return to normal life .
However , we abstained on the report as a number of points do not reflect the reality of the situation in Afghanistan .
Recital D is factually incorrect as deployment of new NATO troops to Afghanistan is continuing with both the UK and Germany recently announcing increased levels .
Also we do not agree with the situation on opium production levels described in paragraph 32 .
The report seems to ignore the hard work being done by the Afghanistan Government through their long term National Drug Control Strategy , and which has led to progress in cutting the number of provinces that harvest opium poppies .
Finally , we want to support continued cooperation with Afghan law enforcement bodies as part of the European Union 's continued support for transitional justice and security sector reform in the country .
in writing - ( RO ) Stabilizing Afghanistan represents a key security policy challenge for the international community and the fight against terrorism .
In the case of failure , the Western countries might become reluctant to engage in future conflict prevention and resolution interventions and in peace-keeping operations .
On the other hand , the Afghans , who today are experiencing a third decade of conflict and whose country has always been an instrument that external actors have used for their own needs , might also benefit from lasting peace .
Military operations are necessary , but they are not a sufficient requirement to stabilize Afghanistan .
An important solution in this process should also be searched for at a diplomatic level and cooperation with Iran , India and Pakistan is essential , especially in border regions where insurgent groups activate .
For this purpose , strengthening democratic structures is extremely important and the international community should fight against the marginalization of the Afghan government by increasing the importance of the political system and democratic actors at local and regional level .
In Afghanistan , the European Union has the image of a humanitarian organization but , in order to play a more important role , Europeans should take into consideration the fact that the solution to poverty and instability is not in guns and violence , but rather in actions that would bring wellbeing to the Afghan population .
With this hope , I voted for Mr. Brie 's report .
in writing . - I abstained on this vote .
Mr Brie 's report on the stabilisation of Afghanistan over-simplifies what is a very complex situation on the ground .
While the European Parliament should be scrutinising developments in Afghanistan , I believe its contributions should be constructive and look towards achieving a stable Afghan state .
I am not convinced of the report 's ability to propose workable solutions for what is a complicated conflict in which our troops are making steady and real progress .
in writing . - ( FR ) The positive results of the recent donors ' conference in Paris are proof that the EU and the international community have their eyes fixed on Afghanistan .
This report , which comes at a pivotal time for the country 's future , highlights the challenges that face the European Union in terms of making an effective contribution to the stabilisation of the country .
It points to the reconstruction efforts that have already been made to strengthen the institutions and improve living conditions .
In this respect , the significant decrease in infant mortality and the rise in the number of children attending school are encouraging signs .
Success in Afghanistan will require better coordination among donors of the various strategies .
Security must of course continue to be a priority , but it is also crucial for the Afghan people to see how the aid specifically benefits them .
It is essential to build additional basic infrastructures , be they roads , schools , hospitals , etc .
The success of the process will also require ' Afghanisation ' of the stabilisation process : the Afghan people must be given the tools to enable them to take charge of their future .
In this respect , many hopes rest on the Afghanistan National Development Strategy ( ANDS ) , which must be supported by the international community and by the European Union .
in writing . - ( CS ) In my opinion , the report on the situation in Afghanistan and on proposals concerning stabilisation of the situation in that country is inconsistent and places too much emphasis on the importance of the military actions and on the significance of the role of NATO in the region .
On the one hand , the report says that the military activities of the Taliban do not pose a direct threat to Afghanistan 's sovereignty , and on the other hand there is the warning that Afghanistan is now at a critical crossroads .
I would see it differently .
President Karzai himself clearly says that the coalition forces are not winning the fight against the Taliban and adds - very fittingly I would say - that winning the war against terrorism will be possible only if some of the Afghan Government 's partners stop pursuing their own ( different ) interests .
The war waged in the past in Afghanistan by the former Soviet Union proved that this country cannot be stabilised , let alone governed , by military means .
Political , economic and social measures , affecting not only Afghanistan but also neighbouring countries , are the only effective way to achieve stabilisation .
Let me add that US hegemonic interests in the region are probably the key aspect in this serious problem .
The report is a blunt imperialist challenge .
As it states , it ' supports the efforts of NATO forces to [ ... ] tackle local and international terrorism , and considers the presence of these forces to be essential in order to ensure the country 's future . '
It calls for a reinforcement of US-EU-NATO occupation forces with ' additional combat troops ' and cynically demands that these be ' unrestricted by national caveats ' , meaning that they should act as occupation forces overtly and without any pretext .
It stresses that the EU ' should use the experience and expertise of its missions and of those Member States that already have a military or civilian presence on Afghanistan territory . '
In other words , it should utilise the homicidal acts of its military forces in the country as an opportunity to gain operational experience for its imperialist interventions elsewhere too .
The concern of the political representatives of EU capital is to secure a larger share in the distribution of the region 's imperialist loot ; they , therefore , stress that ' the EU should encourage and help European investors to be involved in rebuilding Afghanistan . '
The report 's cynical confessions reveal the role and imperialist intentions of the EU and confirm once again that ' the EU and NATO are both part of the same homicidal syndicate ' .
The popular struggle must be united against the imperialist system as a whole .
I voted against the report on Afghanistan , as did the Group of the Left in its entirety , because the report insists on the military invasion and presence in that country , which is being burdened by the war , with over 1.5 million casualties over the last 30 years .
The issues in Afghanistan cannot be resolved through military means .
The people of the country need Europe 's solidarity .
Continuing with and reinforcing the European military presence is one of the main reasons for the instability and insecurity in the region .
in writing . - ( PT ) Afghanistan is now the scene of a battle for security , stability , peace and democracy and , at the same time , against international Islamic Jihadism which is seeking a victory so that it can repeat , in its propaganda , the claim that the empire is starting to collapse .
This is why the international effort , particularly the European effort , is so important .
The challenge facing the allies , particularly all those who believe in the need to reinvigorate NATO , is to withstand the extreme difficulties and help with active troops on the ground - which implies a necessary reduction in caveats - because victory is essential .
The future of our alliances is being played out , to a large extent , in Afghanistan , as too is the future of our peace and security .
However much the supporters of compromise and concession suggest this route , we cannot ignore a threat directed at us , simply by pretending that it is something else .
We urgently need to reinforce the effective military capacity in Afghanistan and all the other measures , particularly aid for the development and promotion of a democratic rule of law .
If we fail in Afghanistan , we will probably have to fight again , later on , but closer to home .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report notes that , despite certain progress , there is still a long way to go before security and stability are achieved in Afghanistan .
In order to improve the situation , the European Parliament proposes a number of positive measures .
Unfortunately , Parliament also chose to support a proposal under which the spraying of opium fields , which are to be found over large parts of the country , would cease .
Of course the agricultural population must be supported , but opium cultivation cannot be a long-term alternative for Afghanistan 's growth , democracy and political stability .
It damages both Afghanistan 's chances and the health of others .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.55 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks - Internal market in natural gas - European strategic energy technology plan ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Atanas Paparizov , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1775 / 2005 on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks - C6-0319 / 2007 - ,
the report by Romano Maria La Russa , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2003 / 55 / EC concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas - C6-0317 / 2007 - , and
the report by Jerzy Buzek , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the European strategic energy technology plan .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteurs , ladies and gentlemen , Europe 's energy future must cope with two challenges .
The first is ensuring a safe , sustainable , competitive supply via an effective , operational and interconnected network .
The second is a transformation that is needed to combat greenhouse gas emissions and climate change .
On the first point , in particular , and in this area as a whole , I would like to highlight the progress made by the Slovenian Presidency , which resulted in the adoption of a general framework for the ' internal energy market ' package as a whole at the June Council .
The most important element of the compromise reached relates to the effective separation - and I stress the word ' effective ' - of production and supply activities , on the one hand , from network operations , on the other .
I will mention here the form of solution that the Council adopted mutatis mutandis for the gas and electricity sectors .
Although several Member States and the Commission prefer full ownership unbundling , the Member States wanted to retain some flexibility , and the Council agreed to an option that provided for an independent transmission operator .
This option would be available for the Member States whose transmission system belongs to a vertically integrated company on the date on which the directive enters into force .
This option implies significant adjustments to guarantee the independence of the transmission operators in terms of decision-making , of course , but also financing .
It would seem that the mechanism adopted makes it possible to avoid conflicts of interest between the various bodies of an integrated company and to ensure a balance between the independence of the transmission operator , its development plan and its investment needs , on the one hand , and the financial interests of the parent company , on the other .
Special attention was paid in this respect to system development and the guarantee of a compromise that does not discriminate between system operators .
The action of these operators will be monitored by the regulatory authorities .
The role and action of the regulatory authorities will be reinforced by the establishment of the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators , which is long-awaited and whose creation was approved by the European Parliament last month .
I would like to highlight some of the other important elements of this ' internal market liberalisation ' package : firstly , the crucial issue of infrastructures and the emphasis on the Europe-wide 10-year investment plan .
This is a vital new element that should promote integration and modernisation .
However , another key aspect is investment by third countries in the transmission systems , which is very closely linked to energy security issues .
We must find a pragmatic solution that is adapted to each case .
The discussions in the Council are going on at this very moment and I am sure that they will result in a compromise that is acceptable to all the Member States .
The next stage , ladies and gentlemen , will be the confirmation of these general elements through the adoption of a political agreement on 10 October at the Energy Council , followed by the transmission of the common position in November or December .
That will allow the discussions between our institutions in the context of a second reading to begin .
I would now like to move on to the second point .
I believe that it is essential to establish a low-carbon economy , in which each Member State is of course free to choose the energy sources it wishes to use .
The goals of , and investments in , this global transformation of the economy must focus on the long term and they pose numerous technological challenges for the next 10 years .
I would like to mention a number of them : the commercial use of CO2 capture and storage , the doubling of the production capacity of the largest wind farms , the commercial maturity of photovoltaic or thermodynamic solar energy , sustainably produced second-generation biofuels , the introduction onto the public market of mechanisms allowing more efficient end use of energy in construction , transport and industry , the crucial advances in the energy efficiency of materials , biosciences and information technologies .
In February the Council , on the basis of the Commission 's guidelines , Commissioner , adopted conclusions containing a number of operational elements , which I will mention here .
The first is the introduction and launch of the six industrial initiatives proposed by the Commission : wind , solar , bioenergy , CO2 capture , transport and storage , electricity grids and , finally , sustainable nuclear fission .
The measures also seek to support and encourage research , particularly in the field of energy efficiency , and the establishment of agreements between public authorities , industry and researchers with a view to supporting the objectives laid down in the Strategic Plan .
In conclusion , I wish to thank the Commission and the rapporteur for the work they have done until now and I hope that our positions on the internal energy market will converge at second reading .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very pleased to be here again today to discuss the second part of the internal energy market package , namely gas .
Last month this House discussed electricity and the Agency .
Many amendments are very similar for gas and I will not go into all the points which were raised when we discussed electricity .

Let me first of all congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr La Russa and Mr Paparizov , on their excellent reports , as well as the shadow rapporteurs and all the members of the committees involved .
You have managed to maintain a high-quality debate , taking into account very short deadlines for rather complicated legislation .
Let me explain why gas market liberalisation is as essential as electricity market liberalisation for a competitive , sustainable and secure energy supply in the European Union .
I will also stress that they require the same legislative measures .
Gas is one of the main energy sources in the EU for both industry and households .
Energy prices are spiking : now , more than ever , EU consumers need a competitive gas market so that they pay only the cost for efficient supply .
Moreover , the electricity market will not function properly if the gas market does not function properly .
I would like to quote the International Energy Agency : ' In many regions , gas-fired plant sets the price of electricity a significant proportion of the time .
Expensive gas therefore means expensive electricity . ...
Policymakers must appreciate the growing intertwining of gas and electricity industries , and design markets and regulatory systems accordingly . '
This is even more the case at a time when we need more renewable energy .
As the wind and sun do not always function as we would wish , electricity production is difficult to predict .
It needs the back-up of a source for electricity production that is predictable and very flexible , and this is gas .
Gas is also the cleanest of all fossil fuels .
If we want to reduce carbon emissions and combat climate change , it is one of the very efficient ways , but we need to make sure that our gas supply is competitive .
Security of supply is also important .
The best way to guarantee a secure gas supply to the EU is by having one internal market for 500 million consumers .
The EU is loud and clear if it speaks with one voice .
It is very incomprehensible if 27 voices speak at the same time .
In a common market we need to work together because we have one common interest .
All these arguments underline the importance of measures on which we will take up a position today .
I am glad to say that they support most of your amendments .
We need effective independence of system operators to ensure investments and optimal network use .
For the Commission , ownership unbundling is the most efficient way to achieve this independence .
But not everybody agrees and , as you know , the Council has reached agreement on the independent transmission operator option .
I believe that an alternative to just ownership unbundling should be given a chance , just as Europe was built using a step-by-step approach .
You have asked for a stronger Agency .
I agree with you on the principle , but we need to stay within the boundaries of the Treaty .
We are bound by the Treaty and so-called Meroni jurisprudence of the Court of Justice .
In particular , we need comitology to make codes binding .
The Agency can then control the procedure and the implementation .
A strong Agency is not in conflict with comitology .
On the contrary , the Agency needs guidelines to frame its powers so that it can take individual binding decisions on market players .
Access to storage and LNG is as important as access to the networks .
We welcome your efforts to improve access to storage in the directive .
To make sure that these access rules are effective , we need legal unbundling of the storage operators .
Transparency is also the key part of our proposals that you have underlined in the previous votes .
Transparency should be the rule and confidentiality the exception , not only for network use but also for balancing , storage and LNG .
I am pleased to see that many of the horizontal concerns , as regards the protection of vulnerable customers and the fight against energy poverty , have also been taken up in the gas report .
These elements are essential in the implementation of market opening and should be strengthened .
The Commission will look carefully at the wording in order to respect the principle of subsidiarity .
It is important to confirm again that our policy should not prevent proper investment signals and market entry .
I think the Council has clearly indicated its wish to try to find a solution at second reading .
I can assure you that the Commission will play a very constructive role in finding the solution that is beneficial for all EU citizens and developing our strength , which is the internal energy market .
On the second report , I would like to congratulate Mr Buzek for his excellent report and express my appreciation for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy 's support for the strategic energy technology ( SET ) plan initiative .
It seems that I have already overstepped my time limit .
We have worked very closely with my colleague Janez Potočnik and so I will join in his views on this very important proposal , not just because I very much appreciate what Mr Buzek has done but because we really worked together in the Commission to move this dossier ahead .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to say a few words on our joint enterprise - the SET Plan .

We all know that on energy and climate change we face an enormous challenge .
It is perhaps the defining challenge of the 21st century .
Let us be under no illusions that it will be easy .
The targets we have set for Europe for 2020 are an important milestone , but they are no more than that .
A much more profound change is needed in the longer term : a complete overhaul of the energy systems that have delivered our current prosperity and wealth .
To fulfil our promises we will need new knowledge and new tools .
These will be delivered by research and innovation in energy technologies .
That is why the SET Plan is so important for Europe .
We need to snap out of the lethargy that has characterised energy innovation in recent decades .
We have to invest more and better .
We need a new mind-set in the way we work together in Europe to develop and deploy such technologies .
I very much welcome Parliament 's report on the SET Plan .
It shows that there is a solid consensus at EU level for effective action in this area .
Of course , we do not all agree on which technologies we need but , as we know , it is up to each Member State to decide on its preferences on the basis of their preferred energy mix , indigenous resource base and exploitation potential .
But more important than what we disagree on , for me , is what we all agree on .
We agree on the crucial importance of energy savings and energy efficiency .
We agree that the capacity of the European research base has to be enlarged , strengthened and freed up to work in a much more dynamic and transnational manner .
We agree on the need for more resources , public and private .
And we agree on the need for enhanced international cooperation to face a global challenge .
You know my ambitions for the EU research policy and the development of the European Research Area .
The SET Plan and the development of our research policy go hand in hand .
I see it as a pioneer in many respects , including ERA initiatives such as joint programming .
I believe that the SET Plan will start a process that will act as a model for the organisation of research and innovation activities within Europe , a process that will change the way we do research in Europe and one that will ultimately change Europe .
Last week I was present at the annual meeting of the DFG - the German Research Council .
Their President , Matthias Kleiner , said something memorable : A vision without action is a daydream ; action without a vision is a nightmare .
There is probably no better example of how true that statement is than the SET Plan we are discussing today .
We need a clear vision and we have to act urgently .
Mr. President , the discussion of the third energy package will be completed with the discussion and vote of the regulation on access to transmission networks at the July plenary session , along with Mr. La Russa 's report .

I think that on this basis I can above all express my gratitude to all shadow rapporteurs with whom I worked in the process of preparing the report , as well as to the rapporteurs on the other two regulations , with whom we achieved a common approach to the resolution of third energy package problems .
I would like to make a particular point of the fact that within the framework of our actions we confirmed the proposals of the Commission related to the establishment of a network of transmission network operators , but limited their functions in respect precisely to their obligations to fulfil technical tasks and develop the network , not to establish rules of trade .
In our proposals we set aside an enormous role for the future Agency for cooperation between national regulators .
It is precisely this agency that we think is the important authority which should , under the guidance of the Commission , determine the main trends and guidelines for development of the energy market , including the gas market .
In this sense , the agency will not only fulfil functions on the approval of the codes , which are voluntary at this stage , but according to the last proposals we have made , through the Commission it will also be able to propose by way of comitology that some of the codes become mandatory .
I think that the texts in respect to regional initiatives have an enormous importance for the development of the market .
This regional investment plan , which is to be developed on the basis of the ten-year investment plan , will really help member-states cooperate on regional level as a stage for a future common energy market .
Many other important matters related to transparency , and to boosting interaction between the participants on the market , have been resolved in the report .
I am very much encouraged by what Commissioner Piebalgs has said about his attitude to our proposals on the Agency and I believe that we can found , within the principles of the Meroni case and within the proposals of the Parliament , an Agency that will be viable - an Agency that will be parallel to the efforts of the Commission in the development of the market .
At the same time , I am very much encouraged by what happened on 6 June in the Council and I believe that a good basis for compromise has been found .
I am happy that Commissioner Piebalgs mentioned today this possible compromise unlike at the last meeting when we discussed electricity .
I believe that with the support of the Commission , and of course in the trialogue that will develop , it will be possible to find a solution possibly by the end of the year .
I am a bit discouraged by the delays put forward by the French presidency .
I believe we could work more expeditiously to keep the previous European Council wish that we finish the work by the end of this year , and not the end of this term , which would mean the middle of next year .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , here we are at last on the home straight after many long months of work .
It has certainly not been easy .
Albeit with a few misgivings , I believe that the committee 's proposals are equal to the arduous task of dismantling established monopolies .
These , as well as preventing new competitors from accessing the market , have long restricted investment and the capacity for network interconnection .
Anyone who heard my speeches in the committee knows that I have regarded ownership unbundling as a priority right from the outset , so as to ensure that companies transporting gas are fully independent of companies generating it , even though of course ownership unbundling is no miracle cure for all ills .
It goes without saying that , once a vertically integrated company is allowed - even if only temporarily - to retain ownership of transport systems , there is a need to establish effective regulatory control mechanisms which are neither too onerous nor too invasive .
Obviously , as we all know , the implementing measures for the gas directive will inevitably follow a different schedule from those for electricity .
This difference emerged clearly in the Committee on Industry , which opted for the ITO - the Independent Transmission Operator - as an alternative to ownership unbundling .
It is a compromise proposal , certainly not my own preferred option , but one that does go in the direction of greater liberalisation .
Indeed , unlike the ISO , the ITO will be answerable to a separate body with genuine supervisory powers .
I hope the Council will take up the ITO proposal as approved by the Committee on Industry .
The fundamental role to be conferred on the Agency by the forthcoming legislative framework should be emphasised : it must not be a purely advisory role - as I fear might be the Council 's intention - but one that envisages a broader remit for the Agency in future .
If we are to attain the goal of reducing our energy dependence , we need a single energy market and a single integrated network .
I therefore urge colleagues to support the amendments tabled by myself , and by other colleagues from various political groups , concerning the possibility of combining the various transport operators into one single European network company , in order to ensure that there is a single legislative framework and to guarantee market access for all operators , thereby overcoming the ' unbundling yes ; ownership unbundling no ' hurdle .
Another very important aspect of my report is the central role of consumers .
I shall be brief .
There needs to be a transparent , comprehensible means of determining tariffs , enabling consumers to access consumption data at any time and giving them freedom to change supplier if they so wish .
Regarding the comitology procedure , I am pleased that the Commission has accepted my position : I believe that it is up to Member States to lay down the guidelines , rather than a committee speaking for the Commission alone .
Finally , I should like to mention the agreement reached between the political groups , and set out in my report , concerning the powers and role of national regulators : I think this is an important agreement , especially as regards the possibility of imposing sanctions .
It is for us , ladies and gentlemen , to decide whether we want tomorrow to be remembered as a key moment in the creation of a single integrated energy market , which Europe needs in order to confront the challenges of the next millennium , or whether , on the other hand , it will mark the umpteenth climb-down , the result of a timid , cowardly reform effort which will basically be postponed until the next legislative term .
I hope , moreover , that the Council will give due consideration to Parliament 's decisions .
That is not always the case .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I was rather surprised when I read that both the SET Plan and our energy package were going to be in the same programme as a block .
It is as if one were to talk about human rights and human diseases in a block because they are both ' human ' , which is not a very good idea .
Similarly , the fact that they are both about ' energy ' is not enough to link energy technology and the energy package together as they are very different topics .
But seeing both Commissioners here , I am very glad at this decision , because the SET Plan is very important for the European Union and needs strong support from some Commissioners and from the whole Commission .
As you can see from the voting in the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , you have support from the European Parliament .
I will now go through the content of the SET plan .
However , it would probably be easier if I change to my mother tongue , which I shall now do .
( PL ) The European Union has decided to make a charge for emissions of carbon dioxide .
This is a key decision .
We are showing that we shall fight climate change .
We are showing that we are a leader in this battle .
On the other hand , we should remember that charges on carbon dioxide emissions create difficulties for the economy and result in higher production costs in almost every sector .
I would like to emphasise that the energy sector itself will be hardest hit , particularly in countries where electricity or heat are generated using coal .
The proposal put forward by the European Commission concerning a strategic energy technology programme is , in my opinion , an excellent response to the threats to the European economy .
It is all about reducing energy costs .
The European Commission has introduced support for zero and low-emission technologies in ' energy , production and energy processing ' .
For the first time we have all the methods for combating climate change and for energy security presented in one document .
This means that nuclear power is also included .
In fact , the continuing concerns of our colleagues , principally our colleagues from the Green Party , all the risks associated with nuclear power generation , are presented by them .
However , today , the third generation of nuclear power stations is completely different from what was built in Chernobyl .
It seems that there is full agreement as regards another great challenge and issue , namely the capture and storage of carbon dioxide .
This is a new technology , so incentives are essential , as for any new and promising technology .
As regards support for sustainable technologies in the power generation sector , this was never in doubt in Parliament .
Parliament treats energy efficiency and energy saving as the most important issue .
Perhaps as a result of this it will be possible to avoid building one or two nuclear power stations , because we will improve efficiency and energy saving .
I would like to end by mentioning two points .
The organisation of research at European level is an excellent idea and we are in favour of it .
This could be the first sector in which the European Union does this .
It is the start of a common energy market , in this area also , as well as the free movement of knowledge .
In this report I proposed specific amounts of funding to support new technologies .
This is essential if we want to help our industry , the energy sector , and if we want to make the Lisbon Strategy a success .
Mr President , Commissioners , the debate on the gas market and gas supply networks that was held in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs was not ideologised to that extent .
We in the ECON Committee reached our decision very coherently and by a large majority .
Clearly , the emerging compromise on network unbundling is not to be seen in such ideological terms .
Our report places much greater emphasis on the question of how suitable the national approval procedures really are , realistically , when it comes to ensuring future progress in the field of cross-border networks , network development and network investment .
We believe that there is still much catching-up to be done here and regret for example that in the position adopted in plenary very little emphasis has been placed on the need to accelerate the approval process at national level .
A second aspect that appears important to us is the question of the regulator .
States would be very much more prepared to accept a regulator if the latter were given a large measure of independence .
Contractual concerns have been voiced in this regard .
However , looking at everything in regulatory terms it is only possible to argue in favour of a regulator if such an office would also have appropriate powers of intervention .
Still on this particular subject I would again express sincere thanks to my colleague Mr Buzek .
We have been having an integrated discussion on the subject of energy policy and Mr Buzek has put forward some very constructive proposals as part of the SET-Plan .
As rapporteur for CCS demonstration I too will be supporting this with solid funding proposals .
After such a heated and ideological debate I think that we should now give priority to the question of exactly what these concrete steps should be .
This means that we now have a transition period in which we also have to examine whether the proposed measures actually work .
To me this seems to be much more important than any ideology-laden discussion of network ownership .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , on principle the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety welcomes the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan in that it helps configure a common energy market and support for the Lisbon Treaty , and especially assists with the fight against climate change .
We also feel that the consultation process carried out was extremely positive , and in our opinion this ought to continue subsequently .
We regret , however , that the SET-Plan focuses mainly on supply-orientated measures rather than measures to reduce energy demand , especially energy savings and energy efficiency , and we are calling for more attention to be paid to these two aspects .
To this end , we would like a hierarchy to be created between EIIs , with efforts being focused on those with greater potential to reduce emissions in the short term , a reduction of 20 % by 2020 , obviously without neglecting measures in the longer term with a view to fulfilling the objectives set for 2050 .
With regard to these priorities , we also feel that consideration should be taken of the life cycle of each technology and its environmental impact during the production process , and that transfer of these technologies to developing economies should be taken into consideration in order to reduce the technology gap with these countries .
We also feel it is necessary to extend the EIIs to other sectors with significant emissions reduction potential such as cogeneration , hydrogen , the construction and housing sector , heating and cooling systems , and better energy storage and distribution infrastructures .
Finally , we wish to say that we feel that funds for these technologies ought to be part of the debate on future financing of EU policies , and therefore the Member States should be required to make a greater effort , at least in the same proportion as they did in response to the energy crisis during the 1980s .
Mr President , I will in a moment be presenting the decisions of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , a somewhat insane undertaking and just as insane as the way in which some of our debates were organised , with such results .
For this reason I would just make one comment , for there is not enough time for anything more .
The Commissioner has again just pointed out that in the Commission 's opinion ownership unbundling is somehow - to use his words - the most efficient solution .
We doubt that , because it cannot be verified either empirically or theoretically ; certainly not empirically , for there are plenty of examples to show that even after ownership unbundling undertakings do not operate so smoothly .
Neither can it be verified theoretically .
It is and remains a monopoly , a natural monopoly , and monopolies do not have much to do with free competition .
What therefore matters is not so much the question of ownership but rather of regulation .
The sector has to be strictly regulated and this has to apply to unbundled network operators just as much as to non-unbundled network operators .
We have made a number of proposals to this effect in the ECON Committee and we would hope that these proposals could also be taken on board .

Mr President , I would also like to comment on the matter , in my capacity as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , regarding the terms of access to the natural gas transport networks and to congratulate Mr Paparizov on his outstanding work in examining the proposals package discussed within our committee .
Our criterion has been to protect consumers and to approve socially appropriate and transparent measures to protect them .
I wish to add that this is a report which was not affected by antagonism or by any negative reactions and was adopted by the Parliamentary committees within which it was examined , unlike the rest of the energy package where the matter of ownership unbundling took centre stage .
With more specific reference to consumers , our committee focused on matters relating to consumer protection and on proposals promoting and safeguarding a true European internal market in natural gas .
Our position on the promotion of effective regional cooperation among the Member States is a highly significant aspect of securing a true internal cross-border market .
It is , therefore , necessary to create a European network of transport system administrators , where cooperation will be based on securing an efficient , representative and transparent European natural gas market .
At this point , I wish to highlight the fact that cooperation on transport systems does not require a separation of the network 's activities from production and supply .
The transport network can easily become effective without any ownership unbundling in all the participating Member States .
We have argued that it is important for the European network of transport system administrators to hold talks with the bodies involved and especially with consumers and consumer associations , as these are important involved bodies in the extent to which they are also the end domestic users .
We have supported the transparency of information and of natural gas storage capabilities , so that fair prices and a truly open market will be sustained to their benefit .

I too think that one minute really is very short , but I thank the Commissioner , the Minister , the honourable Members and also Mr La Russa for their preparatory work .
I will keep it short .
The market for energy has to be able to operate at European level mainly in order to guarantee the supply of energy to end-users at market prices .
That is our aim .
The unbundling is not an aim in itself but we think that this may be the way toward a functioning market .
If the so-called third or fourth way , as proposed by the Council , can bring about a working market , then of course that is fine too .
However , in case that third or fourth way does not work , we have already produced a proposal in order to be ready with a possible alternative solution , which I hope will be carried tomorrow , for a ' European network manager ' directed and controlled by the European Union .
I hope that both the Commission and the Council can support this so that we will at least have an alternative ready in a few years ' time .
In October , Mr President , we want to organise a round table discussion at which all stakeholders will be present and we hope that this idea will also be widely supported .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate on the energy package will live on in my memory as one that was not properly conducted in every detail , for we were rushed through it .
We did not always take the time that was needed for it .
I would say this now here in this debate and at this particular time .
I hope that it all does not catch up with us one day .
I have now seen again that in politics there is a real risk of staking everything on a cure-all and then railroading it through with all vigour while promising the people that this will solve all their problems .
I hope that at the end of the day we really will find a solution to the problems facing us , namely how we acquire more investment and obtain more reasonable prices and how we achieve security of supply in the European energy sector .
From morning to night we read in the newspapers and hear on the television about the cares and woes that all this is causing around the world .
Is that the solution that we have been working towards all this time in these debates ?
I doubt it .
I am therefore thankful that we have made some headway on the gas directive , that we have moved a little further towards a compromise , that we have been more discriminating and have noticed that electricity and gas are different , that there is no longer a one-fits-all solution .
It is good that we are now aiming for the third way and no longer just see unbundling as the number one option , and that we have managed to make a few amendments to much of what the Commission had proposed .
Whether this is enough only time will tell .
I am pleased that in June the Council demonstrated , through its new proposal , that even in such difficult situations we are able to rise above national boundaries and differences of opinion so as to come up with solutions .
I would hope that what we have now agreed on gas will be revised slightly tomorrow and will move a bit closer to the compromise that has already been found in the Council .
If we are to reach a swift settlement then we ultimately need to achieve a compromise between the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
I believe that what has been presented to us by the Council is very close to what we have now come up with for gas .
Perhaps we should also take this as a benchmark for the electricity market .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to congratulate the three rapporteurs most sincerely for their excellent work .
You must forgive me for focusing mainly on the report by my colleague Mr La Russa on the gas directive .
There has been some very good collaboration between the rapporteur , Mr La Russa , and the various shadow rapporteurs .
We have already discussed the issue of unbundling , network separation and gas supply .
That is not one of the most important or central questions .
I am satisfied with the compromise that we have found , even though it is very stringent , because on the one hand it still provides the option of not actually going for full separation , though this is subject to very strict conditions , while on the other the Commission can in any case use a review clause to apply quite a lot of pressure to ensure that competition exists and that competitive conditions are really maintained .
Of course we also need to take a slightly longer-term view of things .
In this respect we would agree entirely with the basic views expressed by our colleague Mr Manders in the sense that we need to examine whether perhaps a common European infrastructure can satisfactorily be found .
However , that is a possible alternative for the future and one that we cannot yet go into in any detail .
It is important that we should also have derogations , such as those that apply to any major investments where a lot of capital is involved and where we are still unable to say whether this will really lead to a solution , such as in the case of the Nabucco project .
Here we also have to be sufficiently flexible .
Investments of this kind are on a long-term basis and we do not exactly know when we will reach contract conclusion .
That is especially important .
I hope that a majority in this House will support our amendments tomorrow .
Otherwise we shall be adopting the report as voted on in respect of transparency , consumer protection , energy and poverty .
When I look at what the Commission and the Commission President last said on this subject it would be important if we had a clear declaration in this area , firstly on having transparent information for consumers , which is not always the case , secondly on setting up a help-line for network users , so that they too can request information , thirdly on an independent entry point for complaints , for there are always complaints - and each of us knows of such cases , even if we were not personally affected , which is also quite important - and fourthly on the protection of vulnerable customers , especially pensioners , the handicapped and others .
These are all real concerns , particularly in view of the rising energy prices .
I do not understand that on the one hand the committee unfortunately did not take this on board , especially in the gas sector , and that on the other the conservatives and in the end President Barroso himself have been saying repeatedly that we have to strive to help the consumers and , more particularly , the more vulnerable customers .
I do not wish to speculate whether this means subsidised rates or some other option .
This would also be left to individual countries .
The Member States should not always shift responsibility to the Commission but should also be prepared to take their own decisions .
However , the European Commission and Parliament should be taking a lead by showing that such an option is possible and probably also beneficial if we are also to protect the social interests of consumers at a time of such high energy prices .
The EU has no common gas market ; it is very fragmented and mainly regional .
However , some areas in the EU do not even have a regional gas market .
These are the Baltic countries - Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia and Finland - which are not generally integrated and have no links to the EU gas network .
Dependence on a single supplier with a penchant for using energy supply for political purposes is quite dangerous to both energy security and the general security of the EU .
Eliminating energy islands and creating links between states and regions should be the main priority of EU energy policy , supported by the finances and political will of the Union .
The Third Energy Package for the gas market could be implemented only with EU help and constitutes the instrument that would enable the European Union to be more secure .
The third way - this is the five-year period during which EU Member States must find the political willpower and finances to eliminate energy islands in the gas market .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
Firstly , I would like to congratulate both Commissioner Piebalgs and Mr La Russa , the rapporteur , on taking a significant step in the liberalisation of the gas market , although it is certainly not perfect .
For me , the problem is the same as that referred to by the previous speaker with regard to the ' islands ' in the European gas market - the Baltic States and Finland .
I am not truly convinced by the agreement reached in the Council on 6 July inasmuch as existing owners , principally Gazprom and the companies associated with it , will not have to partition off their property rights until other connections emerge in these states .
There is something of a chicken-and-egg situation here , since it is very likely that new connections will not emerge if it is not possible to come to a prior agreement and to be completely clear about access to existing networks .
It is therefore possible that we will need to make use of some specific deadline here , with the introduction of an independent transmission operator in such monopoly situations .
Mr President , it is the gas market that is at stake here today .
When it comes to gas we have to distinguish between two markets .
Firstly there is the fact that we have to bring gas to Europe .
To do this we need a stable investment policy that also takes the gas supplier countries into consideration .
For this we need long-term contracts and we must give European companies the opportunity to invest in pipelines in order to transport this gas to Europe .
What we would need - and with a bit more effort from everyone , and particularly from the national governments - is a unified European policy on gas that allows the EU 's 27 voices to take the same line at international level .
That is probably a better definition of what we need .
If Nord Stream is built we shall have gas at the crossing point in Greifswald and indeed everywhere else in Europe .
Then we have the LNG market , which means the European gas market .
The question that then arises is whether we are to draw up policies for the consumer or for the companies involved in this European gas market .
What does a company need in order to establish a cartel ?
The first thing is control over the pipelines so that competitors cannot gain access to their home market .
The second is control over the gas storage facilities , so that while being readily able to cushion the supply a company does not then have difficulties when it comes to delivery .
Thirdly there is market dominance : E.ON currently controls 60-70 % of the German market while Gaz de France has a 70-80 % share of the French market and there are no mechanisms in place to do anything about this .
Fourthly , we have a weak European regulatory system , which means multinational concerns and national regulatory authorities that always end up coming second best .
Then , fifthly , there is lack of transparency .
What are Mr Reul and others proposing ?
Just these very things !
In other words we are devising policies for the companies instead of for the consumers .
This is why we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance favour two basic approaches .
We need to bring gas to Europe , but once this gas is inside the European single market there has to be competition : separation of the networks , better access to the storage facilities and a gas release programme .
My dear conservatives and liberals , you cannot any longer allow a situation in which we have 70 % , 80 % or 90 % dominance on the national markets and the only weapon against this is gas release .
We have tabled an amendment to re-introduce the gas release programme and we need it .
Regarding point four , we of course require a European regulatory authority .
This means that for the FDP and the CDU / CSU Members , as well as for the liberals and conservatives , tomorrow is the day of reckoning : either we make policy for the consumers or we make policy for the companies .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , the objective of the report before us for discussion is the liberalisation of energy markets , this time for gas .
The majority of Parliament is calling for the separation or ' unbundling ' of production and network ownership in connection with the liberalisation of the electricity markets .
However , the Council has ridden roughshod over Parliament , and it is good that it has done so .
Unbundling of ownership does not by any means guarantee a reduction in consumer prices .
Whatever happens with gas , the Member States will still have the option to unbundle ownership or to continue pretty much as they are doing at present .
The construction and maintenance of networks are not profitable business activities and this must be understood if the current owners are prepared to stop doing them .
Company profits accrue through the pricing of electricity and gas , and the Commission 's proposal does not protect against this , nor does it protect consumers from energy poverty .
In liberalising the markets , I would like to remind you again of the situation in the United States .
According to calculations by the NGO Public Citizen , in the 14 states where the price of electricity is not regulated , it is 52 per cent higher than in the 36 states where it is regulated .
Liberalisation , competition and unbundling of ownership will not automatically lead to a reduction in prices .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this debate assumes that the EU is to be heavily reliant on natural gas for energy .
I challenge that , not least because almost all natural gas has to be imported .
It places us in the hand of others , not all of whom are exactly friendly .
Do I have to recall how Russia cut off the gas supply to Ukraine at Christmas time two years ago ?
What about alternative indigenous resources ?
Western Europe is rich in coal , which needs only travel a short distance to a power station .
Coal has a bad name , partly for pollution and partly for the extra carbon dioxide it produces per kilowatt as compared to gas .
But you are behind the times .
Coal can be much more efficiently burned these days , releasing much less CO2 than previous methods .
Personally , I prefer not to see it burnt , but coked .
Turning coal into coke produces two smoke-free sources : gas and coke , which when properly burnt together produce more energy than the coal they came from , in the ratio of 5 : 4 .
Moreover , by thoroughly scrubbing the gas , what are otherwise pollutants are removed .
They are in fact the very same by-products we get from oil .
And all that is under our feet .
Further , there is nuclear power for electricity .
That too has a bad name on account of one admittedly serious incident at Chernobyl , but that was an old Soviet installation of poor design in the hands of operators who tried an unsupervised shut-down which went wrong .
Why are there are doubts about nuclear energy , especially here in France , where nuclear power stations produce 70 % of our electricity ?
Let it be noted that Finland , very environmentally conscious , has just approved a third nuclear plant .
More recently , we have the spectacle of the EU promotion of biofuels which are now being severely questioned .
Biofuels are either produced on new land produced by destroying the rainforests , or on converted existing farm land .
The former produces more CO2 than the biofuels save , while the latter is causing food shortages , especially in the less-developed countries .
Of course we need natural gas , not least for domestic use , but the thrust of these reports is for the supply of gas to the EU to be controlled by the EU itself , by way of regulation .
Well , if it is anything like the CFP , where the regulations intended to conserve the fisheries have resulted in their near destruction , then heaven help us all .
Without doubt , gas supply regulations will be a red-tape nightmare , just when the Commission has said it wants to cut all that down .
How else will you produce a situation where the gas supply is split into two : transport and storage ?
Surely the most efficient system is for the storer then to supply - but no , you want to divide and increase the bureaucracy .
The report suggests licences for the pipeline operators while at the other end smart meters will be installed so that the consumer can be closely monitored .
By whom , exactly ?
Thus is state surveillance ratcheted upwards , while energy failure is to be a public order issue , giving the police powers of intervention .
Apart from placing the consumer in the uncertain hands of unreliable regimes , these reports extend the power of the state over the individual .
In short , it is all about control .
Meanwhile it must be noted that earlier this very day , Parliament voted to approve investigation into the environmental impact of the proposed gas pipeline under the Baltic Sea .
This is tantamount to approving a project to bring Russian natural gas direct to Germany , bypassing Poland , thus preserving their supplies and never mind the rest of us .
Is that what they call solidarity ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fully support the method and the substance of Mr La Russa 's proposal .
At long last we are deciding to separate ownership over the activity of generating natural gas from that of transporting it , or we are at least entrusting redistribution to a separate operator .
This is quite rightly the thrust of the parliamentary amendment introducing the concept of independent transmission operator .
This is a welcome attempt to dismantle dangerous monopolies - as Mr Zīle said just now - and hence to settle conflicts of interest in the most effective manner : it is vital to do so in order to guarantee security of supply .
Furthermore , a laudable attempt is being made to stem geo-economic and geopolitical interference by prohibiting third-country operators - albeit with waivers which I hope will be short-lived - from controlling the network of gas pipelines which are of strategic importance to the Union .
One merit of the La Russa report is this : if it is true , and it is true , that the purpose of the Community-wide internal gas market is to offer all EU consumers freedom to choose their supplier and at the same time to create new commercial opportunities , we must expect a more efficient service to be provided and then reflected in competitive pricing .
The contribution to security of supply would also seem obvious .
Lastly , another aspect worthy of note in view of its huge social importance is the strengthening of protection for users at national level : more vulnerable users and those living in disadvantaged or remote areas and regions .
Such protection should be afforded thanks to preferential supply tariffs .
I congratulate my colleague , and I hope that his report will receive the broad-based support it deserves .
( ES ) Mr President , tomorrow we will be voting on the second and final part of the third legislative package for liberalisation of the energy market , in other words , the part concerning the gas sector .
This House has always claimed that the reality of the gas market differs from the electricity market , since a sector that controls all its areas of activity from generation to end distribution is not the same as a sector subject to intense geopolitical pressure during the extraction and production phase that controls only transport and end sales .
That is why a large majority of the EP felt , and continues to feel , that we ought to consider another alternative to ownership unbundling for gas .
To this end the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy adopted a compromise amendment to the La Russa report securing a position acceptable to the vast majority of Members , who see this as a credible alternative to ownership unbundling ; an alternative that guarantees effective independence of the system operator , since only this can ensure more investment is forthcoming to increase the capacity , and this in turn removes the main barrier to newcomers and provides better and greater competition .
Those of us who support ownership unbundling have always said we could accept a credible alternative that would guarantee the same results .
I think we have succeeded in drawing up a suitable plan with this gas compromise .
However , we are aware that certain people favour the alternative plan proposed by the Council , which does not support the trustee concept and intends to propose a separate vote .
I wish to let it know that without this concept its alternative will not constitute a genuine alternative to ownership unbundling , but rather a legal formula allowing certain Member States to be more equal than others in terms of opening up their markets .
Naturally this possibility does not seem so coherent .
Finally , I wish to lend my wholehearted support to the Paparizov gas regulation report and express my gratitude to Mr Paparizov for his splendid assistance to us during the first reading .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioners , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to start off with the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan and congratulate Mr Buzek , and thank him for including amendments that my group felt were essential .
We are satisfied with the way in which we dealt with finance together , a common concern within such an important plan .
We must also make some mention of human resources , not only because they must be increased , but because the Plan also involves other aspects such as training , mobility and coordination .
One extremely important objective has been achieved in that a more significant role has been allocated to technologies that increase energy efficiency and to research in general , deploying the full potential of the European research area .
The report enhances research and basic sciences that are essential for progress to be made in energy technology , and calls for the private sector to invest more in research and assume greater risks to make the EU a frontrunner in this sector .
Improvements must also be made to technology transfer , a task to be undertaken by the new European Institute of Innovation and Technology , and there must be greater cooperation with the Member States and other Community instruments to bolster research , development and innovation capacities in those areas .
Coordination has to extend to all fields which , owing to their multidisciplinary nature , play a part in energy technology research and development , especially information and communication technologies .
In relation to gas , it simply ought to be said that LNG facilities and their storage infrastructures , provided they have interconnections with transport networks , operate as complementary facilities which play an essential role by guaranteeing access to new operators and speeding up the creation of a genuine internal European market .
It would thus seem logical to apply the same treatment in this area .
Within this context , operating on the basis of the ' one-stop shopping ' principle upheld by this House , a combined operator of independent infrastructures emerges as the most effective option .
Using a single operator gives users access to gas infrastructures , since they will encounter similar contracts and codes , the same level of transparency and the chance to arrange services in groups .
This is the reasoning behind the three amendments we are tabling in plenary , and I ask my colleagues to vote for them .
Mr President , as shadow rapporteur on the SET Plan , I warmly welcome this initiative .
We are establishing a new energy research agenda for Europe , which is much needed in view of the challenges we shall be facing in the next decade .
The Commission believes that Europe should lower the costs of clean energy and put industry at the forefront of the low-carbon technology sector .
While I agree with these objectives , I would also say that the best intentions never become reality without proper financing .
This is why I regret that the Commission did not publish the communication on financing for new low-carbon technologies .
How does the Commission intend to finance these actions ?
In any case , let me assure you that Parliament will not accept the reallocation of funds from the Seventh Framework Programme or the CAP .
This question of financing is also raised in regard to the 12 CCS projects .
While I believe this technology might help industry to reduce CO2 emissions , I cannot accept that European taxpayers ' money be used to finance the development of a CCS infrastructure that will be someone 's business in the end .
As a Liberal , I believe we have to let the market function and develop , if needed , a fair partnership with the industry .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union 's approach to energy issues is full of inconsistencies .
We hear more and more calls for amicable , united , long-term cooperation and strategy while , at the same time , we are faced with examples of uncoordinated actions , partial proposals and investments that serve the interests of one party at the cost of others .
The reports that have been put forward are an attempt to deal with this problem or else to draw attention to issues and dilemmas that have not been sufficiently considered .
The rapporteur deserves our praise for this .
The world has never in its history seen an example of another commodity whose price has risen so much over such a short period , as have the prices of oil and gas .
For this reason we can state clearly that mistakes were made in anticipating the future .
There is no doubt that this economic dilemma must be resolved by moving in two directions : first of all , by increasing the supply of energy sources , including newer and more efficient ones and , secondly , by slowing increase in demand using new , more economical technologies .
The European Union must show itself to be more effective in this regard and cannot allow the privilege of monopoly access to raw materials or a majority shareholding to decide the situation in the market .
For this reason access to gas distribution networks , research into new technologies and new agencies are useful suggestions .
Today is a time when we need urgent action and implementation .
For this reason the threat to climatic stability posed by CO2 emissions should be analysed again by scientists to verify its accuracy , so that we do not find in the future that reductions in emissions only bring advantages to a selected few , these being , principally , large companies and not consumers , while at the same time destroying the coal sector .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have recently had news from Japan that will certainly have delighted the rapporteur , Mr Buzek .
What it said was that my country , Germany , was completely isolated when it comes to using nuclear power .
I sometimes wonder how such reporting can be possible and whether people do not know how few countries around the world actually use nuclear energy .
If you really look into it you will see that three quarters of all the world 's nuclear energy is produced in just six countries , while there are one or two others that have a marginal share of the nuclear power market .
This means that on a global level nuclear energy has made little or no contribution to date .
It only plays a role in part of Europe and in North America , where it figures largely .
There are many factors dictating whether this state of affairs will change or not , and one of these is how much public money is once more to be pumped into this dying industry .
The US , which was so conspicuous in Hokkaido , has now - thanks to departing President Bush - pledged USD 18 million to promote two or three reactor projects .
Nothing of this kind has been built there for twenty years and the nuclear industry needs a lot of public money in order to create a market artificially .
Some EUR 6 billion have been announced for the UK .
This is what a reactor is said to cost there if the German company E.ON builds it .
If we look around elsewhere we see that the Belene plant will be built for less , though Bulgaria wants EUR 600 million from Brussels to put the scheme into practice .
We really have to decide whether in the years ahead we are to put public money into future technologies and new markets or whether we want to stick to technology from the last century that poses enormous risks .
I am arguing for the future and against nuclear energy because I am convinced that the risks presented by this technology cannot be overcome .
Today 's report of yet another accident at the Paks nuclear power station in Hungary simply reaffirms my opinion . Thank you all for your attention .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Commissioners , Council representatives , I want to say that today we find ourselves in the same situation as the people in the book The Pilgrim 's Progress by John Bunyan , which asks ' Were you Doers , or Talkers only ? ' .
I think that now is the time for action and that European voters want us to adopt measures that would result in fair prices on the energy markets .
The share of speculation today counts for 30 % to 40 % of the final price , and it would be good to introduce an energy price moratorium when the year-on-year increase is over 30 % , as it is now .
I think that people expect us to do this .
It is clear that salvation is not to be found in the markets alone , and the old saying that ' financiers support the state just as a rope supports a hanged man ' is confirmed .
In my opinion , liberalisation will not help us in the present situation .
What will help us is building new capacities ( including the much condemned nuclear energy ) and investments , massive investments in new technologies .
Here we may see a real challenge : creating the basis for a new , long-term technological era in the energy sector .
Crises , including energy crises , are overcome by innovation .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I fear that today we are once again solving the partial problems of the energy markets instead of pausing to think , in a complex manner , about the strategic problems .
Do we really know what the energy needs of the European Union countries realistically will be over the next decades , and is this knowledge reflected in our regulations and directives ?
Do we really know what a stable European energy situation , as a whole , should be like ?
Are we able to identify clearly those countries that actively look for the solutions to their energy needs , and at the same time point the finger at the troublemakers who are just energy importers but at the same time unashamedly criticise energy producers and exporters ?
Have we become at least a bit more realistic , in the light of the latest World Bank study , about the Union 's nonsensical goals in the area of biofuels ?
Ladies and gentlemen , no market functions if demand exceeds supply .
It may happen to the Union pretty soon in the energy area .
Consequently , we need to start supporting research and development and , most importantly , resolve all the links in the energy chain , such as production , transmission , distribution and consumption .
As far as resources are concerned , whether we like it or not it is necessary to start building new facilities to replace the existing ones that are nearing the end of their lifespan in order to meet the growing energy demand .
I believe that we have to start talking about an energy mix that will not discriminate against any source of energy , including nuclear energy , will respect the geographical and political maps of the owners of raw materials and will be based on modern scientific knowledge that can be used in practice , rather than on green dreams .
Ladies and gentlemen , of course I support the so-called third way , according to which Member States will retain their right to define freely the ownership relations between energy producers and transmission networks .
I also welcome the boost given to the independence of competences and duties of the potential operators of the transmission networks .
I believe that in this way we will manage to prevent increasing unilateral dependency on gas supplies from Russia , and at the same time invest in the distribution and security of natural gas supplies .
- ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , energy is the resource of the future and for that reason it is important that we take a long-term view when debating the subject of Europe 's energy supply .
It is also especially important not to exclude long-term contracts but rather to ensure that these are considered when planning for stable energy supplies to Europe .
We should also be thinking about the production and supply conditions for the trans-European networks .
By providing support and incentives on one hand we could , on the other , demand that unbundling , even ownership unbundling , serves as a basis for setting the production and supply conditions .
There are countless models that could be used here to safeguard the future markets .
A key issue - and one that has already been discussed today - concerns the operation of nuclear power stations .
It is high time that the European Commission plays an active role in this area by setting up an agency or regulator that would be responsible for the safety and security of nuclear power installations .
This regulator should also have the authority to remove unsafe nuclear power stations from the network .
The French agency could serve as a model in this respect .
France has provided us with an excellent example of how to set up an independent regulator .
It would be useful if this French regulator were given a say in the activities of the regulators in the other 26 countries .
This would strengthen the national regulators and take care of health and safety issues in Europe .
We all share responsibility for this .
We must give some thought to a long-term strategy on how to protect the people of Europe in the years to come .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs , the compromise achieved in the Gas Directive is good and we can support it .
However , not enough attention has been paid to customers and consumers , who are in a weak position ; this applies to the poor and to those living in remote areas .
I therefore ask you to support our proposed amendments .
Secondly , it is good that a compromise has been reached with the Council , ensuring that the countries from which there is no pipeline to the other EU Member States will not end up implementing all the internal market rules because they are not participating in the internal markets .
A strategic energy technology programme really is needed , and I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on the fact that energy efficiency has been included .
There has been inadequate funding for energy technology .
This has led to supply and demand failing to coincide .
The crisis that has occurred in all sectors of the energy industry has led to the industry , which has woken up to climate change , not obtaining the technology it needs quickly enough .
Quite simply , there are not enough suppliers of components .
Waking up to the reality of climate change has shown how poorly prepared for it we are .
However , the change in the attitudes of citizens is clear , and cooperation is now needed from the Community , the Union , its Member States and industry at the same time as we have to prevent developing economies from spoiling our living conditions by polluting them .
We must improve cooperation with the United States in the field of the environment and at the same time we must conclude an energy cooperation agreement with Russia .
It is therefore important to consider consumers , industrial development and cooperation with the United States and Russia .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to highlight two elements in relation to the gas market .
The first concerns long-term contracts .
This type of contract is an important tool for consumers , be they domestic or industrial .
It gives us a long-term view of the market and thus ensures that it operates in a more stable and efficient manner .
The second concerns the security of systems and , above all , the security of gas supply .
Gas transmission networks are of even more strategic interest than electricity networks .
The question of ownership is vital in relation to the configuration of the European model , characterised by high dependence on producing countries , which are outside the European Union .
For these reasons I support the amendment in favour of the third option , which guarantees non-discriminatory network access .
In addition to this , as it did for electricity , my group proposed creating a single European transmission system operator , which would preserve our strategic interests .
I would like to reassure my colleague Claude Turmes in this respect .
This directive on the gas market does not seek to protect national historical operators but to provide them with the opportunity to be Europe 's great energy champions .
( GA ) Mr President , investing in new and cleaner technologies must be a central element of EU strategies to ensure that we can reach the EU target of 25 % of energy supplies coming from the renewable sector .
It is equally important that other trading blocks around the world sign up to similar commitments in the near future .
However , fuel prices are now the more serious concern for the citizens of European countries .
The European Union must put in place innovative policies to help stem the rise of oil prices .
Increasing oil production is a key element of this process .
Mr President , there is clear uncertainty in the international financial markets at present .
Many speculators have switched their investment strategies into the commodities market and this speculation has contributed to increasing pressure on oil prices in an upward spiral .
Rising oil prices is the last thing that European business and consumers need at a time of increasing economic difficulties .
The European Union needs to have a progressive neighbourhood policy in place which will ensure that we can protect and secure our energy needs into the future .
( FR ) Mr President , when it comes to gas and to energy in general , we are faced with two radically opposed approaches .
The liberal approach consists of treating gas and its supply as a good and a service just like any other , giving rise to uncontrolled competition and totally excessive dismantlement of integrated public service companies .
Inevitably , prices rise , the services provided deteriorate and commercial and marketing spending shoots up to the detriment of research and development , and to the detriment of security .
What is worse , it generates harmful competition among the various forms of energy , thereby encouraging short-term choices based on the sole criterion of maximum profit in the minimum amount of time .
That approach forms the basis for the reports presented to us .
There is another approach , however , which consists of treating energy , gas and their supply as a public service that should be provided to all on the basis of equality and territorial adjustments .
That would result in a real Europe of energy based on cooperation and the general interest .
It would be built around a European energy agency that would coordinate and pool all the research efforts of the Member States and would guarantee equal access to energy for all citizens .
It would be based on an economic interest grouping integrating European energy companies , both public and private .
This EIG would carry out within a framework of cooperation major industrial projects at EU level and would enable our resources to be pooled .
( SL ) In the area of energy we face at least three challenges : the environmental challenge , the challenge of ensuring that the European economy is competitive , and the challenge of securing a regular energy supply .
The essential condition and a necessary requirement for responding to these challenges is that the players operate on a transparent internal market and under uniform rules .
There is , of course , a difference between the electrical energy sector and the gas sector .
In the gas sector our dependency on imports is as high as 60 % and , according to some estimates , by 2030 this dependency will be 80 % .
From Russia alone we import 40 % of total gas imports , and some Member Countries import all their gas , which means their dependency on imports is 100 % .
For this very reason it is extremely important that we should take care to ensure that an integrated Europe is a competent and an equal partner to Russia .
With liberalisation in the energy sector , we are introducing several independent protagonists .
Given that in Europe securing a critical mass of well-trained labour is now already a considerable challenge , due to a further liberalisation will be even more difficult to secure experts in the future .
This particularly applies to smaller Member States with relatively insubstantial power-generating undertakings .
An additional challenge in this respect is to maintain the political responsibility for welfare within a country despite the changes on the European energy markets .
A well-trained labour force is also required in order to make use of the opportunities available within the SET programme .
During the last four years alone we have adopted a number of mechanisms for the promotion of research and development in the energy sector .
I therefore expect that the Commission will dedicate special attention to the harmonisation of various contracts .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Slovenian Presidency has made considerable endeavours to promote the third market liberalisation package .
I hope that the French Presidency will continue the work with the same conviction .
( LT ) The only way to achieve a smoothly operating , secure gas market is to opt for the vertical unbundling of monopolies .
Undoubtedly , there is quite a difference between the electricity and gas markets , and we should distinguish between them in our documents , as was rightfully done by the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
Alas , we have only a few gas suppliers , and if we do not do something to achieve maximum reduction in dependence , we will be vitally dependent on them , both now and , highly probably , in the future .
Reducing our dependence is of the utmost importance and the documents under consideration will play a huge part in the process .
Let us adopt a realistic outlook and choose the third way .
It is necessary to consider the realities of the position of the Member States ' gas markets .
For example , Lithuania , along with the rest of the Baltic States , relies on a single supplier , Gazprom , for its gas supply .
There is no doubt that the Kremlin is prepared to maintain and increase its authority in the EU gas supply sector .
No financial resources are being spared .
Everyone has witnessed the level of lobbying with regard to the Nord Stream and other projects .
This is not economics , it is politics , and quite aggressive at that .
The only way we can resist this dictatorship is through solidarity in our actions and the creation of a common EU energy system as well as by supporting and implementing the alternative and , of course , nuclear energy projects .
For this we will need political willpower and common finances .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
This is a time when the European Union ought to respond to the increase in gas prices through market liberalisation , which is the only instrument that accurately reflects the relationship between supply and demand .
Unfortunately , it is still possible to see that the energy sector is in the grip of European energy companies that are integrated vertically and at state policy level .
I would therefore like to express Parliament 's gratitude to the committee concerned for its endeavours to direct reform in the direction of market liberalisation .
Mr Piebalgs is right , however , in saying that we must give the distribution of property rights a chance .
The case for this is strengthened by the fact that seven EU Member States have in fact made this move .
The Council has laid down exemptions from the directive for small , isolated gas markets .
At any rate , Latvia , the state I represent in the European Parliament , cannot talk about complete isolation , since it has a common gas market shared with two other EU Member States and a gas storage facility that supplies the region .
These are sufficient preconditions to create the elements of a market in the region .
I therefore call upon you not to support the Council 's proposals in that direction , at least not for the three Baltic States , but to grant an exemption from the directive .
They need to prepare for the integration of the EU gas market .
( PT ) Mr President , the fundamental point that we are discussing here is the liberalisation of the natural gas market by putting pressure on the Member States to speed up the process of privatising what is still public .
To achieve this more rapidly , the supporters of the proposal are insisting on ownership unbundling of the networks , without any concern for energy security .
The fact is that the acknowledged results of having liberalised the electricity market demonstrate that neither workers nor consumers benefit from liberalisation .
On the contrary , this has reduced employment with rights and increased the prices paid by consumers .
It is clear that the profits of economic groups in the electricity sector have increased , but that fuel poverty has also increased , in other words more people and families are struggling to access energy .
We therefore regret that the same route is being taken with natural gas .
Although these are different sectors , the economic and social consequences will be identical , hence the reason for our opposition .
Mr President , whatever we talk about , whether environmental or security issues , climate change or European competitiveness , the energy markets and how they function in the future are crucial .
This also applies to the discussion about the next phase of our legislation regarding carbon dioxide emissions : how to share the burdens and how to develop a scheme of European emissions trading .
That is why I would like to turn to the presidency and stress that , when we have debated here today and voted tomorrow on the second part of the energy package , it is of the utmost importance that the presidency start the discussions between Parliament and Council .
There must be no delays , because we need to have these markets functioning with a new legislation in place .
We can ask ourselves whether the European energy markets are functioning as well as they should .
The answer is very easy : they are not .
There is a difference between the electricity market and the gas market .
Electricity is dependent on a number of different sources of energy and different producers , while gas tends to be more dependent on distributors .
That is why the difference in the legislation which we are talking about - namely that we have full ownership unbundling on electricity and this scheme that the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy decided on in Parliament - is acceptable .
But what is important is to ensure that this is discussed and negotiated as soon as possible .
It is important to make sure that the legislation on gas allows for a separation between production and distribution that also gives real strength to the third-country clause of the energy package .
Once again I would like to underline to the presidency that negotiations should start as soon as possible .
Do not delay until October .
We need to start now .
( FR ) Mr President , although I am speaking after my colleague Mr Hökmark , I do not share the position he has just outlined .
I believe that just as we are on the brink of adopting this energy package we must keep in mind three challenges .
The first is the energy challenge or the climate challenge , which highlights the extent to which we must be mindful of the nature of gas as a resource and treat it in a very specific way .
The second challenge is the one our fellow citizens are bringing to our attention : price .
Their spending power is currently affected by the price of oil ; they want to have access to a high-quality , reliable constant resource , and for their interests in particular to be protected .
Then , of course , we have the challenge of companies and the challenge of employees .
There are many fears at present : both among consumers as regards their access to energy , and among employees faced with the prospect of the dismantling of gas companies .
That is why , Mr President , I believe that we must pay very close attention to all the solutions that are suggested .
Since it is important to talk about it , I will mention the issue of the third option .
I would first of all like to thank my colleagues in the ITRE Committee , who in their wisdom adopted the Vidal-Quadras / Laperrouze compromise last month .
I firmly believe that this consensual approach allowing each of our Member States to make the necessary improvements to their gas markets , in accordance with their traditions , will be a useful basis for discussion with the Council , and I would like to call on my colleagues to confirm that basis .
Of course , when prices are higher awareness of the delicate nature of climate change is heightened .
However , we must respond to these three challenges , the ecological dimension and the dimension of security of supply , and we must therefore chose the best option , which is the third .
( BG ) I call upon the Commission to take into account the potential of the new member-states , including Bulgaria , in the development and application of new energy technologies .
The Commission should introduce mechanisms in support of research so that the objectives for 2020 could be achieved and greenhouse gases be reduced by 60 to 80 per cent by 2050 .
Low carbon and decarbonising technologies for the production of electricity and heat should come out on the market .
These objectives , as well as the renewable sources , are achievable only through coordinated use of the entire potential for innovations of the European Union .
I appeal for a better interaction between member-states in the development of new energy technologies .
The variety of national rules and technical specifications partition the market and hinder industrial investments in risk technologies .
Therefore , I once again call upon to the Commission to take into account the potential of the new member-states , including Bulgaria , in the development and application of the new energy technologies .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank you for allowing me to speak because I have a very full schedule , which forces me to leave you in order to catch a train , and I would like to apologise to the House for that .
I would first of all like to thank the European Commission and the Members for this interesting debate and for all the work that has been done on this ' internal energy market ' package .
As several of you pointed out , the adoption of this package will have direct consequences on the lives of our fellow citizens .
We are dealing with a topic that reflects the expectations of the people of Europe .
In my view , the improvements our citizens expect can come from two angles .
The first is the need for consistent rules and mechanisms throughout the European Union , to which this package will contribute .
The second is a need for clarity and visibility for the actors in the market and consumers .
As far as consumers are concerned , Annexes A to the directives must in particular be transposed by the Member States ; they provide for better information , greater consideration of citizens ' concerns and , obviously , greater concern for the situation of vulnerable consumers .
The work is not complete , however .
Consensus has yet to be reached on a number of points , notably the application of effective separation not only with regard to gas , since our positions there are already quite similar , but also with regard to electricity .
The French Presidency will firm up the general framework adopted on 6 June at the Energy Council on 10 October .
It will not be until that date that we have a consolidated position in the Council .
In particular , we need to work on the third-country clause in order to take account of the Member States ' concerns .
The Presidency will then forward its common position to the European Parliament so that the ' internal market ' package can be concluded before the end of the parliamentary term ; that is our intention in any case .
I hope that our joint efforts will be rewarded with a constructive spirit and a desire for compromise among all our institutions .
( CS ) Mr President , Commissioners , I would first of all like to thank all the rapporteurs involved in our debate for their efforts .
Two reports dealing with the market in natural gas are in favour of liberalising this market in Europe .
The legislation offers an alternative to full ownership unbundling , using the ISO model .
The positive features include , in particular , the duties of national authorities to include renewables in transmission networks , guidelines for third-party access , setting up tariffs for access to networks and imposing sanctions for discriminatory behaviour .
The creation of the European network of transmission system operators for gas , i.e. the body active in the area of cooperation , and of the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators is also valuable .
These institutions are a precondition for creating a natural gas integrated market .
However , we should add that the advantages of market liberalisation can only bear fruit where a diversified supplier market already exists today , and that means most of the countries of Western European .
In contrast , natural gas suppliers in most of the new Member States have almost a monopoly .
Paradoxically , these countries may in the end suffer as a result of the liberalisation package because the proposed legislation will weaken the position of transmission operators who have contracts with producers with monopolies .
The so-called third way is better suited to this economic relations model .
I support market liberalisation , but when it comes to natural gas , in most of the new Member States we must first do away with the market monopolies and introduce more suppliers ; only then can we proceed ( for example ) with ownership unbundling without any risks .
To conclude , let me say a few words about the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
It is closely linked to energy consumption in the Union , to reducing CO2 emissions , to Europe 's energy dependency .
However , as the rapporteur points out , little attention is paid to economical production , co-generation or poly-generation , savings by end users and industrial energy efficiency , and the budget for the established goals is very small .
Funds are also lacking when it comes to technology demonstration , for example carbon capture and storage .
It would be nice if the sweeping European gestures and statements about energy research were accompanied by the corresponding budgetary sources .
( PL ) Mr President , every plan should include decisions concerning its situation both in time and in space , but the present Commission decisions are slowing down implementation of earlier plans , for example , plans for cogeneration investments are being held back by the market , as it is not worth converting heat-generation plants into efficient heat and power plants burdened by emission charges and network problems .
Furthermore , the Commission has divided EU countries into the better ones , which can increase their emissions , and worse ones , which have to reduce them .
These latter ones are , of course , principally the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
According to the Kyoto Protocol , the reference year for calculating emissions under the ETS should be 1990 , not 2005 , as has been imposed by the Commission .
This would be more honest and show greater solidarity .
Being a leader in the area of the questionable impact of emissions on climate change should not take place at the cost of poorer populations .
Efficiency and energy reductions should , however , be priorities , while renewable energy should be a supplement rather than an alternative .
In the medium term the future belongs to clean coal energy and , in the longer term , as is already clear , to nuclear energy .
( SV ) Mr President , the European energy market has huge problems .
We have an import requirement which will rise to 65 % in 2030 .
We have consumers who cannot choose what kind of energy they are to have and who are hit by increasing energy prices and the effects of greenhouse gases and climate change .
The Paparizov report , which we are debating today , concludes that there is a need for increased cooperation between system operators and for increased investment in the gas market .
That is fine , but it is not enough .
The Buzek report covering research and innovation concludes that we invest far too little .
I would remind you that Parliament also wanted to increase investment in research and that we are soon to embark on new budget negotiations .
The La Russa report covers the unbundling of monopolies and improving the functioning of the gas market .
Those who are against this think that it would give rise to higher energy prices if ownership and distribution monopolies were broken up .
So I have to ask the following question : when we have increased energy prices and the effect of climate change , are we going to solve the problem by more monopolies ?
Absolutely not !
The outcome of the votes in committee has yielded something of what we need , but we still have many steps to take before we get a functionally efficient and environmentally friendly energy market in Europe .
( RO ) I would like to thank the Rapporteurs for the long-term strategic approach of the issue of natural gas in the European Union and the research in the field of energy .
In 2006 , the European Union 's imported gas amounted to 62 % , and its demand and dependence on the gas import shall increase to 80 % in 2030 .
Therefore , it is important to find concrete answers to the questions on ensuring the energy security of the European Union and the efficient operation of the energy market .
I believe three elements in the Rapporteurs ' proposals are essential .
First of all , as Rapporteur on the Black Sea Synergy , I would like to emphasize the importance of the successful development of regional cooperation and cross border interconnection .
The regional dimension is the suitable framework to establish common rules and principles , as well as to ensure the gas sector coordination and transparency .
Secondly , it is essential to expand the implementation of such norms to third country companies activating in the field of energy in the European Union .
And finally , I fully support the idea to consolidate the sector of scientific research in the field of energy , as a key element of the given long-term policy .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , our objective must be to establish non-discriminatory rules for determining the conditions for accessing gas transmission systems , liquefaction facilities and storage facilities .
The rules must therefore seek to make the relationship between companies more transparent by harmonising tariffs , the methods for calculating these tariffs and the operation of gas transmission systems .
In addition , all system operators must come together in a European network that can guarantee investment to maintain optimum gas transmission across Europe .
The elements of this new European legislation are fundamental for the citizens at a time when we are experiencing an explosion in energy prices .
As shadow rapporteur , I put most emphasis on consumer rights .
The competition must actually benefit consumers ; we need measures to regulate the market and control prices , especially for the most vulnerable people .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , even though today 's discussion focuses , naturally , on the internal energy market , I would like , in the interest of balance , to refer to the great importance of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan with regard to Europe 's ability to deal with the enormous challenges it is currently facing in the areas of energy and the environment .
We need to review our priorities , but we also need to redefine our current development model , to follow a course with low or zero carbon emissions , while at the same time creating development opportunities for European industry , which has the capability to lead the rapidly developing sector of low and zero carbon emissions technology .
Increasing the EU budget for research in the energy sector and promoting innovation in sectors such as renewable energy sources and intelligent networks are absolutely necessary in order to deal with today 's challenges .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking all of my colleagues , especially Jerzy Buzek for his report .

As Aristotle said , ' well begun is half done ' .
Actually beginning rather than encouraging a set of salutary objectives will thus be a fundamental step in laying the foundations of the vital commitment to combat climate change .
This pressing challenge requires a new definition of the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan based on two redefined pillars : ensuring better , cleaner production with regard to CO2 emissions through innovative technologies ; and using less by decreasing energy use in all its forms and by promoting all the solutions .
This basic good sense is unfortunately not sufficiently recognised in our major policies and measures to reduce energy use are not given adequate support in the SET-Plan or in the EU 's major structural policies .
Another crucial element is the urgent need to increase both the human and financial resources needed to actually achieve our European goals .
When will we at last provide a concrete response to the crucial demand , the formidable challenge represented by climate change ?
We are lagging behind when it comes to financing research on low-carbon technologies .
To use Aristotle 's words again , Mr President , if we begin to provide extensive funding for research into these technologies , we will already have won half the battle in this new world .
We will have complete energy efficiency and , in no time , exceptional energy efficiency .
( RO ) Today , we debate on three important reports for the European Union energy policy , reports that contain references to the energy technology , energy safety and fighting energy poverty as essential factors for achieving the objectives regarding energy and climate change .

Our colleague Paparizov 's report defines a new concept of access to the natural gas transportation networks ; colleague La Russa 's report brings an important contribution to defining the medium and long-term strategy of the internal natural gas market , and colleague Buzek 's report emphasizes the need to develop the strategic energy technologies .

The rapid implementation of these reports will develop a more efficient and transparent internal market with direct effects in increasing competitiveness , transparency of prices at the end user and protection of consumer rights .
Today , it is time that the Commission and the Council explicitly and concretely encourage the diversification of supply sources and the development of new gas storage facilities in order to ensure the Union 's energy independence and safety .
In the end , I would like to congratulate our three colleagues for the manner in which they have managed the drafting of reports .
( PL ) Mr President , the purpose of the regulations we are discussing today is to make it easier to integrate the gas markets of individual markets and to increase executive monitoring at a European level .
The gas market should be considered separately from the electricity market because of the European Union 's considerable dependence on imports .
Ownership unbundling could be an extremely useful instrument for guaranteeing the creation of a unified gas market in the European Union and for the creation of real competition in the EU energy market and , in practice , could lead to a reduction , or at least a stabilisation , of energy prices .
However , we should also be cautious .
The liberalisation process requires concrete structural changes , for which not all European Union countries are prepared .
Market liberalisation and ownership unbundling just in Poland , without this happening throughout all the main energy producers in the EU , could give West European firms an advantage over Poland .
Europe needs an energy model that does not just ensure that there is competition in regional markets and in the common European market , but also guarantees protection for the end user , and , first and foremost , guarantees energy security .
Mr President , let me place the matter at issue in a larger political perspective .
Today energy is almost synonymous with foreign policy and tends to relegate even climate change to a secondary position .
It is evident that the current situation has caught Europe off-guard .
Our national energy systems are parochial , monopolistic , complicated and obscure .
Consequently the tendency to try to manage current challenges individually is irresistible .
Thus efforts to create a single integrated energy market are increasingly resisted and Europe 's objective to reduce its dependency on foreign supply sources becomes almost unreachable .
Equally , attempting to integrate new solutions in old frameworks would only make our task even more difficult .
Therefore Europe urgently needs to overhaul the current arrangements , push decisively for a single energy market and start investing massively in research on alternative sources of energy .
For Europe this is simply a matter of survival .
( PL ) Mr President , one of the fundamental issues to consider is that of guaranteeing security of supply .
Energy policy must take into consideration the fact that there are significant differences in the potential of different countries to diversify sources of imported gas .
There are different capabilities for obtaining and purchasing this raw material .
I have often pointed out that it is vital to prepare a united energy policy that will guarantee energy security to individual Member States .
Measures aimed at ownership unbundling in the natural gas market will certainly improve competition and the quality of services supplied . However , because of the considerable differences in gas and energy markets I would be in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal that these sectors be regulated separately .
The gas market will only really be competitive when customers have full access to information on the amount of natural gas they are using and the possibility to change suppliers .

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , due to a lack of time I was unable to thank the rapporteur , Mr Buzek , for his generosity by agreeing to include proposals by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , especially issues relating to energy efficiency , the life cycle of the various forms of energy , and most particularly aspects of human resources , training and cooperation with developing countries .
I therefore wish to express my warmest thanks to Mr Buzek , since the time factor prevented me from doing so before .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is extremely important , as far as gas supplies are concerned , to ensure that these operations are embedded in an appropriate competitive environment .
On one hand renewable energies have a major role to play here , while on the other natural gas does of course provide competition for renewables .
I believe that this very competition gives us an opportunity to push prices in the right direction and by supporting this with efficiency measures we can also achieve a corresponding price reduction .
Proper energy distribution in Europe is set to play an ever-greater role in the years to come and our small and medium-sized undertakings in particular will have an increasing contribution to make towards energy efficiency , because building refurbishment and the restoration of older properties naturally plays an important part in all this and there will also be an appreciable level of competition for the supply of gas to the household market .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , it is very clear that there is very strong convergence of views on the three reports .

Again I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Buzek , Mr La Russa and Mr Paparizov , for developing such a type of consensus .
We know that we are looking for secure , sustainable and affordable energy supplies and at the same time we also now realise that the change in the energy sector came a bit earlier than everybody anticipated .
That requires us to take much faster action and to be more determined .
I would mention one particular synergy that I have seen and that is very relevant .
Yesterday I visited the Institute of Technical Thermodynamics , not very far from Strasbourg , in Stuttgart .
They have a research project on how to increase the efficiency of energy supply , combining the cycle of gas turbines and fuel cells , so in a way trying to rely on existing energy sources and increasing their efficiency with new technology .
They are advancing reasonably well but there are a lot of technical challenges .
To really move ahead we need more support for such a type of project .
But , at the same time , we also understand that , if there is no competition in the market , these projects will always stay in laboratories .
So we need to act in both ways to continue .
For the internal market package , I believe that now , after the vote , it is very necessary for all three institutions to move ahead rapidly to wrap this thing up and go on to the implementation stage .
The Commission is committed to really doing everything to find a fast compromise in the second reading and to get the package agreed .
Concerning the strategic energy review : it is at the start of the process .
The technology plan is only the starting point .
We will still need a lot of measures to really move ahead .
One of the measures that I have promised to my colleagues and also here in Parliament is a communication on the financing of low-carbon energy sources , but this is not the only one .
We believe that there are a lot of other measures needed if we are to really move ahead .
Very wise words were said at the time of the first oil crisis .
We do not have too much oil but we have ideas .
I believe - at least this is my opinion and it was said in the debate - we really need to use the ideas that we have .
We do not have too much oil left in the soil in the European Union .
Commission 's position on amendments by Parliament
Paparizov report
The Commission can accept the following amendments : 2 , 3 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 12 , 14 , 16 , 17 , 25 , 31 , 39 , 41 , 43 , 44 .
The Commission can partially accept the following amendments : 1 , 11 , 18 , 19 , 20 , 21 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 27 , 29 , 30 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 , 36 , 37 , 38 , 46 , 47 , 49 , 50 , 51 , 53 .
The Commission cannot accept the following amendments : 4 , 7 , 13 , 15 , 23 , 28 , 40 , 42 , 45 , 48 , 52 , 54 .
La Russa report
The Commission can accept the following amendments : 2 , 3 , 7 , 16 , 20 , 24 , 27 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 36 , 40 , 44 , 50 , 56 , 60 , 64 , 73 , 74 , 87 , 92 , 98 , 99 , 100 , 101 , 102 , 103 , 112 , 120 , 122 , 124 , 136 , 140 , 142 .
The Commission can partially accept the following amendments : 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 17 , 21 , 23 , 25 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 35 , 45 , 46 , 48 , 49 , 51 , 52 , 53 , 55 , 61 , 63 , 64 , 68 , 69 , 75 , 76 , 77 , 78 , 80 , 81 , 84 , 85 , 86 , 88 , 91 , 93 , 94 , 95 , 96 , 104 , 107 , 111 , 115 , 117 , 118 , 119 , 125 , 127 , 132 , 135 , 138 , 139 , 141 , 143 .
The Commission cannot accept the following amendments : 1 , 4 , 10 , 14 , 15 , 18 , 19 , 22 , 30 , 37 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 42 , 43 , 47 , 54 , 57 , 58 , 59 , 62 , 65 , 66 , 67 , 70 , 71 , 72 , 79 , 82 , 83 , 89 , 90 , 97 , 105 , 106 , 108 , 109 , 110 , 113 , 114 , 116 , 121 , 123 , 126 , 128 , 129 , 130 , 131 , 133 , 134 , 137 , 144 , 145 .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I was very much reassured by the debate and by what my colleagues have said in favour of rules , in favour of strong demands that may be made obligatory , in favour of a strong Agency .
It is clear that gas is not a market in which there is free competition ; 90 % of contracts are long-term , so it is very important to have strong rules and not to solve the problems by a single unbundling model .
That was said in this Chamber and I think this was a good message for the next stage of negotiations .
What was very important was the support for my proposals on the 10-year plan , on the development of regional initiatives that will become the basis for a common market : we should not be ideological ; as many of our colleagues have said , we should be pragmatic and develop a transparent market with a clear set of rules .
What was said in the debate about the role of the different participants in the markets was also very important .
It is true that ENTSOG , the new body , may develop a lot of technical codes , but it is also true that the Agency , based on the national regulators ' initiatives and on their experience , could develop very important principles for the development of these codes , and together with the Commission ensure that this market is regulated by rules that will be applied by all .
I would not be very happy to over-develop the control mechanisms within the different companies , so I believe the compromise that has been developed in the Council would be a basis that could be applicable both to gas and electricity and could open the way to speedier resolution of the Third Energy Package , because it contains a lot of new improvements both for consumers and concerning transparency .
It would be a pity to postpone , for purely ideological reasons , this package , which is very important and much needed for the development of our energy independence .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I knew from the very outset that this would not be an easy or straightforward discussion .
This directive is without doubt difficult to bring to fruition , but after today 's debate - which has certainly been very intensive and high-calibre - I believe that I , and all of us , can now be somewhat more confident that a positive solution will be found .
A large number of colleagues have spoken , and it would take at least one more working day to reply to each one .
Our timetable does not allow for that .
There has in addition been a good deal of - too much - praise and flattery expressed towards me : I trust it will not unduly go to my head .
I think that the compliments paid to me ought rather to be addressed to the entire Committee on Industry , which has worked very conscientiously throughout these many long months .
I should therefore like to express particular gratitude to my colleagues , Mr Manders , Mr Swoboda and Mr Reul , Commissioner Pibelgas of course and also Mr Vidal-Quadras .
Thank you all .
I think our work during this period has been absolutely transparent and cooperative , trying to consult everyone and involve everyone in the directive .
I do believe that we have achieved clarity and transparency .
On a few occasions I did perhaps ask certain colleagues to divest themselves of the mantle of national parliamentarian , in other words to cast off their partisan allegiances , so as to function a little more as Members of this House at the service of all EU citizens .
I would just like to conclude by allaying the fears of Mr Zīle , who raised the problem of Gazprom and Russia .
We are of course well aware that this is an extremely serious issue which has to be addressed , explored and resolved very carefully and above all very thoroughly .
Regarding consumers , I believe that I have argued in every speech I have made over the months , and in my report too , for transparency and help for consumers , naturally without forgetting operators , who also have their merits .
That is why we must not give in to major powers or European monopolies , and not just European ones .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I thank all my colleagues for the discussion - it was a very good , very deep discussion - especially the shadow rapporteurs and all the colleagues who prepared opinions in other committees .
I congratulate both rapporteurs , Mr Paparizov and Mr La Russa .
I entirely support your reports - and of course I support my report as well , but I am probably not very objective on that .
As you can see from the discussion there is not much controversy on the SET Plan , but there is one thing on which I should like an answer .
Adina-Ioana Vălean is not in favour of the CCS installations - the CCS commercial demonstration installations - because the companies we would like to support are doing business .
I would like to give an example .
The same companies receive enormous incentives from citizens ' taxes for renewables .
There are also commercial renewable installations and companies are doing business - nothing else - and I very strongly support these incentives for renewables .
If you really want to solve the climate change problem on our planet we must solve the CCS question because we do not know the true answer for that .
So from that point of view , as in the case of renewables , we should also have incentives for the first movers on CCS .
I give my thanks and congratulations to both Commissioners .
You are doing great work on the energy issue , as well as on R & D and innovation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 9 July 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , Europe 's fundamental weakness in its relations with Russia stems from the lack of a free and united energy market .
At present there are a number of energy centres in Europe , each of which is managed by national regulators .
It is natural that national governments wish to ensure a supply of cheap energy for themselves , as well as jobs in a sector that they treat as a priority .
However , in this way , divided by national selfishness , we are losing in Gazprom 's European energy offensive .
An integrated European market and a united front in the face of suppliers from outside the EU would make sure that we had energy security even before we diversified energy supplies .
So far , the EU 's failure to create a free-flowing and competitive energy market is , without doubt , being exploited by Russia .
Opening the European internal gas market to competition will lead to greater efficiency and a strengthening of consumer rights as well as national regulators .
The creation of a kind of system of connected tanks will make it easier to react if there is a crisis of energy supply for individual Member States and this will make the risk of energy blackmail less likely .
We must stop the expansion of Russian companies in Europe and force Russia to respect mutuality in the treatment of investments in the energy sector .
I fully agree with the rapporteur that Member States should support integration in national markets and cooperation among network operators at both European and regional level .
in writing . - ( HU ) The leap in energy prices draws our attention more sharply than ever before to the lack of effective regulation in the energy market .
This is no different in the gas sector .
For this very reason , it may be regarded as an important step forward that the European Parliament will shortly adopt the report on the gas market .
We feel that the document prepared by the European Commission is an appropriate first step in the direction of more effective regulation .
The new legislative package may contribute to the creation of real competition on the European market .
There is only a great need for this because the Member States are largely at the mercy of external suppliers .
With regard to imports of natural gas , Europe already has 50 % dependency , and this may grow further in the decades to come .
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the defencelessness of some Member States even exceeds this severe level .
For example , Hungary depends on a single supplier , Russia , for 80 % .
The new regulation will not do away with this dependency at a stroke , but nonetheless it will create more transparent relations .
It will promote more vigorous competition and reduce the burden on consumers .
We feel it is an important step forward that the proposed legislation will reinforce the consumer protection measures that are already in force .
This is particularly important if we know that rising energy prices have become one of the most significant causes of poverty .
We hope that the new regulation will make it possible for consumers not to have to face unbearable prices in future .
in writing . - ( PL ) Liberalisation of the natural gas market constitutes a particularly important part of the attempt that is being made to create a common internal energy market .
At present the natural gas market is dominated by large concerns , which often control both gas production and distribution .
An efficient internal energy market is important for realising the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy and for ensuring approachable prices for energy consumers .
During this debate we should not , however , forget about energy security , which must be guaranteed through diversification of the supplies of imported raw materials for energy .
This does not mean that the energy market is the same in every area .
The natural gas market differs significantly from the electricity market and , for this reason , it is not possible for the regulations resulting from the work on the regulations for the electricity sector to be transposed to the natural gas sector .
A real liberalisation of the natural gas market sector should be based on ownership unbundling of transmission system operators .
Only in this way can we avoid unnecessary conflicts of interest and fair and non-discriminatory access to the network .
For fair competition in the common energy market , investors from third countries should be subject to the same criteria as regards ownership unbundling and independence as companies in Member States , which is something on which we should put very considerable emphasis .
I hope that the European market will soon be an open market with an effective separation of the activities relating to energy production and supply on the one hand and network operation on the other , thereby ensuring greater market transparency .
in writing . - ( FR ) The gas market has specific characteristics that needed to be taken into account .
They relate to the very significant supply constraints , which make it necessary to guarantee long-term contracts with supplier countries , but also to the particularly high cost of investment in transmission and distribution networks , which must offer consumers the highest level of security .
Consequently , the political challenge here is clearly to stimulate investment and innovation , to promote our knowledge and skills , and to ensure that our supplies are secure .
By focusing its proposal on ownership unbundling , the European Commission , in line with its obsession with competition , did not in any way respond to these challenges .
Its text destabilised a specific strategic market : we are hugely dependent on foreign imports and companies with which we should be able to negotiate from a strong position , rather than a position weakened by prospects of industrial dismantling .
By adopting the amendment on effective and efficient separation of activities , as a possible alternative to full ownership unbundling , we should be able to achieve a more balanced and , above all , proportionate text .
It is therefore important to support this position , which will reinforce the excellent work also done on investment , system access and system operation .
In that way , security and competition will be able to sit side by side .
Sovereign Wealth Funds ( debate )
the next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions :
oral question to the Council by Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the EU answer to the challenge of sovereign wealth funds - B6-0164 / 2008 ) and
oral question to the Commission by Mrs Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the EU answer to the challenge of sovereign wealth funds - B6-0165 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( FR ) Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , thank you for giving us the opportunity to hold this debate with the two institutions concerned .
I hope , Mr Verheugen , that you will be able to report back to Commissioner Charlie McCreevy on the nature of our debate .
For a long time we have had active sovereign wealth funds in Europe , primarily the Norwegian fund , and yet until now none of the actions of this fund had posed us any problem .
Two new events have shaken up the current situation , however .
The first is the constitution of important reserves by oil monarchies and countries that have accumulated trade surpluses that feed these sovereign wealth funds .
The second event is of course the subprime crisis , which has shed light on the strategic role these sovereign wealth funds could play .
Previously , when these funds were used to invest here and there , particularly in the United States , their strategic character was called into question .
Now , when we look at the role taken over by sovereign wealth funds from investment banks in terms of injecting liquidity or own funds , we realise that they have instead become investors of last resort .
In these conditions , emotions come into play , and that is why we wanted to ask this question .
It is also undoubtedly why , unlike the Commissioner responsible for the internal market , the President of the Commission himself felt it useful and necessary to publish on 27 February a document that forms the basis of our discussions today .
We run the risk of seeing a strategy being implemented in each of the Member States that , at the end of the day , would not help to tackle the reality , which is that sovereign wealth funds have today assumed a responsibility , an active role in the capital market .
As a result , this new situation to some extent places obligations on them and on us in the dialogue we wish to hold with the managers of these funds .
Therefore , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we would like to raise five questions today .
Firstly , we are of the impression that the Commission 's response up until now has been to say : ' Let each Member State implement its own strategy , in terms of the transparency and governance requirements relating to these funds , and at Community level we will simply verify whether the requirements in each Member State infringe the rules of the Treaty or the rules on the functioning of the internal market ' .
That does not seem to us to be the correct strategy .
In our opinion , in a case like this we should instead be working towards a proactive approach and establishing coordination at Community level : on the one hand to prevent unfair competition among Member States - for it is clear that there is to some extent a race between the Member States to see who can benefit most from the sure , long-term investment capacities of these sovereign wealth funds - and , on the other hand , to define and work together on strategic or sensitive sectors that need to be preserved .
The second question relates to the problem of the registration of these funds .
Would it be possible to envisage at Community level registering these funds , just as we are currently considering doing for rating agencies ?
The third question concerns the interpretation of Article 58 , which provides for restrictions on the free movement of capital on grounds of public order .
As far as the Council and the Commission are concerned today , is there one interpretation that should take precedence in this area ?
We would like further details on this .
The fourth question is as follows : is this not a debate that has an international dimension ?
In our opinion , the European Union would be much better equipped and better prepared to tackle the international dimension of this debate if we had to some extent defined the position of our base camp , the position of the European Union , rather than the position of one Member State or another that might have rushed into this race , attracted by the financial possibilities .
The last question relates to the exchange rate .
What is your view on the situation where the oil monarchies are currently investing in euro assets with funds from oil sales in dollars , thereby aggravating the tense exchange rate situation , with the resulting repercussions on our trade balances ?
Madam President , Mr Vice-President , those are the questions the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs would like to ask and we look forward to the responses from the Council and the Commission .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , the questions surrounding sovereign wealth funds have been perfectly summarised by Mrs Berès .
I would like to add a number of other reasons why they are being discussed .
Of course , they have taken off in recent years : according to the IMF , they generate between EUR 2 200 billion and EUR 300 000 billion today .
However , we also need to look at their investment strategies , their transparency , the clarity of these strategies and , possibly , the emergence of new funds .
In October 2007 the finance ministers of the G8 countries asked the IMF and the OECD to look into these issues .
In response to these invitations both institutions got to work : the IMF focused on the countries responsible for the sovereign wealth funds while the OECD concentrated on the recipient countries .
The IMF examined the funds ' current practices , organised a round table focusing primarily on these topics and set up an international working group composed of 25 countries that possess such funds with a view to drawing up a report , which is due to be published at the end of October of this year .
The aim is to draw up best practices , which sovereign wealth funds would be free to adopt , particularly as regards transparency , investment strategies and governance .
It should be noted in this respect that the Norwegian Government Pension Fund has been highlighted by many as the reference in this area .
As far as the OECD is concerned , emphasis has been placed on best practices for the recipient countries , and the OECD ministers adopted a declaration a few weeks ago .
The work will now continue in the Investment Committee , which will focus in particular on peer monitoring of policy development and hold a wider debate on the investments controlled by foreign governments .
I will now move on to the Community dimension .
As you know , in February 2008 the Commission presented a communication entitled ' A common European approach to Sovereign Wealth Funds ' .
In its communication the Commission notes that new legislative measures at Community level are unnecessary , but it advocates a common European approach based on cooperation between the countries receiving the sovereign wealth funds , the funds themselves and those responsible for them , with a view to establishing , and I quote , ' a set of principles ensuring the transparency , predictability and accountability of SWFs ' investments ' .
The common approach recommended by the Commission should be based on five principles : commitment to an open investment environment , support of multilateral work , use of existing instruments , respect of EC Treaty obligations and international commitments , and finally , proportionality and transparency .
It is important to note that the Commission communication is recommending the common European approach as a complement to the prerogatives of Member States regarding the use of their national legislation .
On 4 March the Council examined this communication and submitted a report to the Spring European Council .
The latter took over the ideas set out by the Commission , clarifying two principles in particular .
On the one hand , rather than expressing its support for the multilateral approach in general , it preferred to express its position specifically on the work under way in the IMF and the OECD , which I have just mentioned .
On the other hand , rather than referring to the use of the existing instruments , and once again taking a more general approach , the Council thought it more appropriate to adopt as a basic principle the use of national instruments and EU instruments , if necessary .
So as not to leave anything out , it is important to note , too , that the question of sovereign wealth funds was discussed at the meeting of the Transatlantic Economic Council , with which Commissioner Verheugen is very familiar , held in Washington on 9 November 2007 .
As far as national initiatives are concerned , it is true that certain Member States have already taken some or plan to do so .
This also applies to other countries that are major recipients of sovereign wealth funds outside the European Union .
Of course , such national measures should not contradict the common European approach advocated by the Commission on the basis of the principles I have just mentioned and supported by the European Council .
The national measures must be envisaged in the context of a common European approach , which they should complement .
I believe that that this corresponds to the concerns expressed by Mrs Berès .
Coordination of the national measures is one of the cornerstones of the common European approach proposed by the Commission .
As you suggest , an analysis of the existing initiatives in the Member States will quite probably be necessary in order to establish effectively such coordination and ensure that it does not encroach upon national prerogatives and competences in terms of protection .
This analysis of European practices could take its lead from the results of the peer monitoring that will be carried out by the OECD Investment Committee , as I said just a moment ago .
As regards Article 58 , which you mentioned , Mrs Berès , it stipulates that the Member States have the right to put in place restrictions on grounds of public order or public security .
However , as far as the Council is aware , this article has never been invoked in the context of sovereign wealth funds .
In terms of the need to clarify this provision , I will simply point out that the Lisbon Treaty did not amend it .
In conclusion , the Council wishes to look at the European Union 's role in the international bodies .
The Commission communication clearly demonstrates that we are actively participating and will continue to participate in the work of the IMF , the OECD and other bodies .
As sovereign wealth funds have an international scope , it is clearly important for Europe to cooperate with the other recipient countries , on the one hand , and with the sovereign wealth funds and those responsible for them , on the other .
The Union should thus play an active role in ensuring that the work in the multilateral bodies I mentioned moves forward , rather than simply following the discussions like a silent observer .
That is why the Spring European Council supported the ideas put forward by the Commission .
In particular , it explicitly set out its support for the current work to obtain an international agreement on a code of best practice , which the sovereign wealth funds would be free to adopt and which would set out the principles applicable to the recipient countries at international level .
The European Council also added that the Union should endeavour to contribute to the current debate in a coordinated manner and it invited the Commission and the Council to continue the work in that direction .
The Council fully intends to continue along that path .
As regards your final question concerning the link to oil-related financial issues , as stated today in the G8 we are all aware of the importance of the issues involved in reducing the global imbalances .
Certain emerging countries , notably oil-exporting countries , have large surpluses .
It is crucial that adjustments be made , particularly through adequate currency appreciation .
These questions are naturally being very closely monitored in the G7-G8 , but also by the IMF with , of course , the participation of the EU Member States .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , sovereign wealth funds have become major players in the global finance system and more recently have with good reason been attracting increasing public attention .
In its aforementioned February communication the European Commission has therefore set out how , in our opinion , Europe should respond to this challenge .
At its spring meeting the European Council unreservedly endorsed the approach being proposed by the Commission .
The situation as it stands is simple : the European Union is the world 's largest exporter of direct investments and at the same time also attracts a lot of investment capital in the opposite direction .
This is all very welcome .
Investment and openness are two of the main driving forces for growth and employment in Europe .
We cannot step back from our commitment to provide an open environment for investment .
Sovereign wealth funds did not just arrive on the investment scene yesterday but have in fact been investing in Europe for about 50 years .
These responsible and reliable investors have pursued a long-term , stable policy that , moreover , has certainly stood the test during the recent turmoil in the financial markets .
These funds have provided capital just when it was most desperately needed .
Neither do we at this time have any grounds for assuming that sovereign wealth funds are having a negative impact on exchange rates .
There are no real indications that such funds are switching from US dollars to euros and , moreover , their order of magnitude is not yet on a level that would enable them to have a significant effect on developments in the international money markets .
The number and size of these funds is currently growing rapidly .
Investment patterns are changing .
Even the geopolitical map of those countries that are setting up these funds is changing .
The scope and the quality of the information that the funds are making available to the market tend to differ enormously from fund to fund and hence the fear that the investment of these monies could give the foreign governments concerned excessive political influence , and that is a concern that we have to take seriously .
If the funds are transparent and comply with clear rules of accountability then the fact that they are State-owned investment vehicles should not give cause for concern .
What we need is confidence in the purely commercial nature of their objectives , which means that transparency and corporate governance are the key factors .
The communication from the Commission sets out some of the options that are available .
Regulation is scarcely the best response .
All investors in the single market should have to observe the same regulations as they apply to competition , the internal market and employment law .
The various instruments on foreign investments that Member States adopt in order to protect public security , law and order must abide by Community guidelines .
However , Mrs Berès , I would like to point out that Member States are entitled to adopt such measures and indeed most have been doing that for some time .
The Commission will monitor this closely , though there are as yet no plans to carry out a detailed audit .
Any review of investments in sensitive sectors at EU level also has to examine all investment sources , not just sovereign wealth funds .
We are certainly in agreement that there are other types of fund that give more cause for concern than sovereign wealth funds and here it is not so easy to talk about transparency and corporate governance .
It is certainly correct to say that we cannot tackle a global issue by adopting a narrow European approach , but rather we need to seek an international and global solution .
The Commission believes that the best answer would be a code of conduct that would be developed jointly at a global level by the recipient countries and by the funds themselves .
A voluntary code of conduct that lays down basic standards for governance and transparency would ensure greater clarity in the functioning of the funds .
Since the European Council meeting in March signalled its support for this approach the European Commission has been actively involved in the work of the IMF and OECD on the definition of best practices .
Progress is being made in both these organisations .
I can certainly say that a solution is now beginning to take shape and we have a well-defined and integrated European approach that we are now pursuing .
We should not forget that this is a bilateral process .
It is in everyone 's interest to achieve clarity .
For the funds themselves , this will mean stability and reduce the risk of setbacks .
For those national economies in which the funds are investing , a stable , predictable and non-discriminatory framework will eliminate the risk of these important investors voting with their feet , in other words leaving Europe and investing elsewhere .
We intend to take the work of the IMF and OECD further .
We have a strong consensus within the Union and this means we have a common approach .
Member States have not opted to go it alone .
In fact not one single Member State wishes to play a lone hand .
This strengthens our argument and it is important that we maintain this whatever happens .
With this kind of support we can expect our policies to carry a lot of weight and the Commission is confident that by the end of this year we will have concrete results of a positive nature to report to Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Madam President , I completely agree with the Commission and Council assessment on sovereign wealth funds .
They are the trend of the 21st century and this debate is very welcome .
These funds have become more visible again in a time of financial crisis involving multiple banks and investment firms as they stepped in to provide much-needed capital injections to some of these firms .
Sovereign wealth funds are predicted to grow at an increased rate in the near future , which should not scare us .
This is a natural part of market development .
The capital that sovereign wealth funds bring to the global market is needed to keep investment flowing .
They have the capacity to provide liquidity to the financial market and to companies .
This is sometimes vital to their survival .
Due to their size and resources , sovereign wealth funds are able to invest where funds are sometimes desperately needed but where others cannot or will not invest .
In theory , like any other investment funds , also SWFs seek good yields from sound investment which moreover tends to be long-term .
They do not a priori pose a threat to global financial markets or the European economy ; rather they are very beneficial to it .
While there is some concern today with the rising economic power of some oil-rich countries as well as countries such as China and the implications of this , the response to this unease should not be the exclusion of these countries from global financial and investment markets .
On the contrary , Europe should welcome the inflow of funds coming from these states and their investment funds .
Naturally the fact that some of these countries are not abiding by the same basic principles with us politically is a cause for some concern .
If political objectives drive their investment strategies - however , this has not been the case - there is no evidence that sovereign wealth funds would have caused any major crisis .
They have operated in a sound manner without political interference .
It is both counter-productive and against the principles of good regulation to discriminate against all SWFs based on their origins .
The basic principle of financial markets and corporate governance regulations should be the same treatment of all actors involved in similar activities .
Of course the code of conduct would be welcome but it should be based on this undifferentiation of the source of income .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Opening up to trade and investment is a hallmark of European integration .
Sovereign wealth funds have been around for a long time .
In the current context of serious economic problems , as has been said , their capitalisation potential and the interest in this potential have increased .
The opening up of strategic sectors and the assignment of essential public assets to private initiative is another characteristic of the European Union .
However , it is important to guarantee that all operators , and sovereign wealth funds in particular , are guided by clear and transparent rules and that their objectives are compatible with the proper functioning of the markets , with fair competition between operators and with both short and long-term protection of the rights of European citizens .
We welcome the Commission 's commitment to a multilateral code of conduct , under the aegis of the International Monetary Fund .
However , as is happening with hedge funds and private equities , a code of good practice is not enough .
We would ask the Commission for an independent and much stronger guarantee that , in the internal market , the principles of transparency and governance will be duly respected by all financial operators , including these funds , based on European and not solely national or international criteria .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , sovereign wealth funds have increasingly become the topic of conversation in recent months because they have been dealing in the European and US banking sector .
Many believe that this involvement is just the first step and that sovereign wealth funds are now lining up for a massive shopping spree that will end with many companies in Europe and possibly elsewhere too coming under their influence or even under their control .
Here the fear of political influence is mingled with the anxiety that at the very least an attempt might be made to gain access to technologies that would otherwise not be accessible , especially since we are now dealing with partners and market players that have not previously been active on the international stage , namely sovereign wealth funds from Russia and China .
The money is certainly there .
With more than USD 3 billion to hand these operations have now twice as much under their charge as the international hedge funds .
However , from a historical viewpoint it has to be said that there is no evidence to support this assumption .
The funds - as has already been pointed out - have so far always proved to be good shareholders .
They are interested in the long-term , positive development of their business and hence in obtaining a good , long-term rate of return on their investment .
Nevertheless we should not be wide-eyed and naive as we watch these events develop .
We need a set of rules , but we do not want to have isolationism or protectionism , for sovereign wealth funds are , after all , an example of the fact that the free capital market is working and it is in our interest that this remains so .
We Liberals therefore support the Commission in its approach and in its call for a code of conduct and we hope that such a code will really bring transparency , that the basic motives for the investment of these sovereign wealth funds become clear and that the funds themselves apply good corporate governance and stick to it .
However , we need an EU-wide solution - not 27 different EU solutions - and we need an international solution too .
I therefore welcome what the Commissioner has said , namely that intensive talks are now under way with the OECD and the International Monetary Fund .
Over the years the free movement of capital has contributed to growth in Europe and in the world at large .
We must not endanger this in the future through overregulation and protectionism but rather should abide by our free market principles .
- ( NL ) Sovereign wealth funds have been active on the financial market for more than 50 years .
The funds in sovereign wealth funds have increased enormously in recent years in , for instance , China , Russia and the Arab states .
The purpose of sovereign wealth funds is to invest surplus state reserves to yield profits .
These countries may well , I think , be entitled to seek the best way to invest their reserves in foreign currency , so I take a positive view on the contribution of these funds .
The funds improve the liquidity of the financial markets and create growth and jobs .
They also contribute to investment for the longer term .
They create stability for the companies they invest in .
We should , therefore , continue to allow them the scope to invest .
These funds can , however , bring threats along with them too .
We will have to look at the type of investments they are making and whether they meet the requirements for transparency .
There is still not complete clarity about the political involvement in these sovereign wealth funds .
The disadvantage of this lack of transparency is that it can result in growing uneasiness on our part about these sovereign wealth funds .
The Commission should , therefore , take action and that is a good thing .
Otherwise countries will deal with these sovereign wealth funds at a national level .
I am against too much national policy on this .
Europe is the right level to respond to this and we should have a common response .
It is important to have a coordinated position at European level .
I am pleased , therefore , with the response of the Council and the Commission to collaborate closely at the level of the IMF and the OECD .
I look forward to seeing the guidelines that the IMF , the World Bank and the OECD develop and I hope that they will incorporate transparency , good governance and reciprocity .
When it comes to reciprocity , I take the view that we should confine ourselves to the sovereign wealth funds .
We always want private investors , but we can require reciprocity from sovereign wealth funds .
( ES ) Madam President , more than 30 countries have set up sovereign wealth funds within the last 50 years .
Their growth in recent years is due to foreign currency from oil and trade surpluses , and certain countries are now even looking at how they can be used to prop up public pension systems .
Sovereign wealth funds can make a global contribution to financial stability , as we have seen , and also to economic growth in order to ensure solidarity between generations .
They can also lead to problems and distortions .
That is why we need a common European approach and to ensure that they operate with transparency , predictability and sound governance .
We must prevent conflicts of interest , and the paradox whereby European sectors whose efficiency was entrusted to market logic again become a matter of public discretion ; this time , however , it is the discretion of third countries .
Not only must we ensure coherence and reciprocity ; we must also reflect on this issue and move forward in terms of laying down some international rules .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , I am a fervent advocate of free trade and am allergic to protectionism , but that does not mean that I am naive .
One of the problems of state-owned funds is their enormous growth .
Since February this year alone , their assets have risen by 600 billion dollars to approximately 4 trillion dollars , i.e. 4000 billion dollars .
What power !
This , combined with the fact that many of these funds do not have adequate transparency , which has been mentioned , as regards their investment practice and that some of them originate in non-democratic countries , I think indicates that we should be interested .
The funds are needed , the investment is needed , but we need rules of play and regulatory systems applicable to all , under which transparency must be exemplary .
The Norwegian Oil Fund is , I think , an example which has been mentioned in this debate .
It should also serve as a model when the code of conduct is drawn up .
Madam President , when the sun shines we do not need umbrellas , but when it rains we may well need them .
( ES ) Madam President , I will do my best not to repeat some of the comments already made .
I must , however , point out that the first time I heard of sovereign wealth funds was the 1993 ' KIO scandal ' in Spain , which , according to the Kuwaiti authorities of the time , caused more economic damage than Saddam Hussein 's invasion in 1991 .
Other names have emerged since then .
We have already talked about Gazprom , Chinese activity in Africa and Venezuela 's use of the funds to export the Bolivarian revolution , and we will be talking more today as a result of the financial crisis .
Many companies are being bought up or receiving financial assistance through these funds .
As Mrs Kauppi said on behalf of my group , it is true that the funds have some unquestionable advantages : they help improve allocation of resources , they inject liquidity and reduce volatility , and these are all very useful at this particular juncture .
Some of the concerns aroused by the funds have also been mentioned : more extensive government intervention in economies , intervention that may occasionally be dictated by political rather than economic objectives - which can lead to market distortions and threats to national security - and the national reaction of each government , which could further fragment the internal market .
To paraphrase Lenin , what is to be done ?
Obviously we must continue to investigate how these funds operate and produce an accurate diagnosis of their workings , and the Community framework must be reviewed .
It is true that they are subject to rules on competence and investor protection , but is this sufficient ?
We must also come up with a voluntary code of conduct to guarantee transparency , predictability and accountability .
Finally , the code of conduct ought to be exported to the international framework .
I thus extend a hearty welcome to transatlantic cooperation and cooperation with bodies such as the OECD and the International Monetary Fund .
Action must be taken , and it must be taken soon .
Madam President , I share the concerns expressed here by many speakers about state-owned funds , but I would like to stress as well that private commercial funds , such as hedge funds and private equity , are of even more concern .
This is because they often do not have a long-term-oriented focus , whereas sovereign wealth funds , together with pension funds , often have this long-term orientation and can strengthen the role of minority shareholders , as well as having a positive role in providing the market with liquidity .
The point is that they are often not transparent enough in their investment strategy and intentions , and I hope that the Commission will focus on this .
The Committee on Legal Affairs recently adopted a report in this Parliament on the transparency of institutional investors , and there we asked the Commission to come up with a directive guaranteeing common standards of transparency .
I hope the Commission can react to this request .
My last point is about the code of conduct and the ' comply-or-explain ' procedure .
Is this also an element which the Commission has considered ?
( DE ) Madam President , sovereign wealth funds have come into the spotlight , especially since last year when China declared its intention to invest USD 3 billion , only USD 3 billion , of its fund reserves in private holding companies .
The capital held in sovereign wealth funds now totals well over USD 3 trillion , which is twice as much as that held in hedge funds : reason enough for us now to look into this whole business .
So far we only know of a transparent Norwegian system that operates good governance .
However , just like private venture capital , sovereign wealth funds can cover up exactly who the entrepreneur is .
Sovereign wealth funds can invest strategically and can grow rapidly .
Transparency is therefore urgently required .
Employee rights can be restricted and employment conditions altered as a result of corporate transfers that have been influenced by sovereign wealth funds .
Transparency and due notification is therefore needed in this area .
Another point worthy of mention is that the IMF , the US Treasury Department and the German Chancellor are calling for increased controls and regulation .
It certainly seems that we need to do something .
Madam President , I would caution my colleagues against demonising sovereign wealth funds , let alone , Mrs van den Burg , private equity investors .
Recycling surpluses is highly desirable , whether by spending or investment .
The 1930s Depression was the result of hoarding by surplus countries .
Much better that these surpluses are recycled as investments to where they are needed - to our banks with their capital shortfalls , to our infrastructure needing modernisation , our real estate in its current difficulties and our business and industries in general to create and preserve jobs .
Yes , we need reciprocity , but the EU is the biggest investor internationally anyway .
This must not be an excuse for protectionism to keep out other investors .
Surely we have our competition policy to deal with cartels and monopolies .
We have our labour and health and safety rules to protect our workers , and , as a last resort , we have our sovereign right to legislate against unacceptable political interference .
Do not look gift horses in the mouth !
( HU ) Just a few things in brief .
We are heterogeneous - for example , I come from the new Member States , and am the first person from there to speak today - poor in capital , with a defenceless public sector and a very unhappy past , which threatens us with its return in an imperialistic manner .
And everybody must take this seriously .
The second thing , which has been discussed here , is that these sovereign state funds very often serve imperialistic goals , and not only in medium-term investments but also in the world 's energy sources ; look at China 's shopping in Africa .
It is therefore not certain that this international agreement or code of conduct alone will be enough .
After the relevant analysis , we must think long and hard about whether some Member States are taking national security measures on a uniform basis that would prevent foreign bandit investments in strategic sectors , and that this would not act against the free flow of capital but would still mean some security . Thank you .

( LT ) I would like to point out to my fellow Members that perhaps we should not spend so much time on foreign funds but rather concentrate on our own , as Mr Purvis has said - we are investing too much in third countries and are losing money ; therefore , we need wealth fund investments .
Perhaps we should organise our economic policy in such a way that our citizens ' savings could be safely invested in Europe , then we would not have to worry about third-country wealth funds .
I would like to finish by thanking the French Presidency for finally coming to listen to our debates .
Slovenia is a much smaller country , but I could not help noticing that its representatives have always taken part in parliamentary debates .
The representatives of France , however , France being a large state , have not yet been very active and I do hope that these debates will encourage them to participate more actively in our sessions .
Madam President , thank you for giving me the floor again .
It is because Mr Purvis is saying that we might be demonising sovereign wealth funds and private equity and hedge funds , and I do not think this is the case .
We also chose a very balanced approach in the oral question as it was tabled and in the resolution and I think it is wise not to ignore or deny that it is important for us as a Parliament to take account of what is happening in this field .
I think it is our duty , it is our right to do this , and I would not like to see this set aside as mere demonising .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I am struck by the consensus that has emerged from your speeches , which I could summarise as follows : neither demonisation , nor naivety .
We have all heard the comments by Members that we obviously must not dissuade the sovereign wealth funds from being put to good use , and various uses were described for European prosperity .
Nevertheless , there was agreement on a number of political principles that should prevent us from being too naive .
They are the principles of transparency , fairness , predictability and reciprocity .
These contributions from Members will certainly help us to continue the work in the Council and in the Commission with a view to drawing up a code of conduct .
It is extremely encouraging and important that the Members highlighted the need for coordinated work between the Member States , and from that perspective I wanted to say that it is very satisfying to hear the eurozone countries speaking with a single voice since they are capable of upstream coordination and coordination with the ECB .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I really want to thank you once again for the broad support you have given to the Commission 's approach in the course of this debate .
I did perceive some differences in priority , but not in the political stance and for that I am particularly grateful .
Someone asked how this work is proceeding at international level .
Let me just say that while the activities in the IMF and OECD are running in parallel they are not dealing with exactly the same themes .
They could more be described as complementary .
The Working Group in the International Monetary Fund , which meets monthly , is attempting to establish how the conduct of the sovereign wealth funds themselves can be influenced in the ways that we have been discussing .
The OECD Working Group , on the other hand , is seeking to determine how we ourselves should behave in response to the influence exerted by sovereign wealth funds .
This subject is being tackled from two sides and once again I can say that the progress made to date has been satisfactory .
We are quite confident that we shall really achieve something and that - to pick up on what Mr Schmidt said - we will indeed have an umbrella , should we need one .
To conclude the debate , I have received one motion for resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday , 9 July 2008 .
Question Time ( Council )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Council is fully aware of the importance of horizontal measures to combat discrimination and has , in fact , already adopted legislative acts in this area .
I am thinking of Council Directive 2000 / 43 / EC , which prohibits discrimination on grounds of race or ethnic origin in a number of contexts , and Council Directive 2000 / 78 / EC , which prohibits discrimination on grounds of religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation in the field of employment and occupation .
The Commission is responsible for monitoring the transposition of the legislative acts adopted by the European Union and is authorised to initiate infringement proceedings .
The Commission also monitors closely the effective implementation of the existing Directives , and on 2 July it adopted a proposal for a directive to ensure protection against discrimination on grounds of age , disability , sexual orientation and religion or belief outside the labour market .
This new directive seeks to guarantee equal treatment in the following fields : social protection , education , and access to and supply of goods and services that are available to the public , including , of course , housing .
The Council will therefore be examining this initiative very closely over the next few months .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office .
I welcome the fact that the Council will give a positive view of anti-discrimination legislation .
However , he is no doubt aware - or if he is not , he soon will be - that he has inherited a legacy of non-implementation of anti-discrimination directives , both on the Racial Equality Directive and on the Employment Directive .
We now have a much-welcomed new package , a new horizontal directive on goods and services .
I would ask the Council , first of all , to ensure that this legacy of non-implementation by the Council is not perpetuated .
For example , there is a legacy of non-implementation relating to the Council framework decision on racist crimes .
The Council must get behind this package because it is important for the citizens of Europe , and we ask for a positive view on it .

( FR ) Mr President , we know that it will not be easy , but I can tell Mr Moraes that from a legal perspective we are working diligently to ensure that it is implemented and that the Presidency , for its part , will make every effort to see that this Commission package is applied .
We already know , given the traditions of all those involved and the scope of the Commission proposals , that it will by no means be easy .
I am delighted that a horizontal directive has been brought forward in the areas that you mentioned .
Can you tell me how much support you think you will get from other Council members for this directive , and indeed is the French Presidency going to commit itself today to really lobbying to make sure that this becomes a reality ?
It is very important that we get this anti-discrimination legislation through to complete the Article 13 package and , as Claude Moraes says , implementation afterwards is a key point .
- ( DE ) I would like to break this question down a bit more .
There is now apparently , within the European Union , a classic case of ethnic discrimination , and that is happening in Italy , where people are being criminalised because of their ethnic background .
How does the Council view this practice ?
Does it consider it appropriate that measures should be taken against the Italian Government ?
( FR ) Mr President , I think that these two questions are a good reflection of the contradictions that can exist among the Member States .
There have not yet been any talks in the Council so I cannot respond on behalf of the European Union .
What I would say , however , is that , as far as the Presidency is concerned , these guidelines are important .
This issue falls within the framework for strengthening the European Union 's social dimension and is thus one of the tasks to which it is particularly devoted .
We will make every effort to reach a consensus , we will also be pragmatic and we will take the results that we can achieve as quickly as possible .
I listened carefully to what was said about ethnic discrimination and that is clearly a serious concern for the Presidency .
Subject : French Presidency priorities
In light of the French Presidency 's priorities in relation to mobility in education and lifelong learning , does the Council agree that a 2011 European Year of Volunteering would be an ideal way in which the Council could promote mobility through voluntary activities for all generations throughout the EU ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , as you know , although the Council cannot take an official position on the various proposals for themes for future European Years , it was very interested in Mrs Harkin 's suggestion .
Themes for European Years may be proposed by individuals , groups or institutions , but must first of all be approved and selected by the European Commission , which then draws up a legislative proposal .
This is in turn examined by the European Parliament and the Council , according to the codecision procedure .
The Council therefore suggests to the honourable Member that she submit her proposal to the European Commission , which is the only institution that has the right of initiative for proposals of this type .
As far as 2008 is concerned , as you know , the European Year is devoted to intercultural dialogue and we intend to keep this issue to the forefront of the French Presidency .
Thank you for your reply .
I suppose the reason I used 2011 as the European Year of Volunteering is because I and four other MEPs have a written declaration down to that effect and I believe today we reached the required number .
So at least that will be the view of Parliament .
If the French Presidency has any influence on this I would ask that perhaps you would support us on it as well .
As I said , we have reached the required number today and that allows us to put in place plans and policies to have real input into 2011 if the Commission so decides .
In the meantime I would ask the French Presidency if they could ensure that young people 's voluntary activities are developed so as to aid young people 's mobility and employability .
( FR ) Mr President , I certainly share Mrs Harkin 's concerns .
I would point out that the presidency in general , and the French Presidency in particular , are very conscious of the topics she raised , particularly the aspects relating to young people 's mobility and employability , and it intends to ensure that this problem receives special attention .
We will also ensure that that these concerns are taken into consideration by the Commission , for it is the Commission that is responsible for putting forward proposals of this type .
For our part , we will try to make progress during our Presidency in relation to the concerns Mrs Harkin mentioned .
Questions Nos 3 and 4 have been withdrawn .
Subject : Dissolution of the EU 's 10 % biofuel target
A report currently being discussed in Parliament ( PE 405.949 ) is calling for the EU 's 10 % biofuel target to be reduced or abandoned altogether because of the impact on wildlife , people and world food supplies .
Can the Council comment on whether the 10 % target agreed in March 2007 is under threat and whether this link between rising food prices and increased biofuel production is an artificial one ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , it is true that in March 2007 the European Council approved a 10 % minimum target for the share of biofuels in overall transport petrol and diesel consumption by 2020 .
However , the Council also laid down certain preconditions : the target must be achieved in a cost-efficient manner ; the biofuels must be produced sustainably ; second-generation biofuels must become commercially available ; and the Fuel Quality Directive must be amended accordingly to allow for adequate levels of blending .
To answer Mr Crowley , the Council had invited the Commission to present the necessary proposals as soon as possible .
In January 2008 the Commission thus adopted a proposal for a directive on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources .
This would oblige each Member State to ensure that at least 10 % of all transport fuel comes from renewable sources by 2010 , as you know , and this obligation would apply not only to biofuels .
The discussions on the Commission proposal are still ongoing in the Council 's preparatory bodies and in Parliament 's competent committees .
The 10 % target is of course an important element of these discussions , but we cannot draw any conclusions , other than to say that it appears that it will be difficult to meet the current target .
As regards the increase in food prices , this is a complex phenomenon that has many deep-rooted causes and many consequences .
The European Council of 19 and 20 June highlighted the importance of ensuring the sustainability of biofuel policies , for example by improving the production of first-generation biofuels and by encouraging the development of second-generation biofuels made from by-products .
It also underlined the need to rapidly assess possible impacts on agricultural products for food and to take action , if necessary , to address shortcomings .
It agreed , too , that further assessment should also be made of the environmental and social consequences of the production and consumption of biofuels , both within the Union and outside the Union in the contacts it has with our international partners .
We will therefore examine the Commission 's proposals very carefully from the point of view of both sustainability and the monitoring and evaluation arrangements .
We know that Parliament is very conscious of these issues and we believe that we will be able to agree on rules that will allow us to enjoy the benefits of biofuels while minimising any harmful indirect effects .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his response and also to wish him well for the coming six months .
I know that it will be very difficult ; he can be assured of our support .
However , on the issue of biofuels - and the President-in-Office spoke of a first and second generation - the reality is that the problems that we now face in the linkage between biofuel production and food production are the result of using first-generation biofuels only .
What we should be looking at is the third generation - going beyond the whole issue of biofuels to biomass , bioenergy and by-products from the whole energy sector - which could help us to achieve the reduction in our dependence on fossil fuels as well as assisting the environment .
However , two key elements are required for that .
Firstly , coordination of research and development of technology and , secondly , a flexibility within the guidelines as laid down by the Council meeting in January 2008 .
( FR ) President dos Santos , the method used to calculate the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , and in particular the choices behind that method , will take fuel consumption into account .
However , Mr Crowley is certainly right .
We need to think about biomass and other bioenergy elements , and try to avoid the most harmful consequences on food production .
To this end , we need to make further efforts to coordinate research and development , and perhaps to adjust the goals in accordance with the research coordination .
The work is beginning in the Council .
There have already been talks on this issue and we can see once again that we will have to take account of the various elements Mr Crowley mentioned in his speech .
( ES ) Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I know you are familiar with what are known as ' futures ' in finance markets and stock markets .
There has also been much talk of the effect of diverting agricultural produce to the production of biofuels as one of the main reasons for the increase in food prices .
I wish to ask whether a study has been made by the Presidency and the Council on the volume of futures in connection with food markets and hydrocarbon markets , and the extent to which this may be indiscriminately raising prices .
I would also wish the French Presidency every success .
Is it not the problem now that biofuels have a bad name not because of what Europe has done but because of what the US is doing in feeding large quantities of corn to cars instead of to cows ?
And for Europe and the world , is not the key issue to develop a sustainable land use policy which will give us food , feed , energy and environmental goods ?
But let us not demonise any particular one of them while making food production into the cornerstone .
( FR ) Mr President , honourable Member , I am not aware of any studies of the type you mentioned .
I was going to add ' unfortunately ' , because I believe that it would be useful to examine in detail the role of the markets and the role future products might have in this area .
I also believe that it would wise to carry out more in-depth studies in this field because , as on other markets , there is the possibility of anticipation and speculation , depending on the connotations these words have .
As regards Mrs McGuinness ' comments , I believe that you are right - and it is also the Presidency 's intention - that we need to move towards more sustainable agricultural production in order to avoid the surpluses we have seen in certain areas , and you mentioned , in particular , the example of the US , which is quite true .
We hope under our Presidency to develop the initiatives that will facilitate a more sustainable method of agricultural production .
Subject : MDG 2 and ILO Child Labour Conventions
The Council 's conclusions of May of this year on both the Rights of the Child and the speeding up of the Millennium Development Goals are very welcome .
However , in light of the Council 's recognition of the extreme vulnerability of children exploited for child labour , is the Council concerned with closing the gap between MDG 2 and the ILO Child Labour Conventions ?
MDG 2 only calls for states to provide universal primary education , while the ILO Conventions set the age of 15 - or 14 in some developing countries - as the threshold for child labour .
This leaves children between the ages of 11 and 12 to 14 and 15 unprotected and uncatered for , especially in many developing countries where the resources and perhaps the will are not there to go further than MDG 2 and where children are most at risk from labour exploitation .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Aylward , there is indeed an age gap in terms of the protection against child labour afforded by the Conventions of the International Labour Organisation , the ILO , and that enshrined in the Millennium Development Goals .
However , the international Conventions and the Millennium Development Goals are two approaches that are certainly different but are also complementary .
I would remind you that the aim of the Millennium Goals adopted in 2000 is to improve living conditions by 2015 through precise and concrete goals , of which you are aware ; ensuring universal primary education is the second of these goals .
Through these Millennium Goals , the international community has recognised education as a fundamental right and an important factor for economic development .
Recognising the right to education is certainly one way of combating child labour , but it is not the only one : there is also the first Millennium Goal , namely poverty eradication in general , which is a decisive factor in the fight against child labour and increasing the number of young people attending school .
The Conventions of the International Labour Organisation establish the legal framework for the fight against child labour and it can be seen clearly in both the Millennium Goals and the ILO 's protective Conventions that they complement one another , just as legislation and action or the general framework and legal application complement one another .
There is also an age gap in terms of the provisions of the Millennium Goals and the ILO 's binding legal provisions .
The fact that this age gap exists , as Mr Aylward pointed out , does not in any way affect the Council 's determination to support the fight against all forms of child labour and the application of the Conventions of the International Labour Organisation .
The conclusions that the Council adopted in May demonstrate that the European Union will endeavour to use the instruments at its disposal to act and to use the political dialogue between the European Union , the Member States and third countries , be it via trade negotiations , development cooperation or action in international bodies , to ensure that these Conventions are applied everywhere .
In its conclusions the Council emphasised the need for the negotiations carried out by the European Community and the agreements concluded by the European Union with third countries to promote the ratification of , and compliance with , the ILO Conventions on child labour and contribute to the elimination of all forms of child labour .
The Union will strive to make the most of the development efforts in order to further strengthen partner countries ' own systems and capacities for delivering basic services without discrimination ; the Council 's conclusions thus also make explicit reference to protection from violence and exploitation .
They mention , too , the need for adequate vocational training and skills development schemes as well as opportunities for productive employment and decent work after reaching the minimum working age .
Can the President-in-Office give a political commitment that the tackling of world child labour will be a priority for the Council during the next six months ?
Can we expect to see greater coordination in international action in the field of development aid and foreign affairs matters ?
Finally , would the President-in-Office like to comment on a recent BBC Panorama programme on child labour in the supply chain of a well-known and successful European clothing brand ?
Would the Council consider introducing a system whereby European countries would be responsible for reporting on all levels of the supply chain ?
( FR ) Mr President , I am going to answer the questions in reverse order .
I am not aware of the report the honourable Member mentioned , but if that information were confirmed , the question would undoubtedly warrant further examination ; we need to examine the facts at the import level of the supply chain .
Please be assured , however , that the Presidency is very aware of this aspect and is determined to combat it , notably by applying the principles of reciprocity in this field and ensuring that international social standards are respected .
Secondly , as far as development is concerned you are completely right .
It is an undertaking that requires tireless efforts and we will continue to ensure that there is better coordination in the field of development .
Finally , like all the aspects aimed at enhancing the European Union 's social dimension , the fight against child labour and the path the European Union must follow in that area are major concerns of the Presidency .
Subject : Establishment of asset recovery offices
Could the Council make a statement on progress in establishing asset recovery offices in every Member State with a view to confiscating assets of criminals in the Member States ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Ó Neachtain , Council Decision 2007 / 845 , adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council , concerning cooperation between asset recovery offices of the Member States in the field of tracing and identification of proceeds from , or other property related to , crime was , as you know , adopted on 6 December 2007 .
Article 8 of that Decision stipulates that the Member States must transmit to the General Secretariat of the Council and to the Commission the text of any provisions of their national law enabling them to comply with the obligations imposed on them under this Decision and that they must do so by 18 December 2008 .
To date , the General Secretariat of the Council has unfortunately not received any such communications .
( GA ) Madam President , I would like to ask the President-in-Office if the Presidency supports the recommendation that these offices , once established , will have the capacity to seize criminal assets , thus making this trans-European union effective in reducing crime and seizing assets - as is done in other countries - but , of course , is not now possible on a European level in crime prevention .
( FR ) Mr President , I am going to agree with the honourable Member because , having followed these matters at other stages in my career , I believe that this cooperation genuinely has to be stepped up at European level .
Both personally and on behalf of the Presidency , I hope that we will ensure that the Member States ' obligations in this field , in respect of the Council Decision , are fully respected and that , together with the General Secretariat of the Council , we will ensure that these obligations are met by the deadline , i.e. by the end of this year , which is the end of our Presidency .
Finally , I just want to say that the concerns expressed by the honourable Member are perfectly legitimate .
- ( DE ) Mr Jouyet , we have for some considerable time had a money laundering Directive in the European Union that has been quite deliberately put in place in an attempt to siphon off the proceeds from illegal activities , especially drug trafficking and similar criminal operations .
Is the decision you mention to be seen in any way as competing with this Directive ?
Might the Directive and the experience that it has given us not perhaps be a better solution than the one you are now proposing ?
Could we also envisage adopting a tougher approach with measures that are legally more binding ?
Mr President , I too welcome the new President-in-Office and wish him well for the next six months .
I just wonder whether the President-in-Office is familiar with the operation of the Criminal Assets Bureau in Ireland , and whether this could be replicated as a template .
It has been very effective in investigating money-laundering , the proceeds of drug trafficking and , indeed , criminal activity generally .
I wonder what his views are on that .

( FR ) Mr President , to respond to Mr Rack and to Mrs Doyle , I would merely like to find out more about the effectiveness of the Irish office .
If it is effective , I think that there is no reason to take its methodology and change it at European level .
Mr Rack 's question is equally important .
Having followed money laundering matters in the past , I believe that it is possible to draw a distinction between criminal assets per se and assets generated by money laundering , by what has been done , particularly since 11 September 2001 in the European context .
However , I believe that it is important to ensure the same restriction and during the Presidency I , personally , am going to look at what can be done to establish a framework that is perhaps more coherent if still as restrictive .
When it comes to money laundering , you are quite right , Mr Rack : there have been some quite satisfactory results at European level .
It would therefore be useful to build on them , as my experience would suggest .
Subject : EU-wide rapid alert system for child abductions
What plans do the Presidency and the Council have to implement a European-Union-wide rapid alert system for child abductions across the EU Member States ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Ryan , this is a very important question .
Certain Member States have already introduced alert mechanisms that enable all public authorities and civil society to be mobilised in a very short space of time in order to search for and find the victim .
This type of protection , which is effective at a national level , may , however , prove ineffective if you only need to cross a border to get away from the warning or have enough time before it is triggered .
In 2007 the European Commission initiated a reflection on this issue with a view to identifying the existing provisions and examining the feasibility and value added of action at EU level , and a working group was set up for this purpose .
At the same time certain Member States , namely France , along with some other countries - the Netherlands , Belgium and Luxembourg - organised on 12 June 2008 an exercise to trigger a cross-border abduction warning .
Other Member States , such as Germany , Spain , Portugal , the Czech Republic and Sweden , together with the Commission , participated in this exercise as observers .
Mr Ryan 's concern is a priority for the French Presidency , which will continue the reflection in a pragmatic manner in order to step up the fight against child abductions and to demonstrate that the Union is closely involved in these situations .
The results of the exercise carried out between several Member States were presented to the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers that is ended today in Cannes , and Mrs Dati was in fact due to discuss this especially important topic with her colleagues .
I think that it would be interesting to initiate a reflection on the best practices in this area that allow the existing mechanisms to be pooled in a network with a view to obtaining the most effective warning system .
Of course the Council will keep Parliament informed of all initiatives that might be taken in the next six months on this particularly sensitive and important topic .
I , too , would like to welcome the President-in-Office and wish France the very best for its Presidency .
I have two questions .
The first is : has the President-in-Office looked at the idea of an emergency telephone line ?
That would be a very good start .
There is an emergency telephone line in a number of countries now .
Could that be extended further to other countries ?
Secondly , could he give us more of a timeframe as to when he sees this happening ?
This is one of those issues which everybody agrees with and wants to see implemented , but it seems to get bogged down in bureaucracy .
When something does happen , everybody will ask why has it not been done already .
I wonder whether he could give us a timeframe on this issue and also tell us whether the idea of the emergency telephone line has been looked at .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , an emergency telephone line is an excellent idea because such a system exists in several Member States .
You are quite right , Mr Ryan , and it is an idea that , within the framework of the proposals made by the Presidency , could be applied generally .
Our timetable is one of the particularly sensitive aspects in terms of demonstrating that Europe is taking concrete action to promote coordination at times of tragic events , such as child abductions , thanks in particular to the media and a number of new methods .
Our goal is to harmonise practices and reach a political agreement , if possible before the end of the French Presidency .
At least that is the goal we have set ourselves .

- ( DE ) Mr Jouyet , the parents of the abducted child Madeleine McCann were here at the last part-session in Strasbourg in an attempt to enlist Parliament 's support for the development of Europe-wide actions designed to ensure that greater attention is henceforth given to the prevention of child abduction and to the protection of abducted children as part of a European Union approach .
Can the Council envisage giving support to appropriate actions in this area in conjunction with Parliament and the Commission ?
I represent the McCann family and the area that they come from , so I have , therefore , followed this very closely .
Further to Mr Ryan 's point , there is a number that I believe has already been reserved in most European countries - 116 000 .
In fact , it was installed in the telecoms package in an amendment last night by the Chairman of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , so you might like to look at the process of that piece of legislation .
However , my question is : does this need any new legislation ?
Can it not just be based on pure cooperation ?
( FR ) Mr President , the case of Madeleine McCann 's abduction is a particularly sensitive one and , to be very clear , we want to see cooperation between the Presidency , the Council , and the European Parliament to ensure joint action .
Mr Rack is quite right in that regard .
I am not saying that we definitely need legislation .
In my opinion , what we need in this area is convergence , good cooperation and good practices , and we need to look at what is being done best in the various Member States .
That is why it was interesting to carry out these pilot exercises between several Member States with a view to drawing conclusions and submitting them to our partners , in conjunction with this House as Mr Rack pointed out , by the end of the French Presidency .
I believe that we need to very effective on the ground and that implies greater cooperation , as you said , rather than legislation .
Subject : ' Wider neighbourhood ' -related projects
Given that proposals are being made from various sides , including by the Commission , about developing a ' wider neighbourhood ' policy which will make use of the exceptional geographical position of our outermost regions in order to contribute to the development of their neighbours in western and central Africa and in the Caribbean , does the Council think it would be possible to give these proposals concrete shape and draw up plans of some kind in this connection ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Ortega is obviously aware that , on the initiative of the Seville European Council , the Commission presented a report based on a global approach to the special characteristics of the situation of the outermost regions aimed at determining the measures to be implemented to promote their development , taking into account their specific needs .
More recently , in September 2007 , the Commission presented to the Council and the European Parliament the results of this strategy and prospects for the future .
In addition , as the honourable Member knows , the Green Paper on ' Future relations between the EU and the Overseas Countries and Territories ' has just been published .
The Commission has thus just launched a broad public consultation , which will pave the way for a new policy of partnership with the overseas countries and territories .
These territories have many things in common with the outermost regions , as you know : remoteness , isolation from EU territories , vulnerability , including to climate change , and of course all of the issues relating to transport , both air and sea , management of migratory flows , agricultural policy and maritime policy .
All of these points are common to both the overseas territories and the outermost regions .
Given the situation in the world today , what we realised was that , in order to succeed , a coherent development policy needed to be part of a wider regional framework ; hence the ' wider neighbourhood ' action plan that was launched by the 2004 strategy in Seville , which seeks to strengthen the regional integration of the outermost regions in their geographical position , in other words with certain ACP African and Caribbean countries .
This perspective , this regional dimension , is also taken into account in the economic partnership agreements negotiated between the European Union and the ACP states with a view to ensuring greater regional integration of these countries .
We have a number of different instruments for that purpose , with which you are undoubtedly familiar .
First and foremost , the financial instruments need to be better coordinated , be it the 10th EDF , the ERDF or funds subject to cofinancing .
We must strengthen the current maritime links between the outermost regions and their non-EU neighbours .
It is also important to participate in Community research networks between these outermost regions , the overseas countries and territories and their neighbours so that they can participate in Community programmes .
Finally , we need to adopt new guidelines in the area of migration , especially within the framework of the cooperation between the ACP states and the European Union .
As the honourable Member Mr Ortega said , the implementation of the strategy for the outermost regions , whose objectives will also be taken into account in the review of the Regulation on the programme of options specifically relating to remoteness and insularity , is part of the Council 's work programme for the French , Czech and Swedish Presidencies .
As you know , the French Presidency has a special interest in these issues : as proof of this , an important meeting on the island of Réunion , which began yesterday and will end on 11July , is focusing on the strategies that need to be put in place to combat climate change and the loss of biodiversity in these outermost regions and overseas countries and territories .
We hope that that meeting , too , will manage to give fresh impetus to this policy , on which we place the utmost importance .
( ES ) Mr President , I wish to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for the reply .
As the President-in-Office of the Council is aware , it was a proposal by a splendid Commissioner , Mr Barnier , that mentioned the concept of a wider neighbourhood , and the President-in-Office of the Council pointed out a number of instruments in this regard .
I trust that during the French Presidency some specific action will be taken before the end of the year .
There has obviously been a great number of documents with which , as he is aware , I am familiar and we are all familiar .
The most important thing , however , is that we make some progress , because time moves on , and currently the outermost regions do not have this external projection .
The outermost regions are part of the EU , a continental territory , and they are offering us a splendid opportunity .
I certainly do hope that before the year is out the French Presidency can come up with measures to implement these general theories on the wider neighbourhood of outermost regions .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Ortega , numerous specific measures have been adopted on this basis since 2004 and Mr Ortega was right to mention Michel Barnier 's action in this regard , which led to several significant reforms in various Community policies : cohesion policy and Structural Funds , European Agricultural Fund , European Regional Development Fund , European Fisheries Fund and regional aid , POSEI programmes and research programmes .
What I want to say to Mr Ortega in general is that , notwithstanding the difficulties linked to the delay in the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty under the French Presidency , we are going to try to genuinely add a new dimension to these policies and to ensure that their horizontal dimensions are reflected as far as possible in concrete actions .
We aim to focus , in particular , on the maritime field and will work very closely on this aspect with the Commission and within the framework of the programming of regional policies with Mrs Hübner .
Rest assured that we are paying special attention to this matter .
Subject : Sri Lanka
The Council will be aware of the escalating violence in Sri Lanka and the increasing likelihood of all-out civil war breaking out .
Most recently , 11 people have died and more than 70 were injured in a bomb explosion on a packed commuter train , two more were killed in an explosion in the capital , Colombo , and the television reporter of Tamil origin , Paranirupasingam Devakumar , was fatally assaulted on his way home from work , the ninth journalist to be killed in Sri Lanka in the past two years .
The Council will also be aware of Sri Lanka 's failed re-election bid to the UN Human Rights Council , a clear rejection by UN Members of a country which many consider to have abused its position on the Council , not to promote human rights , but rather to protect itself from international scrutiny based on widespread and documented evidence of human rights abuses perpetrated not only by the LTTE but also allegedly by the Government 's own security forces .
In light of this , does the Council not agree that the EU should be seen to be at the forefront of efforts to finding a peaceful and lasting solution to the conflict ?
What approach is the Council considering taking to this end and how will this affect negotiations with Sri Lanka regarding entitlement to GSP Plus status ( Generalised System of Preferences ) ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Evans , the Council shares your concerns about the situation in Sri Lanka .
Since the beginning of 2008 the European Union has actively stepped up its dialogue with the Sri Lankan Government .
From 16 to 18 March a troika of senior officials visited Colombo , where it met four government ministers and other senior politicians .
On 10 June a high-level delegation from the European Commission took part in the 17th meeting of the EU-Sri Lanka Joint Commission held in Colombo .
Both visits provided an opportunity to discuss the European Union 's concerns regarding the current situation in Sri Lanka .
During the EU troika 's visit to Sri Lanka , the Union reiterated its commitment to its role as Co-Chair of the Tokyo Process and to its provision of humanitarian aid .
The European Union is Sri Lanka 's largest donor of aid , as you know .
It emphasised , however , the importance of establishing a more favourable climate to allow the NGOs , United Nations and International Committee of the Red Cross to work effectively .
Sri Lanka currently benefits from considerable advantages under the special incentive arrangement for sustainable development and good governance , which forms part of the European Union 's generalised system of preferences .
The rules of this arrangement stipulate that all countries that wish to continue to benefit from GSP Plus will have to apply for it again by October 2008 .
The conditions for granting this arrangement are based on economic vulnerability criteria and on the ratification and implementation of 27 international conventions on human rights , labour rights , the environment and governance principles .
I should like to thank the President-in-Office for that response , but I have two brief points I would like to put .
To be at the forefront of the peace process the EU would have to change its policy on the travel ban , because negotiations have taken place in Geneva , which is not in the EU , and because the Norwegians , who are also not members of the EU , have also been prominent in the peace process .
Is the President-in-Office happy about that ?
The President-in-Office gave a very comprehensive point of view about the GSP negotiations , but in light of his reservations , or of reservations about Sri Lanka at the moment , how confident is he at this stage that Sri Lanka will satisfy those 27 conditions to which he referred , which must be met before they can actually get this preferential system of trading ?

( FR ) Mr President , Mr Evans , I have noted your comments on the Geneva process , and it is true that the Norwegians are playing a prominent role in it .
However , I believe that the weight of the Union , which , I must reiterate is the largest donor , is particularly important .
We must therefore use all of that weight to influence the Geneva process and the stabilisation operations in the country .
The conditions for granting GSP Plus to Sri Lanka are primarily based on economic vulnerability criteria and on the fact that the international conventions that I mentioned concerning fundamental rights must be applied .
Indeed , Sri Lanka also has to apply for the arrangement .
As far as I am aware , although I am not certain , we need to receive an overall dossier from the Sri Lankan authorities before we can decide whether or not we can grant GSP Plus .
At this stage I am not aware of any reluctance on the part of the Council to grant it .
We will have to look at the exact nature of the request from the Sri Lankan authorities .
I would like to ask the Minister whether he agrees that there have been human rights abuses committed by the government 's own forces as well as the Tamil Tigers .
Could he make a comment on that please ?
( FR ) Mrs Doyle , what I know is that the troika that carried out this mission under the Slovenian Presidency reported back to the Council .
This troika was led by the Asian director of the Slovenian Foreign Affairs Department , by Mrs Campbell and by Mr Nicolaj , who heads the Sri Lankan office .
The only abuses I know of are the ones they indicated .
However , I will get back to you with further information , if you do not mind , Mrs Doyle , and I apologise for not being able to give you a more precise response .
Subject : Priorities of the Council on climate package
What are the French Presidency 's ambitions with regard to the climate and energy package ?
What sort of progress has been made by the Council to date ?
What is the timeline envisaged by the Presidency ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , the French Presidency obviously welcomes the Commission 's presentation at the start of this year of an ' energy and climate ' package , which correctly reflected the goals laid down by the heads of state or government at their summit in March 2007 : reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 , whatever happens , and even by up to 30 % in the case of successful negotiations on a global agreement on a regime for the period after 2012 ; proposing a regulatory framework for the capture and geological storage of carbon dioxide and , Mrs Doyle , launching demonstration projects in this field ; and achieving by 2020 a 20 % share for renewable energies of the European Union 's total energy consumption .
You are well aware of all of this too , Mrs Doyle .
The French Presidency also welcomes the progress made under the Slovenian Presidency .
In this context , you are no doubt aware of the progress report presented by the outgoing presidency to the Council in June .
From the debate based on that report it emerged that the Council supported the general architecture of the package .
In addition , it was decided that some of the proposals concerning the review of the greenhouse gas emissions trading scheme and the sharing of the effort in the sectors not covered by this scheme should be analysed in greater detail .
In particular , the provisions on the fight against carbon leakage , the use of auction proceeds , the flexibility needed to achieve the national objectives and the increase from 20 % to 30 % will be have to be examined in detail , as will the specific situation of certain Member States .
We know that it is going to be difficult to achieve all of these targets .
We also know that the French Presidency will have to provide clarification on all these points , that there are very conflicting interests and that we still need to carry out a comprehensive analysis of the elements I just mentioned , notably the mechanisms for allocating auction allowances , the measures to prevent carbon leakage and the various flexibility mechanisms that are needed .
However , what we also know , Mrs Doyle , is that it is of course absolutely vital to have a political agreement for the Poznań Conference at the end of the year , but above all it is needed for the Copenhagen Conference .
As far as our Presidency 's work is concerned , in the context of the institutions , which you know as much about as I do , and the legislative deadlines , in conjunction with your House we have to reach an agreement that is ambitious enough to put the Union in a strong position for its international negotiations in Copenhagen in December 2009 , and the legislative time we have for that is running out .
That is undoubtedly the most difficult challenge we will have to tackle , Mrs Doyle .
Does a political agreement refer to a first-reading agreement or to preparations for an early second-reading agreement under the French Presidency ?
Also what priority is the President-in-Office giving to border adjustment measures or bans ?
Would the Presidency agree with me that they should be kept in reserve for Plan B in the event of our not achieving our goal of an international agreement , but should not be used as a stick in negotiating to get an international agreement ?
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Doyle , to answer your first question , we are going to try to go as far as possible .
We are going to try to get an agreement at first reading .
We are going to do everything in our power to achieve that ; if we can get an early agreement at second reading , we will do so .
I think that it is in the interest of all the European institutions and the Union as a whole .
To be clear , that is my personal opinion , even though I know that it is going to be very difficult .
As regards the mechanisms for dealing with carbon leakage , I think that it is important - and I am speaking here on behalf of the Presidency , not the Council - that on the one hand we can work together from a technical point of view on these measures , which are far from simple , and that on the other hand we have a bargaining chip that we can use in the forthcoming international negotiations .
If no agreement is reached on this aspect at a global level , then , as you quite rightly said , we will have to move on to Plan B. However , we will be in a better position to come up with Plan B if we have proposals to bring to the table at the international negotiations and we have them early enough .
That is my belief .
As the Minister is on home territory and the role of the Presidency is to lead the 27 countries for this six-month period , could he indicate any areas where he feels that France sets a particularly good example and leads the way for the rest of the European Union in this field ?
( FR ) Mr President , thank you for this clever question .
I think that in this area the French Presidency must forget about the difficulties we might encounter in such and such an aspect of the proposals , which are not necessarily all that easy to resolve .
We know that not everything is easy .
I am thinking of renewable energies and I am thinking of other elements .
However , the Presidency 's aim and our responsibility , Mr Evans , is genuinely to reach an agreement by the end of the year , whatever it costs , and there will be costs , in the monetary sense of the word , as far as some aspects of this package are concerned .
Those questions which have not been answered due to a lack of time will be answered in writing at a later date ( see Annex ) .
Question No 37 will not be called given that its subject is covered by another item on the agenda for this part-session .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )
Request for urgent procedure : see Minutes
Safety on the Community 's railways - Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
- the recommendation for second reading by Paolo Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on amending Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on safety on the Community 's railways ( Railway Safety Directive ) ( 16133 / 3 / 2007 - C6-0129 / 2008 - ;
- the recommendation for second reading by Paolo Costa , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on amending Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency ( Agency Regulation ) ( 16138 / 3 / 2007 - C6-0131 / 2008 -
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure for me to introduce our debate this evening , because we have reached the end of an endeavour which was initially very difficult but whose outcome , it seems to me , is highly significant .
We are discussing some very technical matters this evening , but in my opinion they are ones which will make a much more significant contribution to building Europe than many of the speeches we address to one another on so many other occasions .
We may not have noticed , but there are now almost 700 000 wagons in Europe which are able to move from one country to another and can be used by one company rather than another ; until now , however , they have been prevented from crossing borders with relative ease because we had not established common safety rules on both sides .
This evening , by tackling two issues that complement the rules on interoperability and on the mutual recognition of rolling stock , already carried forward in January , we are eliminating other barriers , and doing so in such a way as to ensure that there is a harmonised system , not least from a safety point of view .
With the regulation under discussion this evening , we are taking a second step forward : as well as extending the powers of the European Agency , we are giving it a crucial role in setting up the single railway signalling system , intended to replace no fewer than 23 existing systems in Europe .
We are at last beginning to glimpse that single railway market envisaged by the first Treaty , back in 1957 , but which has still not been achieved .
With regard to the proposal for a directive on safety , our main concern was to devise a maintenance certification system for wagons , at the service not just of railway companies and companies managing the infrastructure , but also , perhaps , of a third party deciding to invest in a fleet of wagons .
None of this would detract from the liability of railway companies for the use of that rolling stock when it is on the move .
We discussed at length whether or not certification should be made voluntary rather than mandatory , and whether or not to confine ourselves to wagons rather than all other rolling stock .
I believe that we came up with a good solution : the system will be mandatory and will cover wagons for the next two years ; it will also cover other vehicles - passenger vehicles - within ten years or so .
This system has been outlined , this road has been followed , and we will shortly arrive at our destination .
The Agency regulation , I would emphasise , fully covers the European signalling system , making it possible to take a technological step forward and envisage the eventuality of eliminating other measures .
We had two difficulties : how to ensure that technological innovation - which must be fostered and increased - does not jeopardise the timeframe required for investment in the transition to the new signalling system .
It seems to me that a solution has been found here too : namely to adopt a version 2.3.0 of the current system and move ahead with that , bearing in mind that by 2012 we will have introduced the even more advanced , definitive system .
For these reasons , having - it seems to me - ingeniously solved both problems , I believe we can recommend that the House vote in favour of the agreement reached at second reading , enabling us to demonstrate the effectiveness of our work and of our relations with the Council .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , after the adoption of the first two rail packages , in 2001 and 2004 , and just before the adoption of the third rail package in 2007 , the Commission proposed , on 13 December 2006 , a series of legislative measures on the cross-acceptance of existing rolling stock .
These measures seek to support the revitalisation of the rail sector by eliminating the obstacles to the movement of trains on European rail networks .
The two texts that are the subject of this debate , the amendment of the Directive on railway safety and the amendment of the Regulation on the European Railway Agency , are part of these measures .
The amendment of the Regulation establishing the European Railway Agency had two main objectives .
The first was to broaden the Agency 's competences so that it can play its role in implementing the new Interoperability Directive .
It will have to identify the various national procedures and technical rules currently in force for the approval of locomotives .
It will then have to draw up the list of equivalent rules and thus requirements that , once verified by a national safety authority , no longer need to be verified by the authorities of the other Member States that a locomotive may have to enter .
This work will be carried out in conjunction with the networks of national safety authorities , which the Agency will have to coordinate .
The Agency will also be responsible for preparing technical opinions at the request of the national safety authorities or the Commission .
In addition , some of its tasks needed to be clarified , especially with the introduction of the ERTMS system , the Directive on the certification of train drivers , and the registers and databases the Agency will have to draw up .
The Agency will in fact have to play a crucial role in the introduction of the ERTMS system , not only by laying down the specifications of this harmonised signalling system , but also by guaranteeing the technical compatibility of fixed equipment fitted with different versions .
Allow me to congratulate the rapporteur , the Chairman of the committee , Mr Costa , for the work that is being done at second reading in order to reach an agreement with the Council .
This result was obtained following several lengthy meetings and enormous efforts by all those involved .
The results of the negotiations are still quite cautious : amendments to the two common positions that the Council had adopted on 3 March 2008 , which the Commission can support completely .
Therefore , I thank you for your work , Mr Costa .
I am now very much looking forward to listening to the debate .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner - and former colleague of mine - ladies and gentlemen , we could in fact almost have met in the committee room , but it is so nice to be with you all here .
Let me begin by offering the rapporteur very warm thanks on behalf of my Group .
Over the past weeks he has constantly fought about technical details and sought improvements .
With the two amending directives that have now been agreed between the Council and Parliament we are improving rail safety and also have a chance to improve interoperability and advance towards our aim of actually shifting more freight from road to rail .
I consider it most important that the new certification procedure , the mutual recognition of certification rules , will quite definitely reduce certification costs and , as a result , promote the Europe-wide use of rolling stock .
At the same time , however - and that was one of the thorny issues for us and I thank the rapporteur for being so stubborn - we must ensure that the question of responsibility for wagon maintenance is resolved clearly and unambiguously .
That is the only way we can expect our citizens to agree that wagons can be used across borders without extra controls and promote interoperability .
I am also in favour of the Agency endeavouring to make progress with the ERTMS system and I agree with the rapporteur that the best is the enemy of the good .
If we change version too quickly , we will probably find nobody going for it .
So we must proceed carefully and cautiously in promoting the ERTMS version .
We all love trains , especially historic trains .
I am , therefore , glad that we have made it clear here that heritage and museum railways are exempt from all the technically difficult but generally necessary safety provisions .
I hope our friends will hear and see us .
We fully recognise the interests of museum railways .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of the Socialist Group I would like to thank Mr Costa for both his reports , although this evening I will speak only on the one dealing with railway safety .
Safety must always be our top priority , and those who are given the responsibility of running our railway infrastructure and its rolling stock must be properly trained and their qualifications recognised if we are to improve both the efficiency and safety of our railways .
It is right that safety certification of freight wagons should enter a new phase with the introduction of a new system in 2010 .
It is also right that passenger vehicles should be covered , and , whilst that must be done in 10 years , those who oppose this must surely recognise the need for such a system
I also support the rapporteur in his assertion that none of this should hold back railway expansion .
The whole industry in Europe , particularly in the area of rail freight , is haunted by the lack of vision that sometimes emanates from our infrastructure providers who latch on to any excuse to do nothing .
We must expand our railways , both in infrastructure and rolling-stock terms , so that we can deliver an efficient , effective and sustainable railway network devoid of obstacles .
Finally , I must thank our rapporteur and all the Members for their support of my amendments exempting heritage and tourist railways from this directive .
Had they been forced to comply , the cost burden would have been crippling , putting at risk the preservation of that rich industrial heritage that these railways undoubtedly provide .
We in Europe lead the way in railway heritage and preservation , a fact often overlooked by the Commission - but , frankly , never overlooked by this Parliament .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , long before the European Union came into existence , we had a well-organised system of railways in most of Europe .
From the end of the 19th century , the railways , together with the postal services , were one of the main responsibilities of the State .
Each country was responsible for its own railways .
In most countries the State had become the owner of the main or the only domestic railway company .
The need for this arose because the original private companies were mainly geared up to making quick profits .
They had not succeeded in guaranteeing the quality and continuity of the service .
After they were taken over by the States , the infrastructure and frequency of service improved .
The infrastructure belonged to the national railways and therefore to the State .
The running of passenger trains and freight trains was in the same hands , so coordination between passenger and freight transport , on the one hand , and maintenance , expansion and optimal use of the infrastructure , on the other hand , was good .
There was no need for any separate bureaucratic state bodies to interfere .
Almost everything , apart from the sleeper cars and restaurant cars in international trains travelling long distances , was regulated at national level .
Besides , international cooperation was very good .
International train travellers saw the railways as one large overarching European institution .
At station ticket offices you could get hand-written tickets to anywhere in Europe and good information about services abroad .
Regional cross-border connections and connections over very long distances between countries which did not share a border were much more readily available than they are today .
That system , which we might envy today , had four weaknesses , especially after electrification .
Countries opted for different mains voltages and different types of electronic safety systems .
Freight trains were impeded by controls , and having to uncouple and transfer freight at border stations .
As public transport increasingly was operating at a loss due to the rise of the car , sections of track at the borders were thinned out and passengers had to pay an extra charge to cross the border .
After the arrival of air travel , information and ticket sales for long international journeys were increasingly neglected .
Solely on points like these the European Union could deliver improvements .
It has been a matter of great concern to my group for years that intervention by the European Union has not focused in the first place on these cross-border improvements but mainly on further liberalisation .
To limit the damage caused by these changes , more bureaucratic supervision is again necessary .
In a series of earlier decisions on the railways since 2001 certain faits accomplis have been established .
Based on this new reality my group is seeking the best possible outcome for the future .
The outcomes proposed in second reading look relatively good .
A number of considerations relating to subsidiarity , safety and the desire not to leave everything to agreements between the now privatised railway companies have led us to the position where , despite our earlier criticism , we will vote in favour .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all like to go on about shifting transport to more environmentally friendly modes .
First , however , we must create the many conditions we need to implement that .
The same applies in particular to the railway , which is a highly environmentally-friendly means of transport .
We have some serious technological catching up to do here if we want to make the systems interoperable and we need to take a range of measures to ensure that we really achieve an internal transport market .
After lengthy and detailed negotiations between Parliament and the Council , we have achieved a good result .
So we should not badmouth it but should actually endorse it tomorrow by a large majority .
However , I do think some reservations are in order , especially on the subject of agencies .
Our experience so far in Europe with agencies has been , to put it cautiously , less than perfect .
We often began by allocating too few if any budget resources at the start-up of the agencies .
Then problems arose and we kept having to compensate after the event .
We had and still have the problem of incorporating too few if any political controls and finding that the agencies have taken on a life of their own , free of any political control or responsibility .
We can only hope , and the Commissioner must ensure , that it will all be different this time .
Nevertheless , we must still remain on our guard , especially when it comes to agencies .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I first of all want to pay tribute to Paulo Costa for his excellent work .
We are dealing here with a highly technical area that is far from popular .
Nonetheless , when discussing the climate plan and the aim of reducing greenhouse gases , the issue of rail transport and transport other than road transport arises .
In that respect , we have done a lot of work over the last two parliamentary terms to open up the networks .
However , there is still an obstacle to the opening-up of the networks that we absolutely have to remove : the absence of technical interoperability , which is caused by numerous elements , including the many different types of control-command systems , stock recognition - which we are discussing here - and , in particular , track gauge .
I am from a region called Aquitaine , where we have to change the axles of trains that come from Spain to ensure a fluid flow of traffic .
These questions , which appear to be eminently technical , are actually eminently political because they determine our transport policy and the political priority of the fight against greenhouse gases and climate change .
Both of these texts are extremely important .
I would like to thank Paolo Costa for the new proposals he has put forward , notably on the mutual recognition obligation .
There are several ways of hindering the opening of the European networks .
The rail networks were built on very national or nationalist bases .
One way of hindering it is to show little or no desire to achieve mutual recognition of stock .
From now on , I hope that , thanks to the text that we are going to adopt , we will have European legislation that will allow us to do away with this obstacle , which has been particularly effective between France and Germany .
I would also like to echo what my colleague Mr Rack said about the Agency : I believe that it is extremely important to give the Agency the resources it needs for its development and perhaps its democratisation so that Parliament can be more involved .
( CS ) The mandatory certification system for bodies in charge of maintenance and placing in service railway vehicles is the only railway system improvement .
It would simply not be possible to ensure greater operating safety without clear rules .
In both cases , whether it is the ERTMS in another report or this case , the European Railway Agency plays an important role .
It seeks to achieve the free movement of wagons and locomotives , thereby improving the competitiveness of the railway system in comparison to other types of transport .
This can help to improve the environment , which is suffering as a result of the unbearable burden placed on it by traffic ; the amendments should therefore be supported .
Allow me to say just a few words in conclusion .
The issue of maintaining sidings and wagons used by railways that are not directly connected to the network should be dealt with in national regulations , not at European Union level ( including the relevant authorisations ) .
I am thinking of factory sidings and so on .
( RO ) A solution for an efficient and less polluting Community energy transport is the development of modern railway transport , both for passengers and for merchandise .
Regarding the Railway Safety Directive , I consider it necessary to exempt heritage , museum and tourist railways from the directive .
It is also essential that all entities in charge of maintenance be certified and perform the maintenance themselves or be able to contract it with other maintenance workshops .
The entity in charge of maintenance should establish , for basic components or subassemblies designed for railway systems , the basic parameters and technical characteristics regarding maintenance and logistics for meeting the requirements provided by this directive during their operation .
The European Railway Agency plays an essential role in introducing the ERTMS system by 2020 .
In order to encourage the investments required for the interoperability of the railway transport systems in the Union , it is essential to stabilize the final version of ERTMS for a certain period .
I call attention to the need to guarantee the safety of railway transport to the European citizens .
I consider that both Member States and the Commission should finance more the development of the railway infrastructure and the modernization of the rolling stock .
I request the Commission to provide greater support to the new Member States whose railway systems require substantial investments .
The TRAN Committee has proposed the requirement to install the ERTMS gradually in the trans-European transport network ( TEN-T ) and the conditioning of providing European funds by the mandatory use of ERTMS .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , we are easing barriers to the movement of carriages and locomotives in the European rail network .
We are trying to decide whether there should be railways in the Community or Community railways .
In so doing , through this piece of legislation , we are approaching the concept of Community railways , that is , common technical , operational and legal standards , in effect , interoperability , which is needed from every point of view .
Air transport , road transport and shipping are much further advanced in the creation of branch Community systems .
This was one of the factors leading to their market success .
Railways have not yet experienced any visible market success ; if anything , they have lost market share .
The proposal under discussion is good and it is much needed .
Mr Paolo Costa has done excellent work and has put forward a good report .
I believe that you , Commissioner , will be able to control the Agency , resulting in great benefit to railways in Europe .
( PL ) Madam President , in the countries of the ' old ' EU , rail transport is losing ground to road transport .
This has been happening for some decades .
In 1970 railways carried almost 20 % of all freight , while in 2003 this figure was down to just 7.5 % .
We should take advantage of the positive features of rail transport , which is a very eco-friendly form of transport .
Growth in the use of railways could help to ease congestion on roads , especially during summer months .
The proposed updating of the law will help to make trade more efficient in the EU .
It will remove barriers to the creation of new rail freight companies .
In addition , it removes the requirement to have locomotives certified in every Member State and simplifies procedures as regards existing rolling stock .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to draw attention to two issues in this debate .
First of all , it is important support the European Parliament amendments concerning the introduction of a mandatory certification system for all companies , which means railway companies , infrastructure managers , owners or any other entity to which a certificate can be issued as an entity responsible for maintenance in compliance with the criteria and requirements contained in this text .
Secondly , support should also be given to the European Parliament amendments aimed at extending the competencies of the European Railway Agency , especially as regards issuing permits for the use of rolling stock that complies with the Technical Standard for Interoperability ( TSI ) , making the Agency the central development body for introducing the European Rail Traffic Management System , and thirdly , giving the Agency the task of running the mandatory certification system as regards the maintenance of railway wagons and other rolling stock .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Paolo Costa , for convincing the Council to accept the majority of the European Parliament 's amendments .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in times like these when we may talk about shifting traffic from road to railway but have been presented with a directive on costs that will probably not entirely achieve that , it is good to find a report that actually aims to strengthen a transport mode we regard as important , the train , to ensure that in future it will have the same rights and the same opportunities in many respects as the heavy goods vehicle .
Interoperability works , the systems are being harmonised and safety improved .
Both are , therefore , very good reports .
I congratulate Mr Costa on another step towards strengthening the railway at European level .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I have listened with interest to your speeches and I agree with the decision to defend our railway heritage , as emphasised by Mr Simpson and Mr Jarzembowski .
In addition , Mr Rack and Mr Savary highlighted the importance of defending the Agency and we support that too .
I have a good impression in that regard .
I welcome the general agreement on the compromise reached between Parliament and the Council .
The process of revitalising the European rail sector , which the Community launched several years ago , is now starting to bear fruit .
Having fallen after 1970 in most of the Member States , its market share has now stabilised and is showing clear signs of growth , which is excellent news .
With the now imminent completion of the legislative work on this legislative package , which is technical in nature but very important from an economic perspective , railway undertakings will be able to fulfil their role in terms of offering sustainable transport in a market that is open to competition both internally and with other means of transport .
As a consequence , I welcome the agreements reached on these three aspects - interoperability , safety and the Agency - and I would again like to thank Parliament , not only as a Commissioner but also as a former Member , for its rapid and excellent work on this text .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am grateful to everyone who has spoken , because it seems to me that we can look forward confidently to tomorrow 's vote and to the likelihood of reaching an agreement which will constitute a substantial step forward .
The railways have a future in Europe but can only regain market share if they are in a position to compete .
The number-one condition is to be able to cover distances of 300-400 kilometres , which is the distance over which they can beat competition from other modes .
However , 400 kilometres in Europe means crossing borders .
That is the crux of the matter : either we succeed in making our trains cross borders efficiently and quickly or we will have failed .
A few years ago we devised rules enabling engine drivers to do just this ; today we are doing the same for wagons .
Very soon passenger locomotives and rolling stock will also be able to cross borders .
They will do so indiscriminately , without any need for concern that interoperability may endanger safety .
This is the ultimate goal we set ourselves , and I do believe that we are close to achieving it .
We are laying down European timeframes and schedules - two years for wagons ; ten years for other vehicles - but it will happen .
Rolling stock will at last move around using a single signalling system .
The idea we pursued until a few years ago , of making trains learn to recognise more than one signalling system , was another option , but clearly that option was thwarted by the existence of more than 20 different systems in Europe .
If these two matters make sufficiently rapid headway , we will have made a real , major contribution to the eventual construction of the single railway market .
That market , which our founding fathers had thought would be the first to be built , will in fact be the last .
What matters , however , is that it does come into being , and in sufficient time for the railways to contribute to the fight against climate change and to overcoming the constraints imposed upon us by rising energy prices .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) Mr. President , dear colleagues , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur for his work .
Taking into account the recent rail accidents , I would also like to emphasize the importance of the safety of Community railways .
I hope the new regulations for the operation of the European Railway Agency shall bring more benefits to the consumer and simplify the procedures relating to the authorization of vehicles .
I would like us to make sure that there is a well-defined entity that is responsible for the safety and maintenance of each vehicle and that we know who this entity is at every moment .
This authority should make sure that consumer rights are complied with in every Member State and also that compensations are awarded to passengers in compliance with the European legislation .
At the same time , the agency should take into consideration travel conditions , comfort and safety , as well as keeping tariffs at the same level .
It should also take into consideration opportunities and price reductions for young people and students , as well as disadvantaged categories .
Hoping that the European consumers ' wishes shall be implemented through the work of the European Railway Agency , we shall provide it with all necessary support for its operation .
Rules for the operation of air services in the Community ( recast ) ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the recommendation for second reading by Arūnas Degutis , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community ( recast ) ( 16160 / 4 / 2007 - C6-0176 / 2008 - .
The aim of this Regulation is the effective implementation of EU legislation on the internal air transport market .
This is of critical importance for the effective and economic functioning of the air services market within the harmonised and coordinated rules .
This Regulation replaces and combines three existing regulations : the Regulation on the licensing of air carriers and the leasing of aircraft , the Regulation on free access for Community air carriers to intra-Community air routes and the Regulation on the liberalisation of air fares .
The Regulation we have in front of us today is for the most part based on experience acquired in the course of the implementation of relevant existing regulations .
Parliament completed its first reading of this Regulation in July 2007 .
The Council adopted its common position on 18 April 2008 .
As rapporteur , I , together with the shadow rapporteurs , arranged in-depth discussions with interested parties and institutions .
Moreover , after first reading in Parliament , we had several meetings with representatives of the country holding the Presidency of the Council to ensure that the issues we were working on were reflected in the common position .
Having thoroughly analysed the common position , I can confirm that it corresponds to the political agreement adopted by the Council last December , which reflects the issues that concern us fairly well .
With the aim of achieving appropriate implementation of social rights , reference is made in the annex to the document , based on the position of both the Commission and the Council , that the Member States should ensure adequate application of employment rules and conditions , including the maximum employment term and minimum rest periods .
From now on , as Parliament has stated , the transparency of air fares , including their presentation on the Internet , would be ensured .
The proposals on ' wet ' and ' dry ' aircraft lease agreements adopted by Parliament , as well as the position on restrictions on ' wet ' aircraft leasing , have also been adopted .
Parliament has also succeeded in achieving the position that distribution between air traffic routes should depend on direct communication between the airports concerned .
The Council has unreservedly accepted 29 of Parliament 's amendments and rejected 8 , primarily because of technicalities .
Therefore , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that we can accept the Council common position .
I do not think that any further amendments or a third reading would bring any significant results .
We have achieved what we intended to achieve .
Therefore , I would like to recommend that we accept the Council common position , as it has basically been influenced by Parliament 's first reading .
This position was accepted by a majority in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
Prompt adoption of this Regulation would enable the aviation sector to adapt to the upgraded legal environment because there would be only one regulation instead of three .
I do believe that these fundamental achievements would allow Members to support the common position without amendments and to vote in favour of the resolution .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the proposal you are debating this evening is very important because it is going to allow us to modernise and supplement the 1992 Regulation that created the single aviation market .
Its main aim is to simplify and consolidate the existing legislation .
I believe that the agreement on the table , following Parliament 's first reading in July 2007 and the adoption of the Council 's common position in November , allows us to achieve the main objectives .
Firstly , it cleans up the text by deleting the obsolete sections on the transition to the liberalised markets .
The text is clarified and three Regulations are consolidated into a single text .
Secondly , it ensures effective and homogeneous application of the Community provisions by defining more precise and stricter criteria , for example as regards the granting and supervision of operating licences .
It also tightens the monitoring of air carriers ' financial viability .
Thirdly , it enhances the coordination among the Member States in relation to intra-Community services .
Fourthly , it improves passengers ' rights , which is very important : the right to full information on the actual price of a ticket , including taxes , charges and fees , and the right not to be discriminated against on grounds of nationality or residence when purchasing a ticket .
I must highlight passengers ' rights in particular because if we want to defend the European debates we must always remember that the citizens of Europe are the focus of our work .
I am therefore very pleased to see the speed at which this issue is moving forward and I would once again like to highlight the work done by the rapporteur , Mr Degutis , and the Committee on Transport on this text , which has been significantly improved .
Given that there are few differences of opinion between the two institutions , I hope that we will be able to adopt this new text very soon and that it will enter into force without delay .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank Mr Degutis warmly for the good cooperation on this liberalisation package .
We have achieved good compromises and will support his report tomorrow .
Consensus was soon reached on the broad lines of the aviation regulation we will be voting on tomorrow .
As he said , that regulation takes us a big step forward towards reducing red tape .
Three existing Regulations have been put together into a legislative text that is easy to understand .
Thanks to this common position , existing EU legislation on air services has been brought in line with current practice .
In addition to the licensing of airlines , the regulation covers technical questions and price transparency , which is the subject I want to address in particular on behalf of my group .
From the outset we urged putting an end at last to the misleading adverts offering absurdly low air fares .
We want to introduce substantial simplifications for the consumer , which are long overdue .
This EU regulation will bring an end to the advertising tricks and inducements that often confuse the consumer .
Airlines may no longer con consumers by advertising flights - especially on the Internet - at ridiculous fares of , for instance , EUR 9.99 , and then face them with large extras in the form of taxes and charges .
In future air fares are to be set out in a comprehensible and transparent way .
The consumer must be able to identify what proportion of the price goes to the state and how much goes into the pockets of the airline and airport .
That applies above all to Internet offers .
That is why we have also called for price transparency .
We will be happy to vote for the report tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to thank Mr Degutis for his good work and , of course , for the good cooperation .
We are at last adopting the necessary update to the third liberalisation package .
This recast text injects new clarity and efficiency , especially in regard to authorisation for placing in service , aircraft leasing , traffic distribution and air service safety .
It also makes it clear that EU and national social legislation must be applied properly , regardless of the Member State in which the airline has its operational base .
Nevertheless , the social and working conditions in European aviation remain a problem and need to be put back on the agenda .
The text could not resolve the question of the insurance model in the event of airline bankruptcy either , because of its complexity .
That is another task for the Commission .
The adoption of rules on price transparency is a great success .
In future , it will no longer be possible to con European citizens with tempting offers .
All customers will now be able to see not just the final price but also the proportion of the cost that goes to the airline , airport and state .
That is a major contribution to consumer protection .
Once again , I thank the rapporteur for the good cooperation .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Madam President , I commend this report .
It shows how the institutions can work together in implementing amendments protecting passengers as well as consumers and the business community .
Air travel has changed dramatically in a very short period of time , benefiting passengers in a world that is becoming ever more globalised .
The diversity of flights available today shows the enormous change in society as regards business practices and leisure .
The increased competitiveness between airlines has resulted in more flights and cheaper flights for ordinary passengers .
We saw how this happened overnight in my own country - Ireland - with the introduction of deregulation in the aviation industry and the birth of Ryanair .
Constant competitiveness in the industry has led to a wider choice and cheaper flights .
This , of course , has created employment and , in some cases , has improved regional economy .
Nevertheless , it would be remiss for us do disregard the negative aspects of this large development in the aviation industry in Europe , which has led to certain social and safety issues .
Airline profits should not undermine passenger and staff safety or other social aspects .
I commend the recommendations from both Parliament and Council on these aspects .
More cooperation and understanding and a more effective market must exist between Member States for the air travel market to develop in a sustainable fashion .
We have already seen how price transparency has benefited passengers .
Air transport will be in constant change as life and society changes .
However , we must have a unified approach for all those developments to be sustainable and for them to benefit all who depend on the industry .
I commend the rapporteur , Mr Degutis , for his work and I wholeheartedly welcome the cooperation of Parliament and Council .
We will vote for this report here tomorrow .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) This Regulation governs the licensing of carriers to lease aircraft ( both with crew and without crew ) and free access to intra-Community air routes including certain derogations , particularly for public service obligations .
In addition to financial fitness requirements , the Regulation calls for more emphasis on the importance of complying with safety standards , with regard to leasing too .
Restrictions in the Regulation aim , in particular , to reduce the likelihood of social dumping and to ensure that within the framework of the European Economic Area carriers operate more transparently .
I do not totally agree with the previous speaker that Ryanair is the ideal example of how to deal with air traffic conditions .
I congratulate the rapporteur on reaching an agreement both with the Commission and the Council and I welcome the result , in spite of the fact that a general consensus has not yet been reached regarding certain social conditions ( working time and maximum working hours ) .
The GUE / NGL Group welcomes and supports the Regulation .
Madam President , I would like to thank Mr Degutis for his excellent report and the work he has done over recent weeks .
Apart from flight delays , the most complaints that I receive against airlines concern the way that they lure people with what appear to be low fares and conveniently tell them the true cost only at the very end of the process .
Low-fare airlines have perfected this art over recent years .
Now , not only will the customers see the true price , but also the security taxes levied by national governments will have to be highlighted separately .
This transparency has to be a good thing , and I hope it will end what has been over recent years an exercise in deceit by some airlines which try to con the travelling public into believing they are buying a very cheap ticket when the opposite is true .
I must also make mention of the report 's tightening of the ' wet lease ' rules for aircraft outside the EU and its commitment to ensuring that social dumping is not acceptable when airlines lease in aircraft - again , something that has happened in the past .
There are concerns that the number of ' wet leased ' aircraft from outside the EU is at an unacceptable level , compromising not only our social laws but also our safety laws and undermining our own EU civil aviation industry , and our rapporteur has addressed this .
This is an excellent report for consumers , airline staff and European aviation .
It is so good , in fact , that I am pretty sure airlines will already have started to look for any loopholes - again , another thing that has happened in the past and , again , another art that our airlines have perfected .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , at a time when the air transport sector is going through one of its most difficult crises due to the unparalleled rise in fuel prices , it is vital that we invest our attention and our legislative effort in measures that will help to maintain the strength and dynamism of this sector .
In this context , the commitment to improve the common rules for the operation of air services in the Community must cover some fundamental points : firstly , reinforcement of the financial fitness requirements for airlines , given the potential relationship between the financial soundness of carriers and safety ; secondly , transparency in the setting of ticket prices with a clear indication , in addition to the basic cost , of the taxes , duties and other charges , and , finally , the unequivocal definition of public service obligations , including conditions resulting from specific constraints in the outermost regions and the need to safeguard competition .
The rapporteur proposes that we accept the Council common position .
This means that , in addition to the points already mentioned , the main objectives identified by Parliament at first reading have been achieved .
In effect , this text formulates and defines proper rules on the issues of operating licences , leasing of aircraft , public service obligations and traffic distribution rules , while reinforcing the internal market and passenger rights .
It therefore gives the Commission the right to negotiate intra-Community traffic rights with third countries and reinforces the employment rights of those working in the sector .
I must therefore congratulate Mr Degutis on his work in this respect and support the acceptance of the Council common position without further amendment .
Both arms of the legislative authority have worked to achieve an important agreement .
Will the result help to overcome the crisis ?
I was pleased to hear the Commissioner 's response .
Will this help to ensure a better and more effective internal market in aviation that will be of benefit to the economy and people ?
We hope so .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first let me congratulate Mr Arūnas Degutis warmly on this balanced report .
It is particularly important today , in the age of the Internet , to provide greater price transparency in air fares and thereby prevent misleading offers , while also ensuring equal conditions of competition .
That is the only way to achieve a minimum quality and , in the name of consumer protection , to protect people who have little or no experience in booking trips from being lured by misleading offers .
In a sense , it is creating interoperability .
The need to observe social legislation is the second major point in the report and there is no doubt that Member States must ensure that both Community and national social provisions apply to airline employees if aircraft and their crew are leased out to cover peak season traffic or make up for the shortfalls of airline operators based in other countries .
That responds to the needs of the airline operators , the needs of the employees and , in particular , the needs of the consumers .
( LT ) I would like to highlight several points regarding the Regulation under discussion , which I believe are of huge importance to our citizens .
First of all , it concerns passengers as well as airlines , their owners and flight crew .
Firstly , the anticipated measures would not only allow an increase in the transparency of air fares but would also help to combat misleading information , as has been mentioned before , as well as dishonest competition .
Secondly , the Regulation sets out measures for increasing flight security , which is very important .
Thirdly , the Regulation provides information on the social rights of flight crew and ways to safeguard them .
Therefore , I too would like to congratulate Mr Degutis and thank him for his work .
I am looking forward to tomorrow 's vote .
( NL ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to begin with I would like to take this opportunity to thank the rapporteur for his work and to congratulate him on the agreement reached with the Commission and the Council .
This is about simplifying the rules in a great many areas .
It is far more than that though .
I would like to endorse what has been said by fellow Members about the importance of transparency with regard to air ticket prices .
That is a great step forwards .
It has also always been an important demand from Parliament 's side .
Let us be absolutely clear : we have nothing against low prices , but the consumer should in all transparency have a clear idea in advance of the cost of buying an air ticket , inclusive of all costs .
The same applies for that matter to all manner of extra services and insurance that customers have to explicitly request .
Consequently , Mr Degutis , I am assuming that your report will be able to count on a very great deal of support from Parliament tomorrow .
( DE ) Madam President , I want to take up a subject nearly all speakers have addressed , namely greater transparency in pricing , and emphasise what Mr Simpson rightly observed .
Anyone who has ever booked flights on the Internet - and many of us do so - knows that problems may arise not just in relation to price transparency but also if you do not fill in some little detail of the booking correctly .
In that event , it all backtracks and you end up with far more insurance than you actually wanted and not a cheap ticket but one at an over-inflated price as a result of extra charges and insurance .
The airlines themselves should not be promoting this practice and the Commission in particular and we in Parliament should monitor such behaviour .
That is the only way to organise a sensible , customer-friendly system for our citizens .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on a truly excellent report .
We have discussed aviation on many occasions at this part-session .
Today we want to make a reality of the Regulations from some 16 years ago on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community .
These amendments should help to improve safety and - I would stress this - the quality of aviation services as well as passenger protection .
Clear information on flight ticket pricing is a particularly important issue .
It is good that we are also considering the issue of permits to ensure that operators are reliable .
It is also good that the rights of air crews have been debated here today .
At this point in time , when there is an enormous growth in aviation , regulation is vital .
It should not , however , hamper new initiatives and should be in passengers ' interests .
We should also remember that flights start and end at airports , so a good service culture at airports is also essential .
( RO ) The new form of the regulation strengthens and improves the existent legal provisions regarding the supervision of licenses for aircraft operation , rental , traffic distribution and price transparency .
I think that , this way , a better enforcement of the social legislation regarding rest periods and working time is ensured and the principle of non-discrimination between air operators and the principle of consulting airports about the air traffic distribution are introduced .
The amendments proposed to the new regulation also include the principle of conurbation , which represents a grouping of localities served by the same airport .
This concept might also be used for the development of other types of infrastructures .
I think there should be no discrimination between passengers according to their place of residence or that of the tourism offices .
For the people to have confidence in air services all air operators should meet the quality and safety standards and , especially , the ticket should indicate all applicable charges and tariffs explicitly .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you sincerely for this debate and Parliament 's commitment to seeing through to completion this text , which is essential to the functioning of the single aviation market .
I think that we now have a balanced text that incorporates the most important changes and the European Parliament 's main amendments at first reading .
I especially welcome the improvements proposed in relation to the place of establishment and the changes to the text on the conditions for granting and revoking licences , public service obligations and the distribution of traffic between airports .
However , above all , I support the position expressed by the majority of Members who spoke this evening concerning price transparency and passengers ' rights .
I would reiterate here in this debate that is very important for us to defend passengers ' rights , to defend citizens ' rights .
We are thus all committed to transparency .
I hope that when the regulation is applied it will be respected by all the airlines and by all those who sell tickets .
The Commission will ensure that passengers ' rights are always respected .
I am therefore delighted with the quality of the work that has been done and I think that the rapporteur has done an excellent job , with the help of the Commission and all those who participated in this debate , above all to defend passengers ' rights .
rapporteur . - ( LT ) Even without knowing tomorrow 's results , I would like to thank my fellow Members and the Commission representatives .
I found this work interesting , useful , and full of challenges and pleasant moments .
I would also like to wish the Commission success in implementing and monitoring this Regulation .
As we well know , high prices would bring about hard times for most aviation companies and our priority would then be to defend passengers ' rights , which could be especially unpleasant in case of bankruptcy .
Once again , thank you to you all for your cooperation .
( CS ) Madam President , I was also hoping to speak under the ' catch the eye ' procedure about this report but I understand that there will probably not be enough time now .
I would like it to be recorded in the Minutes at least then that I also wanted to speak about this report on air transport .
Mrs Roithová , we must maintain a time order .
Five Members had already asked to speak and you had spoken on the previous report .
We try to keep a balance so that we do not have the same Members speaking on all the reports , because the clock is ticking .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Towards a new culture of urban mobility ( debate )
The next item is the report by Reinhard Rack , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on ' Towards a new culture of urban mobility ' .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , last autumn the Commission presented a Green Paper entitled ' Towards a new culture of urban mobility ' and it plans to submit an action plan containing specific measures in a few months ' time .
The European Parliament felt it had a duty and responsibility as co-legislator for future measures and as a budgetary power to state its position on this Green Paper in good time .
We approached the subject confidently and carefully : confidently in the sense that we want to say where the European Parliament believes this road should take us , and carefully because we do not want to question the Commission 's right of initiative but will await its detailed proposals .
There was broad consensus on this subject during the discussions in the Committee on Transport .
I want briefly to address a few important questions .
A key theme that rightly concerned many colleagues was subsidiarity .
They asked who should be a player in this regard and whether it was a matter for Europe in the first place and felt that perhaps we should not get too carried in making decisions , and so forth .
Our answer would be this : we are assuming that the presentation of this Green Paper followed by the action plan will not affect the existing delineation of areas of responsibility in Europe but that all the competent players , the European Union , the Member States and the regional and local authorities , will make use of their competences and , crucially , coordinate them sensibly among themselves .
In that respect , we would like to see an integrated overall concept and to see urban decisions on what is in fact right and important for the individual municipalities .
Another issue is to ensure that transport matches people 's needs .
We should not mislead European citizens in the European internal transport market .
If there is a green zone in one town and another green zone in the next town , that should not mean they face a new world simply by crossing a local authority border .
We expect European harmonisation here and we expect Europe to set out best practices .
A third issue is accompanying measures .
We held a hearing at which mayors complained that they often receive instructions from Europe and then , when it comes to implementing them , find that the Member States have left them out in the cold or , to be more precise , left them without funds to implement those European measures .
We want to pay special attention to passengers with disabilities .
In my view , and as I keep repeating , that also applies to men and women with small children .
They do not have a very easy time on public transport or transport in general .
We want to send out messages in and to the industry in good time , urging it to develop better logistics and new technologies .
Most importantly , we want to raise awareness among the people .
They themselves must help to ensure that we really can achieve a healthy environment through the transport system .

Mr Cramer will cycle , Mr Marinescu will go home on a new high-speed train , Mr Costa will use the vaporetto , Vice-President Tajani will travel by scooter in Rome and I like to travel on foot in my home town .
If we do all those things , we will indeed bring about a small but not insignificant improvement .
I will conclude by thanking the two Commissioners who have considered this issue in depth here , Vice-President Jacques Barrot and Vice-President Antonio Tajani , who is now the Commissioner responsible .
I thank the shadow rapporteurs who also worked on this report and the colleagues who helped bring about a good result in committee .
Let me also thank my colleagues in the committee , in my group and in my own office for their work .
I hope it will produce a further good result .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Rack for the text he has drawn up with Parliament 's assistance .
I am also grateful to him for his lively speech .
I shall go and visit him so that next time , as he suggests , we can find an intermodal means of moving around our cities .
Parliament 's work , picking up on a Commission initiative , has without doubt been positive , as has the debate , which has focused on three fundamental points : how can urban mobility best be improved in Europe , the added value of Community-level intervention and the redistribution of tasks between the various levels of government .
The Commission 's Green Paper launched the process for engaging in European-level activities in the field of urban mobility and transport .
It puts urban mobility at the heart of the European debate about the best means of ensuring mobility on a basis that is sustainable for society today and for future generations .
The main reasons behind our debate are concerns about climate change , congestion , the health effects especially of atmospheric pollution , security of energy supplies and road safety .
The many amendments tabled during discussion of the draft report by members of the Committee on Transport , and the helpful contributions from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Committee on Regional Development , show how strongly the European Parliament feels about urban mobility , a subject which affects the overwhelming majority of EU citizens .
As you know , the consultation on the Green Paper ended on 15 March and we received more than 400 contributions .
The points of view of all concerned , and of course the proposals from the European institutions , will provide valuable input into the forthcoming action plan on urban mobility , which I intend to present this coming autumn .
Let us now come to the report .
I liked the invitation contained in the text to develop a broad-based European urban mobility strategy and the acknowledgement that Community-level action offers clear added value in some spheres .
The report identifies the main spheres of action in a structured , targeted and also very clear fashion , and so I would compliment Professor Rack once again .
It analyses the EU 's role in various areas : legislation , standardisation and harmonisation , the exchange of best practice and research .
In addition , it raises the need for coordination between authorities and an integrated approach , as well as the responsibility of individuals and the question of funding .
I welcome most of the ideas set out in the text , but I should like to dwell in particular on a few specific points among the many covered .
I note , for example , that the report confirms the need for comparable data and the need to take account of urban mobility in other spheres of action where the European Union has legislative powers .
In this regard , the proposed European platform bringing together data , best practices and policy information , in a manner that avoids red tape , undoubtedly deserves further attention .
I fully agree as to the importance of EU guidance on the standardisation and harmonisation of transport systems , especially for green zones and road pricing , if we wish to avoid piecemeal solutions developed in various European cities .
My support also extends to the proposals on the social dimension , envisaged for specific groups , and to the proposals on improving education , training and awareness-raising campaigns , which could contribute to changing the behaviour of citizens .
As far as financing is concerned , I agree with the report that , beyond making the best possible use of Community funds , new financial instruments also need to be devised .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fully endorse the observation contained in the report : there is an urgent need for new thinking and innovative concepts on mobility in our cities .
With all due respect for EU principles and legislation , we must promote and not hamper creativeness and flexibility at local , regional and national level .
That is what subsidiarity is all about .
Your valuable report makes an important contribution to European policy-making in this area : an area close to the hearts of citizens , businesses and politicians throughout Europe , most particularly local officials .
Thank you once again for your attention and congratulations to the rapporteur on his excellent work .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Rack , on his report .
If the 80 % of people who live in cities would adopt the recommended measures on the culture of urban mobility , life would become much better and healthier for everyone .
This is a good example of the way in which the EU takes care of its citizens .
We need to expand the public transport and bicycle route network and encourage the use of more environmentally friendly means of transport .
However , the most important and most difficult task is to change people 's habits .
For example , in Lithuania around 50 % of all car journeys are less than a kilometre .
Even young and healthy people forget they have legs and that the bicycle has already been invented .
With the Commission 's help we should be able to find different financial levers to eliminate or reduce the traffic jams that paralyse the life of cities and their inhabitants .
It is either movement , mobility , or suffocation among iron monsters , spitting out pollutants .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Development . - ( PL ) Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Mr Rack on his report and , as a representative of the Committee on Regional Development , I would like to say that there was very good cooperation between the committees , namely the Committee on Transport and the Committee on Regional Development .
I hope this will serve as an example for future projects .
Mr Rack 's report considers important concepts in many different areas .
These include , on the one hand , technical and organisational problems relating to the environment and , on the other , issues relating to social affairs as well as matters relating to area planning and town planning .
This report also examined in depth the issue that Mr Rack spoke about , in other words the practical functioning of the subsidiarity principle .
The report deals with an issue that is undoubtedly part of the competences of local authorities , but goes beyond their area of activity .
According to the principle of subsidiarity , however , entities at another level should assist cities in this regard : this is what the principle of helpfulness involves .
Entities at another level should give assistance to cities and they should also , first and foremost , help Member States and also the European Union by creating organisational and financial possibilities , financing pilot studies and experimental research .
This report touches on something that we know about in theory , but here we can see what an integrated approach means in practice .
It is an approach that requires many different types of factors to work together .
We look forward to further work by the European Commission on this subject and we are very keen to see the action plan .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if Europe is at all rich , it is rich in its variety .
We must always remember that when we talk about urban transport , so that we preserve and maintain that richness for the long term .
I am , therefore , a little worried , after hearing the first speakers , that we will lose the balance that our rapporteur set out in his report between what can be decided locally , under the subsidiarity principle , and the little we can contribute here as a European Union .
If that happened we would have uniform European towns and lose the richness of Europe .
Let me put it quite plainly : local and regional authorities that have already tackled the problems of organising transport do not need the Green Paper , while local and regional authorities that have hitherto refused to address this issue will not be more likely to do so as a result of the Green Paper or our resolution .
We must realise , however much we love going into details , that Europe will succeed only if its citizens accept it at local level .
They will not accept it at local level if they feel that it is interfering in all areas of their local life .
That is why I expressed strong criticism , in committee too .
I very much regret that the Committee on Transport and Tourism did not accept my amendments in committee because I fear that in the end - starting of course with best practice , with Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund incentives - we are doing something we should really be keeping out of .
My request is , therefore , that we take the compromise now agreed in committee as the furthest we will go .
Let us not go beyond that as a result of the many amendments that have now been tabled .
Europe will not be successful if it interferes in every area of people 's lives .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Rack , for the good cooperation .
We have achieved a great deal together , I think .
He knows that we wanted to be more ambitious on some points and that we wanted to sum up what the contribution of the European Union should be in more concrete terms .
I understand that some members of his own group do not agree with that .
Having said that , this report contains quite a lot of good elements and so gets full support from our group .
To start with , it recognises that cities throughout Europe are facing the same challenges .
There is congestion everywhere , and that is a problem that leads to a great deal of stress and wasted time everywhere .
There are accidents everywhere .
I think that half of the accidents in the European Union happen in urban areas .
We also all want to meet the ambitious climate targets that we have set ourselves .
Most towns and cities also struggle to finance their infrastructure and the European Union can play a positive supporting role in all these areas , although - and I readily acknowledge this - the situation varies from place to place .
However , we can learn from each other and so I think that the idea of a kind of observatory or platform for urban mobility , in which it will be possible to exchange good ideas , should be developed .
Towns and cities should be encouraged or even required to put mobility plans on paper in order to bring all the interested parties together , get a consensus on a common approach and conclude positive agreements .
We believe that the European Union should take on the role of director in the fields of harmonisation , standardisation , interoperability , and research and development to give new projects , including public transport projects , a better chance of success and to facilitate the dissemination of sustainable solutions throughout Europe .
Commissioner , in conclusion , we are counting on you to quickly come up with as concrete an action plan as possible with a clear division of responsibilities between the different policy levels , but a plan that will certainly include a major role for the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Reinhard Rack for his excellent report and I thank the Commission for having firstly drawn up the Green Paper , which is now the subject of a broad consultation and which is going to result in an action plan by the end of 2008 .
With my colleagues in the URBAN-Housing Intergroup , especially Jan Olbrycht , who has just spoken , we invited Commissioner Barrot to discuss this subject with us last year .
That debate was particularly lively , notably on the topic of the integrated approach .
Commissioner , in the brief time I have available , I would like to highlight the benefits of looking at that very aspect in greater detail .
There is a fundamental link between urban planning concepts and urban mobility .
When I say ' urban planning concepts ' , I actually mean the absence of urban planning concepts .
I will mention four elements to illustrate this .
Firstly , it is clear that our urban areas are currently growing , whether they are small , large or medium-sized , with the appearance of commercial , industrial , housing and leisure sectors and zones .
Every time new zones are developed , mobility develops .
Need I remind you that our urban areas have grown by 11 % in terms of their size , while their populations have grown by just 2.5 % ?
That in 10 years , from 1990 to 2000 , the expansion of urban areas was three times the size of Luxembourg ?
These figures demonstrate that every time an urban area grows , our journeys get longer , no matter where they take us .
Finally , within these urban areas , in 10 years the number of daily trips in private cars increased by 70 % and each individual trip increased by 20 % .
These figures , these examples , clearly show that without a successful integrated approach that takes into consideration the different urban parameters , even with more efficient , safer , more intelligent vehicles , even with faster , more comfortable public transport , we will not totally resolve the problem of urban mobility and we will not resolve the problem facing our fellow citizens , who will always be forced to make an increasing number of longer , costly and unpleasant trips .
These urban planning concepts , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , must take account of urban transport not just in terms of the cities and towns , the urban territory , but also , as my colleague Mr Rack said , at a suburban level .
There must be a degree of consistency for all of our citizens who work , relax , learn , etc. in this urban and suburban perimeter .
However , the problem that arises , and this has just been mentioned , is how to enable the different administrative structures , the different districts and the other territories to coexist .
That is why , Commissioner , we are asking you to give special consideration to the integrated approach in your future action plans .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I too want to offer warm thanks to the rapporteur .
However , I find it hard to say anything positive about the end result of this report .
Europe 's towns are still left to stand on their own ; they are not being helped .
Instead of creating a concrete and helpful framework for urban areas in the 27 Member States , the majority of committee members opted for a superficial text : towns are to become greener , there will be less noise and a better quality of life !
The report is as vague about how to achieve that as the EU Commission was in its Green Paper on urban mobility .
Mr Rack offered us a sushi bar choice of menus for dealing with transport problems .
At most , however , the report presents us with a list of added ingredients but no real recipe .
There is an urgent need for action at EU level , however .
Eight out of ten EU citizens live in towns and they nearly all suffer from the same problems : congestion , accidents , noise and pollution .
Our towns also play a crucial role in the context of climate change .
Urban traffic is responsible for around 40 % of all CO2 emissions and 70 % of all greenhouse gases .
The EU will not achieve its own climate protection target unless there is less traffic and people shift from cars to trains , buses , bicycles and walking .
Emissions from traffic have in fact risen by 30 % since 1999 , while emissions from other sources have fallen by 10 % .
That means they have virtually swallowed up the achievements in other areas .
Nevertheless , the majority of Members feel that even to quote these figures in the report as an indication of the link between urban traffic and climate change is a step too far .
At tomorrow 's vote , the Greens will table amendments in an attempt to inject the report on urban mobility with the substance it so urgently needs .
Firstly , we want to adjust EU cofinancing to make it more environmentally friendly ; specifically , according to our amendment , that means that we should allocate 40 % to the railways and 10 % to expanding cycling .
Up until now , 60 % of EU transport funds has gone to road projects , with only 20 % going to local public transport and rail transport .
No wonder , then , that we are achieving the opposite of what we keep saying we want .
Secondly , we only want to grant EU funds if towns can submit a sustainable mobility plan , which would put paid to a great number of senseless road projects .
Thirdly , we want to improve transport safety by setting a general speed limit of 30 km / hr , while allowing towns to set their own , higher speeds for certain roads .
If we want to do more about the environment and climate protection and ensure safe transport , Europe 's towns will need substantial EU aid .
They will only get that if our amendments are adopted .
If they are rejected and if another report that does not resolve a single problem is adopted , the Greens will not vote for it .
First of all , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Rack for his hard work .
Urban mobility is a complicated issue for policy preparation at European level .
It is not easy to demarcate responsibilities and that can be seen in the report we are debating here .
On the one hand , the report states in various places that the European Union has a role in the realisation of urban mobility plans , and then elsewhere in the report it states that urban mobility is a responsibility of the European cities and local authorities and , on the grounds of the subsidiarity principle , the European Union should only have a limited regulatory role .
In short , weighing up responsibilities in this area is difficult .
I do think though that the rapporteur , Mr Rack , has dealt with this issue well and has worded the text well with regard to the subsidiarity principle .
I have a couple of criticisms , however .
Firstly , I think that the report has become too detailed .
This creates the impression that it is possible to design a European framework that could be used to solve all the problems in all European cities .
I understand the detailed list of topics to be considered for harmonisation and the list of areas for action and they are well intentioned , but I question whether we can take them much further .
I think that a general approach would have been more practical .
This would have put more emphasis on exchanging best practices and on technological developments in the area of urban mobility .
I realise that this approach is less ambitious , but I think that we should remember that urban mobility is a matter for the European cities and local authorities .
What is more , the list of topics for harmonisation also contains some social norms .
This does not seem a good idea to me .
Social norms , such as the mobility of disadvantaged travellers , are very closely bound to individual Member States and so are better not harmonised or standardised .
Despite these criticisms , I will vote for the report .
The fact is that Mr Rack has succeeded in clearly emphasising in the report that a safe , sustainable and effective urban mobility structure is a matter for the cities and local authorities of Europe and I think that this is where the great merit of this report lies .
The European Union can extend a helping hand by means of directed funding and the exchange of relevant information , but EU regulations are not needed in this area , nor are they desirable .
I would like to finish by saying that we should not lose sight in all this of the fact that the responsibility for urban transport systems remains with the towns and cities of Europe .
They will have to develop systems and work effectively with all the relevant authorities .
Finally , I would point out that the success of these transport systems stands or falls with citizen participation .
They also have a responsibility to contribute to the goals of the urban mobility plans : sustainable , safe and reliable transport in urban areas .
( RO ) The urban policy does not fall under the European Union competence , but of the local and regional authorities , according to the principle of subsidiarity .
Nevertheless , the degree of urbanization in the Union has been continuously increasing .
Over three hundred million citizens live in cities and the percentage of urban population will exceed 80 % by 2020 .
Urbanization and agglomeration have become a European problem because they affect the wellbeing of all European citizens .
We are actually dealing with an increased demand for new and diversified means of transport , which causes an increase in the energy consumption , the degree of land use , and a progressive degradation of the air and soil quality .
Although there are major differences at the level of national legislations , as regards the urban transport and the land use planning , the European Community institutions could get actively involved in coordinating the durable urban development and , first of all , the development of urban transport services and submit efforts to ensure the efficient dissemination of good practices .
Our colleague Rack offers us eloquent examples of solutions provided both by modern technologies , such as virtual mobility , and by the consequent application of multimodality , optimization of the use of infrastructures , the use of alternative means of transport .
Education and private initiative play an essential role for a Europe of green cities and the overall Community policies should take into consideration all long-term costs and provide pertinent suggestions , efficient interregional and cross-border cooperation mechanisms , as well as the necessary information resources .
The structural and cohesion funds , mainly the major cause of urbanization , by their appropriate use at local and regional level , should become the most efficient and available resource for solving this challenge that 21st century Europe is dealing with .

( ES ) Madam President , I first wish to thank the Commission for helping to provide our citizens with solutions to mobility problems such as road safety , congestion and the environmental impact : the overwhelming majority of our citizens experience and suffer from these problems in their towns and cities .
Given the reservations and reticence expressed concerning the need to ensure that this kind of action is governed by the subsidiarity principle , I feel that not only do such proposals generate some important and necessary debates ; they also provide a response to serious and pressing questions of national , regional and , above all , local governments .
We are discussing this issue today within the context of the major debate on measures to combat climate change in the run-up to the great debate on the globalisation of costs in the various means of transport .
These debates are essential , but they must be reflected in practice in people 's daily lives in their surroundings , such as cities .
We therefore welcome this splendid effort by our institution in the report by Mr Rack .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his accurate remarks , and thank him for his willingness to include my amendments , thereby accepting , encouraging and enhancing a number of essential issues such as alternative healthier forms of urban mobility - walking , bicycles or public transport - and incentives for road safety , which , as has been pointed out here , shows its most harmful and aggressive side in urban environments .
There must be consideration not only for persons with reduced mobility , but also for people with children in pushchairs , who are often neglected , as demonstrated by the urban obstacles crowding our pavements .
The report also calls for efficient goods transport , including reliable loading and unloading systems to facilitate last-mile operations , acknowledging the need to promote the co-existence of mobility of people and goods .
In addition , it supports improved use of intelligent transport systems , with requests for accessibility and interoperability alongside flexible instruments .
Finally , it encourages active participation in local urban mobility forums .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what are we actually doing here ?
We are dealing with a matter for which we have no competence .
This Green Paper on urban mobility was based on an manufactured competence , as the Commission has admitted in private .
I was told that because of the climate debate and because 80 % of Europeans live in towns , the Commission has now declared itself competent in this area .
Goodness me , I would be just as justified in saying that 80 % of Europeans live in a family or once lived in a family .
So let us now take family policy in hand . That would be an equally manufactured competence and impossible to justify .
With regard to urban mobility , the only thing that can be promoted at European level is the exchange of good practice , nothing else .
To adopt legislative measures here would equate to a breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
We may assume that the local authorities themselves are keen to deal with their transport problems , because those problems are linked to the way the economy works and to internal , urban trade .
At the same time it is , of course , a question of the quality of life of the town-dwellers , who might otherwise leave town .
The problems facing our towns may be similar , but they simply are not identical .
That is why we need local actors to take decisions tailored to their area .
Urban transport policy must be decided and formulated locally and the local authorities must be in charge of planning .
I would warn Members against calling for legislative measures in this report or possibly interpreting the text as including such measures after the event .
I also warn against creating even more mountains of data and perhaps even more red tape .
Establishing a European platform for urban mobility would certainly do that .
No doubt we would then end up with yet another European agency , which would produce even more paper and , of course , also cost a good deal of money .
That is the way to set the citizens against Europe .
We cannot afford that .
I ask you to ensure that we do not end up with that situation .
( SK ) As an architect / town planner , who also has many years ' experience as a regional politician in local and regional government , I can certainly confirm that the issue of urban mobility is extremely topical and complex , and I want to thank the rapporteur for his approach .
Many cities often do not realise that they can prevent problems concerning transport organisation through thorough planning of local road infrastructure .
When deciding to visit European cities , tourists also take into account their accessibility and the way transport in them is organised .
Traffic jams certainly do not make towns and their centres in any way attractive .
There will be no success without innovative solutions , such as easing the traffic burden , exploiting alternative means of transport such as cycling or carpooling .
I believe that research and development offers considerable , as yet unexploited potential when it comes to new safer and environmentally-friendly means of transport and sustainable transport systems .
Everyone must help to solve our transport problems : the EU , cities and their inhabitants , as well as tourists .
I think that it is also important to divide the responsibility between the EU and cities .
In this regard , the EU should have a clearly defined role .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to pay tribute to the report by my colleague Reinhard Rack .
This new culture of urban mobility is a true revolution in terms of our way of thinking and travelling .
To paraphrase the famous saying by Sieyès on the Third Estate : ' What is urban mobility in a city ?
Everything .
What has it been hitherto ?
Nothing .
What does it desire ?
To be something . '
In using these words , I am expressing my complete agreement with this revolution in our behaviour and the urgent need for an integrated and general European approach to this new urban mobility , with emphasis on the consistency of the major principles of successful urban planning .
I also want to express my complete support for the eventual provision of a standard basis of solutions that allows a tailor-made set of measures to be drawn up for each territorial level .
Commissioner , that implies that the Commission must assume its financial responsibilities and put its approach into practice .
During one speech , our colleague mentioned this method , using the image of a ' sushi bar ' where Europe would propose different dishes and the urban areas could then take them or leave them .
This flexible approach must not skip a course : our cities .
We need all the ingredients to be able to revolutionise urban mobility and establish this new culture .
( CS ) Madam President , please accept my apologies for speaking too early .
Now I would like to take part in the debate on the report by Mr Rack on a new culture of urban mobility .
As I have said before , I like cycling in Brussels and in Strasbourg , where I enjoy the safety of the cycle paths and I particularly the consideration shown by motorists , as if not just pedestrians but also cyclists have complete priority here .
I am much more afraid at home , in Prague , where I see tourists barely managing to dodge the cars , and I prefer not to cycle at home anymore .
A different culture is linked to a different tradition of rules of the road , where the stronger party was the winning party .
I believe that increasing European mobility implies both harmonisation of the rules of the road in the Member States and a gradual convergence of traffic offence penalties .
Different rules will sustain a different culture .
Consequently , for the spoiled foreign cyclists and pedestrians ( and I consider myself to be one of them ) , the roads in the new Member States present a huge risk .
( RO ) I congratulate Mr. Rack on his report .
The Union needs a new urban mobility culture , in which public transportation and bike riding should become more important .
For the development of public transportation , policies are required at local , regional or national level for partially or completely subsidizing public transportation services for certain categories of people such as : pupils , students , pensioners , and disabled persons .
I consider it necessary that urban development and planning be carried out in an integrated manner , also taking into consideration the current and future needs in the field of urban transportation .
The introduction of fast trains connecting city centres to marine and railway stations , airports and , especially , to peripheral regions , should be a priority in the development and modernization of large cities .
The localities with access to an inland waterway could develop an intermodal transport that would reduce pollution caused by road traffic in large cities .
The intelligent transport systems and the development of green areas should be integrated into the new urban mobility policy .
( ES ) I wish to thank you very much for your generosity , Madam President .
This is not the first time that I have had to return to the floor due to time restrictions .
I merely wished to say in relation to Mr Rack 's report that I had another two issues to comment on , and I feel the Commissioner is quite sensitive to these .
Firstly , I wish to mention the lack of incentives for new professional profiles in connection with urban mobility .
I feel that arrangements should be made for them and that they should be taken into account in view of the progress they represent .
The second issue is what we originally envisaged as a broad participatory consultation to anticipate the social impact of measures such as urban tolls , for example , which is a major consideration .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , I wish to recall the true significance of the word subsidium in the language of my ancestors , Latin .
Subsidium means help , so subsidiarity means helping .
I say this to allay the fears of Mr Ferber , Mr Marinescu and Mrs Sommer : the Commission has no intention of taking the place of local , provincial or regional authorities .
It is not up to Europe to determine local administrative policies , nor is it up to Europe to decide what to do in individual cities .
Subsidium means helping : thus Europe , the European Commission , the European institutions can contribute to providing solutions , they can contribute to opening up a debate , they can contribute to an exchange of information between cities , with a view to finding solutions - common ones if possible - that may be of use to citizens , to facilitate their lives , their travel and their safety , be it on the roads or in terms of protecting their health against pollution .
Financial contributions are of course a possibility .
I would recall the Civitas programme , which achieved good results and may be an example worth following .
In the action plan which I intend to put forward - whose purpose is to coordinate and propose ideas for action - I shall draw on all the suggestions that have come to the fore during today 's debate , in an attempt to give ideas and suggestions , always in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity , because I am well aware what powers the Union has .
I do believe , however , that since the majority of EU citizens live in large cities , the European Union has a duty to help .
Helping - I repeat - does not mean replacing : I too am convinced that it is up to local authorities , elected by the people , to solve the people 's problems .
However , the European Union does have an important role to play , be it only helping and coordinating a few initiatives and disbursing some funds , in order that our citizens can be better governed by local authorities and their officials .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , I thank all my colleagues who have contributed to what has been a very lively debate here this evening and certainly had some rough edges .
In that regard , the past 40 or 50 minutes have mirrored what happened in the Committee on Transport and Tourism over the past months .
There , too , we saw fairly wide differences of opinion .
We had to vote on more than 350 draft amendments .
We managed to reduce those 350 draft amendments to a relatively consistent text , which was then adopted by a very large majority in committee , i.e. 27 in favour and 2 against .
I would be glad if we could achieve a similar result at the vote tomorrow and will do my best to ensure it .
One group was not happy with the outcome of the discussions in the Committee on Transport and has made that very plain again today .
We have also heard the appeal to colleagues to change their minds tomorrow .
I would be most grateful to see my colleagues continue the cooperation we saw in the Committee on Transport and concentrate on getting the text we drafted in committee through plenary tomorrow .
In that context , I would ask them to take a look at the recommendations the rapporteur has set out in tomorrow 's voting list .
For the rest , I look forward to continuing to work on this subject and wish the Commission and the Vice-President every success with the action plan and their further activities in this field .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) In my opinion , a new approach of urban mobility is essential in a modern city .
In Europe , the economic growth in the 50s and 60s has led to the expansion of the horizontal city , whose population has left the city centre in favour of suburbia .
This model , favoured by the proliferation of the use of automobiles , is no longer sustainable today , in the context of the unprecedented price increase for fuels and the concerns about climate change at a global level , changes mainly determined by the pollution caused by the internal combustion engine .
One should welcome the initiatives allowing European cities to plan efficient public transportation systems , which meet the environmental protection requirements and are accessible to everyone , as well as the integration into the urban planning of alternative means of transport valid for short distances or varying according to the time of the day .
Another challenge is the urban goods transport , which is essential for the good economic development of the city .
For this reason , I consider it to be important to implement practices such as experience exchanges between the administrations of European cities , urban optimisation databases at European level , as well as to encourage citizens to change the way in which they approach the issue of personal transportation in the urban environment .
Technical requirements and administrative procedures for commercial transportation by aeroplane ( EU OPS ) / use of child-restraint safety devices ( OPS 1.730 ) ( debate )
The next item is the oral question - B6-0169 / 2008 ) by Eva Lichtenberger , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism to the Commission , on technical requirements and administrative procedures for commercial transportation by aeroplane ( EU OPS ) / use of child-restraint safety devices ( OPS 1.730 ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate was triggered by a German WDR television report that showed that the safety belts now in common use in planes for infants and small children are not necessarily safe .
Crash tests have shown that these belts , which are the devices most commonly used by European airlines , may actually endanger children and cause serious injuries .
At a time when we are considering the EU OPS , i.e. the technical safety provisions , and they will soon enter into force , I was concerned to ensure that we resolve this safety problem , which is why I showed my colleagues in the Committee on Transport and Tourism the video on the subject .
In my view , it is quite crucial to take a serious look at the crash tests that have been conducted and that have shown that these belts do not save a child in the event that take-off is aborted or a plane lands rapidly and to seek an immediate solution .
I think that is extremely urgent .
The current , proposed rules will continue to authorise these belts , disregarding the fact that far more stringent safety provisions apply to children even in cars , in most European states at least .
Even if emergency landings or aborted take-offs are very , very rare - for which we are most thankful and which is also to do with technical rules - we cannot allow infants and small children to be exposed to this risk .
Anyone who has seen this crash test will be convinced that we cannot allow that .
My colleagues in the Committee on Transport looked into this issue with me and I am very grateful that they too took it very seriously .
We want to find a good solution to this problem .
A few safety experts have now objected that there is not a single known case of this kind of belt proving dangerous .
Unfortunately , there is a macabre background to that .
If infants or children do not occupy a seat they are not recorded in the statistics .
The underlying facts have been known for years .
The German Ministry of Transport has drawn attention to this and said it did not want to go back to a lower safety level .
The association of German airlines , however , described the listing of the risks as populism .
I must say in all honesty that this can only be regarded as a cynical approach .
That raises several important questions .
Which authority actually authorised this loop belt , this additional belt for small children ?
On what basis , according to what technical standards did it do so ?
I am aware that authorisation has been granted for an expanding belt for corpulent persons , but so far as I know there is no authorisation for the additional belt for children .
Lap-holding , which some airlines offer as an alternative , is a very old method .
It was first recorded when planes in the 1920s still took off at about 65km / h .
We should not and cannot wait that long .
I do not think we can leave this decision to the Member States , because we face tough competition in the aviation sector and of course the pressure of that competition produces the risk that we do not create the best safety system .
We need a European solution .
I ask you : when will we have it ?
Is there any chance of seeing it today and is there any chance that we will find a sensible solution for the transitional period ?
Finally , millions were spent on ' liquid on planes ' without serious debate .
In the present case we must invest in the safety of children .
We need to do so .
( Applause )
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , Mrs Lichtenberger , I shall reply to you in Italian because I know that you are a scholar of my mother tongue .
It is a pleasure for me to do so .
Thank you for having raised an issue that is highly topical and relates to the safety of our citizens .
I said during the meeting I had with the Committee on Transport that the protection of our citizens ' health is a priority , as are citizens ' rights , especially those of the smallest citizens who are unable to defend their own interests and are therefore dependent on us to try and protect their safety as best we can .
The problem you have raised is a very real one .
Doubts abound , and the European Aviation Safety Agency itself is aware of a number of controversial studies according to which there are problems concerning child-restraint safety devices .
That is why , faced with a set of contradictory and incomplete information , the Agency launched a study in 2007 to obtain a more reliable scientific response on this matter .
The current provisions - Regulation ( EEC ) No 3922 / 1991 requiring the use of child safety devices - leave Member States free to choose .
In raising this matter , you ask for the European Union to give Member States a definite response , saying : ' Beware , the system you are using does not work and does not guarantee child safety ' .
The scientific assessment will be completed by October 2008 , just a few months from now .
Therefore , as soon as a definite answer to the question of safety has been received - in other words , what the European Aviation Safety Agency regards scientifically as the safest means of guaranteeing that children can travel by air at reduced risk - it will be my duty to propose immediately the measures needed to improve child safety devices .
I do know that the proposed solution , namely that of child safety seats , similar to those used in cars , is one of the options being examined by the European Aviation Safety Agency .
However , before giving an answer and before taking action - which I intend to do , because it is right to be concerned about the safety of our smallest citizens - I shall await the scientifically valid response from the European Aviation Safety Agency , which has so far demonstrated its ability to do good work and adhere to rigorously scientific criteria .
Therefore , I repeat , as concerns the timing - you asked me for precise dates - the study by the Agency is scheduled for completion by October of this year ; as soon as I receive feedback from the EASA , I shall see to it that I notify the parliamentary committee and I will intervene directly to give the Member States indications as to the best method of protecting children and guaranteeing their safety .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , we all agree that we need to improve child protection during flights .
The committee certainly agreed on that , otherwise the question would not have arisen in committee .
I am also grateful to the Commission for starting on the preliminary work a long time ago .
Therefore , we are now joining a debate that the Commission has already prepared .
There are three questions that I hope the Commissioner can answer .
He said that the technical data will be available in October .
The question is : when will the Commission draw conclusions from that data , during this term or later ?
There are three very clear questions .
The first concerns the best technical device for protecting children .
The second question , once we have the answer to the first , is whether the European Union should work on a legislative basis or start by issuing recommendations .
It is thus a question of whether to introduce binding European legislation .
Then there is the question of whether we can manage to do that during this legislative term or whether we should start with recommendations and then move on to legislation .
Then there is a third , thorny question , which is not raised in the oral question but that we and you must answer : who is to pay for it ?
That is a question that needs answering .
Let us assume , as Mrs Lichtenberger suggested , that the rules required every small child to occupy a child seat .
If that were so , the child would be taking up an adult 's seat , which raises the question : should we force parents to pay for an extra seat for their small children , or should we charge the safety costs to the community , so that all the other passengers who are not accompanied by children have to contribute to the cost of the child seat ?
We must , therefore , also answer the question - assuming we are willing to equip planes for the safety of children - of who will pay for that safety protection .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , if there is any chance of a risk to human life , we have to take rapid and preventive political action .
There is no other option .
Obviously that also applies to children under the age of two in aeroplanes .
First , I want to thank Mrs Lichtenberger warmly for giving us access to the video showing crash tests of loop belts .
I also want to thank the Commissioner for delivering an opinion that is very much in line with our question , although a few points remain to be clarified .
These new requirements for the transportation by aeroplane of small children will be entering into force at the end of next week .
Member States will then have the choice between child seats and loop belts .
As we have seen , however , loop belts can be life-threatening .
My first question is : when at the latest will the Commission present a proposal making it mandatory always to use child seats in aeroplanes ?
That follows the same line as Mr Jarzembowski 's question .
My next question is : what is the Commission 's current implementing strategy ?
Will it present a regulation or how does it intend to implement whatever findings the survey may produce ?
Thirdly , if we continue to allow parts of the necessary EU OPS regulation to be adopted under the new comitology procedure , how can we be sure we can still get and consider a regulation on safe child seats during this legislative term ?
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I have availed myself of the opportunity to respond to what the Commissioner said in order to put a few further questions .
It is crucial to implement the strategy in good time and I too would very much like to see an interim solution .
The reason is that the current EU OPS requirements are being interpreted to mean that all airlines that already offer child seats must revert to using the loop belt .
That needs to be clarified .
That is the way they are being interpreted .
I know that because I have asked around and I have asked people to ring up airlines to inquire about their child safety systems .
That is the information I received .
That is important .
It must be made clear and I believe it really is important .
Secondly , there are child seats on the market that fit into traditional aircraft seats and there are fairly cheap airbags for accompanying passengers that fit into anything and could prove useful .
Clearly , a child is occupying a full seat here .
Let me tell you , however , that mothers have to pay even if they hold the child on their lap - I can show you the bills , which come to more or less 60 % of the adult fare depending on the airline .
I want those who already use a better system to be allowed to go on using that system .
I ask the Commissioner to tell me whether that is or is not the case .
( DE ) Madam President , the reason I am asking for the floor again is not because I have not spoken enough today but because I believe we really are dealing with an important issue , on which Members have also asked pertinent questions .
We expect the Commission to give us a prompt answer and then to take the appropriate action .
I want to address the question of costs .
Basically , I assume , although I do not know if my group fully supports me here , that safety is a matter for the state and must , therefore , be decided and also financed at state level .
At present we have a great many aeroplane safety belts that are not used and are not meant for anybody specific .
In the interest of the safety of our smaller citizens - a matter the Commissioner addressed specifically - we should , therefore , definitely decide to take action , to do so rapidly , and not to let funding prove an obstacle .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , you have not answered the crucial question .
What are you doing in the interim ?
There is a positive solution .
What will you do if a child is fatally injured in the meantime and you are partly responsible because you delayed taking action ?
How will you deal with that ?
You have to ask yourself these questions , as we do , too .
In terms of costs , there is a comparable parallel .
In the case of the rights of persons with disabilities in air transport , the costs are spread across everybody , which is only normal .
To conceive , give birth to and bring up a child is not just a private matter but a public task , a state task .
Everybody has to be prepared to take it on and also to fund it .
In my view at least , that is a matter of course .
Where children up to the age of 14 can travel by train for free , it is also the other passengers who contribute to that cost .
In the sector of air transport in particular , which is exempt from fuel tax - i.e. EUR 14 billion a year - we can surely raise a few euro to give children the best protection they need for the future .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( IT ) Madam President , I would like to reply that I am in possession of a magic wand and can solve all our problems this very evening .
Unfortunately , I am not able to wave a magic wand because I do not possess one .
Instead , I believe that we must tackle these matters in a highly responsible fashion , without saying that they will be resolved tomorrow morning because we have found an instant solution .
If there is no certainty from a scientific point of view as to which are the best devices to ensure children 's safety , we can do nothing here and now , not least because under the existing Regulation it is after all the Member States ' responsibility to take decisions : those using child seats can of course continue to do so if they regard that as the best mechanism .
As I said , as soon as I am presented with clearer facts - with a scientific response backed by evidence that enables me to act - I shall take action .
Otherwise it would be superficial of me to say : ' Fine , I have decided that child seats are better than safety belts ' .
No one is in a position to say that unless they have carried out scientific tests , with physical proof demonstrating that one system is better than another .
I do not believe that this is the way forward .
Rather , I think that answers must be given as soon as the solution is found .
In my opinion , a legislative solution will not be reached before the end of this legislative period .
However , I do believe that the Commission can make it a priority to amend the existing Regulation and try to introduce measures harmonising the amendments to the Regulation , making them mandatory in all Member States .
This will take time , mind you , and we may not manage to approve them before the end of the legislative term .
I would reiterate that I gave certain undertakings at my hearing ; to promise that legislative measures , dozens of legislative measures , will be enacted is not a viable , truthful response .
Undertakings should only be made , announced and entered into on aspects that are achievable .
Regarding my undertaking with regard to child safety : believe it or not , I am a father , and believe it or not , the problem of youngsters is a key concern of mine .
Naturally I cannot be held responsible for everything that happens in the world .
Rather , I believe that a careful investigation must be carried out within a short timeframe - conclusions will be reached in October and I shall receive a response - and as soon as I receive the response I shall do whatever is necessary to attempt to protect the safety of child passengers in the best possible way .
Currently , by decision of the Member States , the airlines use all necessary devices , be they child seats or safety belts .
Once we have some hard , provable scientific evidence we shall be able to provide answers .
Otherwise those answers will be mere opinions , and in this House - even though only a few Members are present - everyone has a different opinion about the science .
Since none of us , I believe , is an expert on the matter and can give scientifically proven answers , I think we must await the findings .
Given that the findings will arrive within two months , thanks to the work of the Aviation Agency , we shall then be able to take action to protect children 's safety , which I consider a priority .
I repeat : I regard the safety of every citizens as a priority , especially that of our weakest citizens , which is why I shall endeavour to ensure that specific safety protection measures are adopted as rapidly as possible in keeping with the legislative timetable .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( DE ) I am very glad that the directive on strategic environmental assessment ( SUP directive ) was adopted .
Environmental compatibility assessment at the initial stage , when a project is being developed , means that any adverse effects can be prevented at once rather than having to be contained or combated at a later stage .
For the future , the SEA procedure promises to take even more account of environmental protection and health aspects when it comes to project decisions .
Sustainable development planning must , from beginning to end , include not just economic and social aspects but also environmental effects .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Report on the ECB annual report for 2007 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Olle Schmidt on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the ECB annual report for 2007 .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , Mr Trichet , Mr Juncker , all eyes are on the European Central Bank .

The current uncertain economic situation and financial unrest are putting the ECB under great pressure .
I am convinced that last week 's interest rate rise was the right decision .
Inflation is a scourge which redistributes assets unfairly .
Europe 's political leaders should be grateful that they have an independent central bank which is prepared to act in order to prevent Europe from lapsing into stagflation , low growth and rising inflation .
Ten years after its introduction , the euro is a world currency .
The security and stability which it has brought to the euro zone and the Union as a whole , including my country , and even to the global economy are something no one could have dreamt of .
Ireland 's ' no ' in the referendum was not a reaction to the strength of the euro .
Asymmetric development of economies between the euro countries may constitute a risk , but it can be remedied by holding fast to the requirements of the stability pact for sound state finances and continued structural transformation in the Member States .
At the same time there is some point in reviewing , after 10 years , how the ECB operates ; scrutiny , transparency , decision-making and the international role of the euro could be improved .
The committee therefore proposes that the ECB should present a new proposal on how decision-making can be made transparent and more effective as the Eurogroup grows .
The ECB should give an account of the discussion between Members of the Governing Council when decisions are taken on the interest base rate in order to increase transparency and enhance predictability .
Its role as leader of the Eurogroup should be strengthened in order better to reflect the significance of the euro in the international context as well .
Giving the market better information on the ECB 's interest rate decisions has long been crucial to Parliament , as is also the publication of the minutes and voting outcome .
The ECB has refused this , however , pointing out that it would create national divisions within the ECB management .
Mr Trichet , we have listened to your views , and the committee is now presenting an amended proposal .
The ECB management must provide clearer information after an interest rate decision , i.e. must state whether unanimity was achieved without a discussion or whether there were difficulties in reaching a common position .
This would be an important step forward in improving the dialogue between the market , us politicians and the ECB .
Inflation has risen to record levels and now stands at around 4 % , which is significantly higher than the inflation target of around 2 % in the medium term .
Not only the dollar but other currencies too have weakened considerably against the euro , which has revived the discussion on the exchange rate .
The enlargement of the euro zone gives the monetary area more weight , but at the same time poses several challenges , since decision-making becomes more unwieldy and differences in economic development between the members increase .
The crisis on the housing loan market has shown that financial stability is a global issue , since crises are no longer limited to a single country or a single region .
The combined efforts of the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England have contributed extensively to keeping the financial system afloat , but they have not resolved the crisis .
This has also made clear the need for better cooperation between central banks and other institutions .
The fact that the ECB and the Fed both warned against underestimating the risk of a crisis on the housing loan market , without any great success , shows the increasing vulnerability of the world 's financial markets .
Here there is good reason to act , which Parliament among others is now doing , for example by following up the Lamfalussy process to modernise the European supervisory structure .
The common monetary policy and the ECB will face great challenges in forthcoming years .
I am convinced that the EU leaders and the ECB will stand the test .
At the same time , however , all the EU leaders must understand that price stability and sound state finances are the pillars of growth and new jobs .
It is remarkable therefore that the French President , not least in his current role as Council President , questions the ECB 's stability targets .
In my opinion Europe 's leaders should instead explain , in an open dialogue with their citizens , the purposes and goals of the monetary policy .
Soaring prices and compensatory wage increases are the worst enemies of prosperity .
President of the European Central Bank . - ( FR ) Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , it is an honour for me to present the 2007 annual report of the European Central Bank to you , as provided for in the Treaty .
Our relations go far beyond the obligations imposed by the Treaty and the European Central Bank appreciates its very close relationship with Parliament .
This is the fourth time I have spoken to you this year .
My colleagues on the executive board have also been in close contact with the European Parliament , particularly on matters such as enlargement of the euro zone , payment systems and the tenth anniversary of Economic and Monetary Union .
2007 to 2008 and explain the monetary policy measures taken by the ECB .
Then I shall make a few comments on points and proposals that you have put forward in your motion for a resolution on the ECB annual report for 2007 .
In 2007 the ECB operated in a challenging environment with rising and volatile commodity prices and , since the second half of 2007 , heightened uncertainty stemming from the ongoing correction in financial markets across the world that was mentioned by the rapporteur .
Despite these developments , the euro-area economy continued to expand at solid rates in 2007 , with annual real GDP growing by 2.7 % .
In the first half of 2008 , moderate ongoing growth in real GDP has continued , although the quarter-on-quarter profile is likely to show significant volatility owing to temporary , in part weather-related , factors .
It is thus important to focus on the medium-term trend when assessing growth developments .
Looking ahead , on the external side , growth in emerging countries should remain robust , supporting euro-area foreign demand .
On the domestic side , the economic fundamentals of the euro area remain sound and the euro area does not suffer from major imbalances .
Unemployment rates and labour force participation have increased significantly in recent years , and unemployment rates have fallen to levels not seen for 25 years .
That being said , the uncertainty surrounding this outlook for growth remains high , with downside risks mainly relating to further unanticipated increases in commodity prices , possible further spillovers from continuing tensions in financial markets to the real economy and increasing protectionist tendencies .
Turning to price developments , in 2007 average annual HICP inflation in the euro area was 2.1 % , slightly above the ECB 's definition of price stability .
However , at the end of the year , substantial increases in international oil and food prices brought inflation to levels well above 2 % .
Since then , inflation in the euro area has risen further and , in the wake of renewed sharp commodity price increases , arrived at the worrying level of around 4 % in mid-2008 .
Looking ahead , the annual HICP inflation rate is likely to remain well above the level consistent with price stability for some time , moderating only gradually in 2009 .
Risks to price stability over the medium term remain clearly on the upside in 2007 and have intensified over recent months .
These risks include possible further rises in commodity prices and unanticipated increases in indirect taxes and administered prices .
In addition the Governing Council is strongly concerned that price and wage-setting behaviour could add to inflationary pressure through broadly-based second-round effects .
First signs are already emerging in some regions of the euro area .
In this context , indexation schemes for nominal wages are of particular concern and should be avoided .
As in 2007 , the monetary analysis in the first half of 2008 has continued to confirm the prevailing upside risks to price stability at medium to longer horizons .
In line with our monetary policy strategy , we take the view that the sustained underlying strength of monetary and credit expansion in the euro area over the past few years has created upside risks to price stability .
To contain prevailing upside risks to price stability over the medium term , the Governing Council further adjusted the monetary policy stance in March and June 2007 .
After a period of unusually high uncertainty in the context of the financial-market correction , in July 2008 the Governing Council has brought the minimum bid rate in the euro system 's main refinancing operations to 4.25 % .
This action underlines the Governing Council 's strong determination to prevent second-round effects and maintain longer-term inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with price stability .
This is the contribution of the ECB 's monetary policy to preserving purchasing power over the medium term and supporting sustainable growth and employment in the euro area .
Following last week 's decision to raise rates , in the Governing Council 's current assessment the monetary policy stance will contribute to achieving price stability over the medium term .
We will continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead .
In the draft resolution you raise a number of issues of relevance for the ECB .
I would like to assure you that we will consider the remarks which have just been made and all the remarks that are in the resolution with great care and we will report back to you accordingly .
Let me perhaps very briefly elaborate on some of these points .
On the monetary policy strategy , I would like to start by welcoming the positive assessment made by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on the ECB monetary policy strategy .
Our two-pillar framework ensures that all information relevant for the assessment of risks to price stability is taken into account in a consistent and systematic manner when taking monetary policy decisions .
In 2007 the Governing Council launched within the euro system a research agenda to enhance further its monetary analysis , as is also proposed in the draft resolution to continue to improve the ECB 's analytical infrastructure .
On transparency , I would also like to welcome the Committee 's recognition that making the minutes of the ECB Governing Council 's meeting available to the public would not necessarily be advisable .
Such a measure would draw attention to individual positions when , in a euro area of 15 and very soon 16 countries , what counts is the position of the collegial decision-maker , the Governing Council , the college .
It could also lead to pressures on Governing Council members to abandon their necessarily euro-area perspective when taking monetary policy decisions .
As already emphasised on previous occasions , I see the introductory statement I present on behalf of the Governing Council at the monthly press conference as an equivalent to what other central banks call ' summary minutes ' .
Together with the ensuing question-and-answer session , the introductory statement provides in real time a comprehensive overview on the part of the Governing Council of the current monetary policy stance .
This communication instrument has served us well in guiding financial-market expectations .
As regards fiscal policies , the ECB shares the view expressed that all Member States must fully respect the Stability and Growth Pact .
A renewed increase in the euro-area aggregate fiscal deficit ratio is projected for 2008 .
There is a clear risk that some countries will not comply with the provisions of the preventive arm of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Achieving sound and sustainable budgetary positions and on this basis allowing the free operation of automatic stabilisers is the best contribution we trust fiscal policy can make to macroeconomic stability .
The draft resolution also refers to the risks posed by economic differentials across euro-area countries , which to some extent reflect structural rigidities and / or inappropriate national policies .
It goes without saying that economic divergences across euro-area countries cannot be addressed by monetary policy .
In order to avoid a protracted period of either low growth and high unemployment or overheating , as a country response to asymmetric shocks , reforms to enhance the resilience to such shocks should be undertaken at the national level .
These include well-designed structural reforms to enhance competition , increase productivity and foster labour-market flexibility .
Let me emphasise again that there is a need for lucid monitoring of national competitiveness developments - including unit labour costs - as recouping ex post loss of competitiveness is a difficult exercise .
In this regard we support Parliament 's call for responsible wages and price policies .
Let me now turn to the issues highlighted by the financial-market correction for crisis prevention and crisis management , which also figure prominently in Parliament 's analysis .
As regards crisis prevention , the market correction highlighted issues for both supervisors and central banks .
Supervisors should make further efforts to reinforce cooperation and exchange of information on a cross-border basis .
It is of crucial importance to further exploit the potential of the Lamfalussy framework .
The Ecofin Council has agreed on certain measures to that end , and attention should now shift towards implementing those orientations .
The market correction , in our view , has not provided any convincing evidence for an overhaul of the current supervisory framework , for instance through the setting-up of a new authority for EU supervision .
Central banks , including the ECB , have to a great extent been effective in identifying the weaknesses and risks to the financial system that materialised as the turmoil unfolded .
I will not elaborate on that .
Looking for the lessons for crisis management , the main issue that emerged during the turmoil concerns the need for a smooth flow of information between central banks and supervisors during the unfolding of a crisis .
Central banks may need supervisory information for the effective performance of their functions in the management of the crisis .
This applies to the Eurosystem as it applies to all central banks .
Supervisors from their side may benefit from central bank information .
Therefore , the envisaged reinforcement of the EU legal basis for information exchange between central banks and supervisors is very strongly supported by the ECB .
Let me conclude with some remarks concerning the integration of Europe 's payment systems .
We noted with satisfaction the positive assessments in the draft resolution about SEPA and TARGET2 .
Concerning the Eurosystem 's TARGET2-Securities initiative , the Governing Council will in the coming weeks decide on the continuation of the T2S project .
It is important to note that all major CSDs have responded positively to our initiative .
President of the Eurogroup and member of the European Council - ( FR ) Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to pay tribute to your rapporteur for the standard of his work .
It is an excellent report that contains all the essential points .
I am pleased to note , from the work of your committee and the report by your rapporteur , that the views of your Parliament broadly coincide with the opinions expressed numerous times by the Eurogroup , of which I am privileged to be President .
This consensus , this broad convergence of views relates in particular to the operations and activities of the Central Bank , which , as always , is overwhelmed by the compliments of your Parliament and the governments I am representing here .
That remark is particularly significant in the light of the various criticisms levelled at the Central Bank over recent weeks and months , when a whole arsenal needed to be put in place for the financial crisis that had hit the entire world .
Initially criticised for being over-active , the European Central Bank was able to note with satisfaction that all the other major monetary authorities had adopted its instruments and methods .
We also agree with the rapporteur when he urges us , the Eurogroup , the ECOFIN Council in general , and our Bank , to draw the appropriate financial conclusions from the crises we have been facing , particularly as regards monitoring of the markets and the transparency we shall need to add to our current mechanisms .
The fight against inflation is the main concern of our fellow citizens .
At the moment , all the surveys show that people are still worried about the loss of purchasing power and the fear that the risks of loss of purchasing power will materialise .
It is therefore the right and duty of the Bank to ensure price stability , an objective set for the Central Bank by the founding Maastricht Treaty .
I would add that we should not incline towards the simple idea that the Central Bank , as the monetary authority , is the only body responsible for price stability and the fight against inflation .
Inflation and the fight against inflation are also a concern and obligation for the euro zone governments .
They too , by supplementing the monetary policies operated by the Central Bank , have to introduce sound policies capable of supporting price stability .
Thus the Eurogroup governments have undertaken , firstly , to make every effort to ensure , in the wage restraint we need , that wages and the public sector do not get out of control .
We are therefore absolutely determined to do everything to avoid unnecessary increases in indirect taxation , both VAT and excise duty .
We have firmly committed ourselves to doing everything possible to see that prices do not exceed the bounds of commonsense .
No one can talk about inflation and price stability without mentioning the independence of the Central Bank , as your rapporteur has , in both his written and his oral reports .
I wanted to point out once again that the independence of the Central Bank is a fundamental principle of Economic and Monetary Union , that the independence of the Central Bank is part of the Pact on which Economic and Monetary Union is founded , that , in the work leading up to the constitutional treaty and the subsequent reforming Treaty of Lisbon , no government suggested even so much as a minor change to the general terms of reference of Central Bank , which focus on price stability .
I therefore think that one day we shall have to put an end to a futile and pointless debate that has nothing to do with the real situation .
That does not mean that we are not all entitled to criticise the Bank , to offer support and advice for its virtuous action , but there is no question of interfering with its independence .
Otherwise , I should like to say that we must not overburden monetary policy with responsibilities .
The Treaty sets the Central Bank the objective of price stability .
We must not add a whole range of economic objectives to its terms of reference but must follow the rule of coherence , which requires that we do not try and make the Bank pursue too many political objectives .
It has an instrument for action , namely monetary policy ; it acts with grace and determination .
As far as exchange policy is concerned , I have noticed a slight ambiguity in the report by Mr Schmidt , in that it gives the impression that exchange policy is the sole , if not the exclusive , province of the Central Bank .
I am quite happy for the Central Bank to play a leading role in any areas to do with exchange , but even so I would like to draw your attention to the provisions of the Treaty that assign shared powers to the Bank and governments for exchange policy . Otherwise , in regard to both exchange policy and monetary policy , and structural policies , we have an ongoing fruitful dialogue with the Bank , to which everyone contributes .
Thus , as part of this regular dialogue , Mr Trichet and I went to China last November to discuss exchange policy with the Chinese authorities , and we shall be doing so again in the latter half of this year .
A slight ambiguity that I have noticed in the report by your committee relates to the external representation of the euro zone .
There again , contrary to what the report indicates , the Central Bank is not solely responsible for taking the necessary steps to strengthen the international role of the euro zone .
That is another area in which competencies are shared .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Welcome to the two Jean-Claudes , President Trichet and President Juncker !

( DE ) On 2 June we had a major celebration in Frankfurt am Main , the city where the D-mark and the euro were introduced - ten years of European Economic and Monetary Union .
It is thanks to the ECB that the euro has become established internationally and that price stability has remained the primary goal at all times .
It was logical that a few days ago the ECB used its most effective weapon to influence the base rate and raise it by a quarter of a per cent .
The aim was , and still is , to curb inflation risks created by high living costs , by escalating petrol and oil prices .
This time the ECB announced its measures weeks ahead .
It acted differently in the Spring : large-scale effective action within a few hours .
The report by Mr Schmidt - an excellent report , on which we worked well together - specifically welcomes that .
In the second half of 2007 the property market collapsed .
In the sub-prime crisis , banks and insurance companies that had been gambling found themselves in difficulties .
The ECB very quickly made adequate funds available , thereby preventing a cross-border collapse .
This speed and effectiveness are evidence of strong action , based on competence and greater trust in your institution .
I think that ECB decisions are generally transparent , based on a good flow of information and open objectives .
In the monetary dialogue the ECB regularly reports to us in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on financial policy decisions .
In my view , there is little point in the publication of minutes of board meetings that is often called for .
National influence has to be prevented .
Unlimited independence is needed .
Normally , Mr President , we MEPs have plenty of occasion to criticise .
Today , may I express high praise for what has been said , with businesses and citizens in good hands , on the one hand to Mr Trichet and your bank , the ECB in Frankfurt am Main , and on the other hand , of course , to the admirable Jean-Claude Juncker .



on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Mr Juncker , Mr Trichet , I would first like to say that this report 's main objective was to analyse the European Central Bank 's activities during 2007 .
However , the discussion in the Committee on Monetary Affairs could obviously not fail to analyse the future challenges to the European Union 's monetary policy and its regulators .
With regard to the remit of the European Central Bank ( ECB ) , as provided for by the Treaties , we have to recognise the value of its work in 2007 .
Although it was unable to avoid monetary turbulence and the consequent crisis in economic growth that we are living through , it succeeded in mitigating many of the negative consequences of the current situation .
I think the main issue remains whether the European Union 's current policies and instruments will allow us to definitively overcome the serious crisis in the world economy and its consequences for Europe .
A crisis is not necessarily a catastrophe .
However , we can only stop a crisis from becoming a catastrophe if we have a correct vision of the future , unencumbered by obsolete orthodoxies and focused on the nature of the new phenomena we have to deal with and overcome .
It is unacceptable to defend non-compliance with the rules in force , and we must contribute to the policy debate by developing proposals that seek to change the current situation .
Mr Schmidt 's report presents some ways forward : improve cooperation between the central banks and regulatory authorities in the struggle to reconcile financial deregulation and regulation ; create a framework for the ECB 's financial management role ; promote coordination of economic policies between the Eurogroup , the Commission and the ECB ; improve transparency of decision-making ; and more than anything else , provide information that allows the public to understand ECB measures ; promote structural reform of the Bank 's governance ; manage interest rates with great care , avoiding speculative interventions and inadequate market discounts , in order not to endanger investment policy , job creation , structural reform and economic growth .
Independently of all this , which is already rather a lot , we also need to understand we are facing a difficult economic and social crisis , the extent of which we do not yet know .
However , we do know it will get a lot worse before it gets better .
We are under no illusions that the remedies at our disposal will be capable of resolving current problems .
To recognise the situation is not to be defeatist , but rather to show good sense .
We are probably on the threshold of identifying the political solutions to our problems .
This is certainly not the end of the world and much less the end of History .
We can only ask the ECB for cooperation , competence , transparency and flexibility with regard to its remit and to never exceed its remit .


on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Trichet and Mr Juncker , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to second the compliment from the previous speaker .
The ECB did indeed act promptly and competently right at the start of the financial crisis , and without that decisiveness the crisis would probably have turned out much worse .
It is not over yet , but through its decisiveness the Bank has not only demonstrated its credibility , it has become a kind of model for competent central bank action and a kind of example for other central banks .
However , I fear that the Central Bank still has the most difficult phase ahead of it .
The next eighteen months will be the really critical test of whether the Bank can still retain its credibility .
I hope it can .
We have galloping oil and raw materials prices , we have escalating food prices and we have inflation .
Mr Trichet spoke of 4 % in the euro zone .
In many Member States it is in fact almost 6 % , and the euro is unbelievably strong .
Thus the risk of stagflation is very real .
We need to ensure that we really ward off that risk at an early stage .
Therefore , in those circumstances , I welcome the fact that the Central Bank proved itself through its interest decisions last week .
Certainly combating inflation is and will continue to be our main task .
When Germany was going through a period of stagflation several decades ago , Chancellor Schmidt said that for him 5 % inflation was better than 5 % unemployment . He was thus directly opposed to the Bundesbank .
It turned out that the policy of the Bundesbank to combat inflation immediately and decisively was the right one .
Germany emerged from stagflation more quickly than many other countries .
I do not have any advice to give the Central Bank .
It knows better than anyone what it has to do .
I have three wishes .
Two of them have already been granted .
I would like to see the dialogue between the Central Bank and the Eurogroup and Mr Juncker , the Eurogroup President , proceed smoothly .
I believe that is now happening .
I would like to see closer cooperation not just between the Central Banks but also between the Central Bank and the supervisory authorities .
That too is already in the offing .
Finally - and here I unfortunately have a negative answer from Mr Trichet - I should like us to receive more information on decision-making .
We do not want to know names , but we want to know if the decision was by a narrow or a clear majority and whether there was a great deal of debate or not much .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am not a great expert on monetary matters , but I am trying to understand what lies behind the current energy and food crisis ; and my conclusion is that we are entering a new era .
We are entering an era in which the resources of the planet are scarce .
Why ?
Because we have a dominant economic model , dating from the 20th century , which was devised and operated by a billion middle class citizens in Europe , the United States and Japan , and small elites elsewhere in the world .
That was the 20th century world .
The 21st century world is one in which there will be hundreds of millions more middle class people , in China , India , Indonesia , South Africa , Nigeria , Mexico , Brazil and other countries .
Therefore our present dominant economic model has a systemic fault .
The system took no account of the fact that resources were limited .
Where are we to find fish when the Chinese eat as much fish as the Japanese ?
Where are we to find petrol when all the Indians are driving Tatamobiles ?
Where are we going to find coal for steelworks all over the world if the emerging countries develop in line with existing technologies ?
That is the deep-seated crisis .
So I have three specific questions .
First , speculation .
Speculation is not , of course , the grassroots movement , but what is to be done for citizens weighed down by rising prices , whilst Total and Eon shareholders and other speculators are weighed down by profits ?
Mr Juncker , you put forward the idea of a speculation tax .
Is any progress being made on that idea , because I think citizens want us , as politicians , to take action ?
My second question : what action can be taken quickly to make the European economy less dependent , especially on imported oil and gas and their prices ?
Could we not consider a major investment programme , with the help of the European Investment Bank , to modernise buildings , public transport , and also , for example , install electric motors and other systems in small and medium-sized enterprises ?
I think that is the only way to reduce consumption , because we are not controlling prices .
My third point relates to the wage indexing system .
Mr Trichet , you and I earn high enough salaries not to be too much affected by energy and food prices .
You undoubtedly earn more than I do , but at the same time you say that the national indexing systems we have in Luxembourg and Belgium should be abolished .
Mr Juncker , is that not the only way people can have extra income at a time when prices are soaring ?
I do not really understand why you are so set against indexing systems .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Thank you , Mr President .
Welcome too to Mr Trichet , President of the European Central Bank , and to Mr Juncker .
I would like first of all to congratulate Mr Trichet on the annual report he has just presented .
Things are not looking good for the euro area , let us make no bones about it .
I fear that in the years ahead many of the doubts voiced at the launch of the euro are going to be proved right .
After a few years of prosperity we shall now see whether the European Central Bank can manage to keep inflation low .
The euro area has a single monetary policy , but each of its sixteen countries has its own economic policy .
Sixteen countries , each with its own HICP and its own policy for promoting employment .
With inflation in the euro area at 4 % , the latest interest rate hike by the European Central Bank means that the real interest rate is 0.25 % .
But that rate is not enough to counter rising inflation and the threat of recession in every Member State .
Is Mr Trichet able to give us an estimate of how far the available instruments will be adequate in the years to come ?
( SK ) I support the view that the introduction of the euro , the gradual enlargement of the euro area and the application of consistent economic policies combined with the cautious approach of the European Central Bank have led to the present relatively stable economic development in the European Union countries .
It is also undisputable that , due to the dynamic growth in the number and variety of financial market operations , these operations are becoming less transparent .
This then results in a growing number of risks that may potentially harm not just supplier and consumer groups but also the economies of entire nations .
Consequently , there is a need to set up a wider EU framework for financial supervision and to involve the European Central Bank more closely in supervision to solve any problems in the financial system .
I agree with the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt , that increased cooperation between central banks and national supervisory authorities will become inevitable .
The goal is to uphold stability in the financial markets , in particular taking into account the increasingly integrated financial systems .
In this day and age , what applies to ecology applies to the financial markets as well .
Without the participation of other big players , such as the US , Russia , Japan , China , India and others , achieving a successful result in the worldwide context will not be possible .


( ES ) Mr President , Mr Trichet , Mr Juncker , the President of the European Central Bank and the President of the Eurogroup are in agreement that , for ten years , there has been consistent agreement about the relative roles of the various policies .
The Central Bank and monetary policy are responsible for ensuring price stability , public accounts need to be balanced in the medium term and the other policies need to create economic growth and growth in employment .
When things go wrong , we begin to question this model .
We start to offload our own responsibilities onto the shoulders of the European institutions .
Some people lay the blame at Mr Trichet 's door , others blame Mr Juncker .
If things go from bad to worse , it will be Mr Pöttering who ends up being blamed .
At this time , therefore , I think it is important - and Mr Trichet is a good navigator - to keep a steady course and to maintain the model which has enabled us to come this far .
I would like to add a few words in terms of prices .
It is true , as Mr Juncker says , that we are all responsible in this matter and that governments need to take action ; it is a matter which will need to be examined when we tackle market flexibility , when we work out the post-Lisbon strategy .
However , there is one matter where the Central Bank needs to take the lead .
People say - I do not have the figures - that to a certain extent price increases are due to financial speculation ; the transfer of money from the sub-prime and variable interest rate markets to the futures market is partly responsible for this situation , and we will all need to do something about this .
In terms of institutional architecture , I would agree with the rapporteur , Mr Schmidt , that now is probably not a good time for publication of the full minutes .
However , I think that it would be good to publish a summary of the minutes and , even more importantly , I think that the Central Bank should tell us the relative weight given to the two pillars on which its strategy is based when taking decisions to increase transparency and market awareness .
I also think that increased economic governance would need a counterpoint , a balance : but this is not the fault of Mr Trichet .
It is our fault for not yet having approved the Lisbon Treaty , and this is something which I would like to see remedied .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Trichet , Mr Juncker , I should first like to thank our rapporteur for his excellent work .
I think the contributions everyone has made have produced a result that makes the situation clear ; the message might be a little vague , but I think it has useful elements .
Mr Trichet , everyone was impressed by your speeches in the summer of 2007 .
We appreciate the fact that you reported immediately to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
Now , however , you have increased the rates in a climate in which we all believe that the crisis is not behind us and the bad news , including that from the major European banks , is still to come .
When we saw you last December , you told us that you were basically expecting 3 % inflation in 2008 and then things would calm down .
Now inflation is at 4 % and you are telling us you have increased the rates by a quarter of a point and that is it .
With imported inflation though , if your strategy is actually to remain so vigilant on price stability , will you be able to stick to that in the short and medium terms , with the risks we are aware of for growth and so for employment ?
It seems to me that the phenomenon Mr Turmes has referred to , which we might describe as the European Union entering the second phase of globalisation , is leading us to reassess the tools we had at our disposal to deal with the first phase of globalisation .
That first phase favoured price stability , or at any rate a reduction in the prices of consumer goods , connected in particular with relocation .
Now , in this new phase , we have a new balance and a new model in which what were previously emerging countries are now fully established , also in their access to raw materials , with the effects on prices that we are aware of .


In these circumstances therefore - and I am addressing my remarks both to Mr Trichet and to Mr Juncker , since Mr Juncker rightly draws attention to the competencies of the Eurogroup and ECOFIN in this area , but they never come to this committee or to Parliament - is not the fundamental issue at the moment the exchange rate ratio , the buying of oil supplies in euros and the ability of the European Union , particularly its euro zone , to speak with one voice , so that , ten years after changing to the euro , we can at last contribute to a coordinated and responsible dialogue between the main world currencies to secure the best exchange rate for our growth ?
( LT ) May I point out that during our term of office the European Central Bank , thanks to its impressive work , has risen from being just one of the world 's many central banks into the world leader in central banking .
Today it is facing the new challenge of establishing its increasingly important role in the globalised world .
We would like the bank to enhance its role of forecasting and management of macroeconomics and financial stability as , since the majority of crises have their roots in third countries nowadays , it would be appropriate to say that the European Central Bank has failed to produce an accurate forecast of the extent of the crisis and its possible impact .
What could be done to improve the situation ?
First of all I would mention increased coordination between economic and monetary policy .
The Third World is now entering the stage of price liberalisation , which is very familiar to me , as a representative of Lithuania .
It could last longer , and Europe would then be under a lot of pressure as regards prices .
However , this pressure could be overcome by our monetary policy , which would be more taxing on our economy .
Alternatively , we could offer to help developing countries to put their revenue policy in order and stabilise prices .
This could be done through our increased participation in the International Monetary Fund and communication with the World Bank .
This is one possible tool that could help curb inflation in developing countries as well as relieve the World Bank of the burden of adjusting monetary policy .
There is one more aspect that worries me , and that is the European settlement system .
Despite the European Central Bank 's substantial input into the implementation of SEPA and the development of the TARGET 2 security system , the problem is yet more complicated than that .
( PL ) Mr President , the annual report of the European Central Bank does not , it appears , speak of a certain tendency that has developed in recent years .
Whereas up to now one could speak of the European bank in Frankfurt acting with real independence , in recent times we have seen attempts by the largest European Union countries to put pressure on the ECB and to influence its decisions .
This is a worrying tendency since , in practice , it means that the EU is being divided into countries that are equal and those that are more equal than others .
This could lead to double standards .
Countries such as France or Germany are given the right to put pressure on the ECB but , when it comes to smaller countries , the principle of the independence of the European Central Bank from the governments of European Union Member States is adhered to very strictly .
I speak of this because it is a worrying development .
Finally , one cannot say that Europe has a proper and stable financial system .
This is something that is in the process of development .
An illustration of this is given by the paradoxical example of London , which is the most important financial centre in the European Union , even though it is the capital of a country outside the euro zone .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro area is suffering from energy prices which neither the ECB , nor the Union , nor governments are able to control .
The German Finance Minister , Peer Steinbrück , told you that , Mr Trichet , and the ECB then announced that it intended to support banks facing difficulties .
I wonder when the ECB will announce that it wants to support citizens who fail to make it to the end of the month , by cutting the cost of money and forcing the banks to charge mortgage rates which are not as crippling as they are at present ?
Maintaining growth is more important than keeping the currency high .
That is the policy of the dollar to which the ECB is not mounting an effective response .
Mr Schmidt is keen to strengthen the role and authority of the ECB , while I am with those who continue to question the independence of the ECB .
The introduction of the euro has undoubtedly had some benefits : some of those cited by Mr Schmidt are unquestionable , but there is not one word about the tangible adverse effects for every citizen of the euro area who has suffered from real inflation which is much higher than official figures as a result of the widespread speculation which accompanied the introduction of the currency and which the ECB and the institutions did far too little to control .

As Mr Schmidt writes , the ECB derives its acceptance among the public from the fact that it upholds goals , such as price stability and economic growth , and for that reason he considers transparency to be less important ; he also proposes that the principle of equality of Member States should be given up and would like to put more power into the hands of the Executive Committee .
Mr Schmidt is afraid that the governments will in practice exert pressure on the president of their central bank , in other words he is afraid that politics will gain the upper hand over finance .
I believe the opposite to be true .

Mr Schmidt , Mr Trichet , I absolutely cannot go along with these proposals .

Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Schmidt for a very good report .
Let me say at the outset that some Member States are in , or near to , recession , and we must ask ourselves what is the most important thing we can do in those circumstances .
I believe the most important thing we can do in those circumstances is to protect jobs and promote the creation of jobs .
Let us look at the situation between 1990 and 1998 when , in what is now the euro area , five million jobs were created .
But what happened in the 10 years between 1998 and 2008 , when the euro was in situ and Mr Trichet and his predecessors were pursuing their policies , was that almost 16 million jobs were created .
Therefore , we have to reflect on this .
This is a success story , and the contribution that the policies being pursued by the Central Bank made to this have to be acknowledged .
We must give credit where credit is due .
But is this story being sold ?
The reasons for the success clearly are low interest rates in the main , but in particular low inflation , and I think Mr Trichet 's constant refrain about that holds true .
But do we need continued increase in interest rates ?
It is time now to examine this more deeply .
Current economic conditions call for calm and sensible action .
That is why we have an independent Central Bank .
However , I would like to make a comment on the strength of the euro .
This is negatively impacting exporting economies .
The euro exchange rate with the dollar and sterling is not softening and not likely to soften with the divergence between the US and euro interest rates .
The rate rise , while targeting inflation , may present further risks to the euro exchange rate and impede economic growth potential in a time of economic uncertainty .
In the moments that are left to me , let me say that last year I was rapporteur for the Report on the ECB annual report and I pointed out then that there were EUR 223 billion in EUR 500 denominations - that is 446 million notes !
I asked that it be examined , particularly because it seems to me that it is likely to be used for criminal purposes .
Perhaps Mr Trichet would say in his reply what has been done about the concerns I raised then .
Mr President , I would like to join in the compliments and congratulations given to the ECB for what it did last year in the financial crisis .
The ECB 's role as liquidity provider of last resort and market maker of last resort has been emphasised in the report and I share this view .
I think it also achieved this .
Linked to this , Mr Trichet , I think it is correct that you emphasised the necessity of better information access and exchange of information , where I think the ECB could take a leading role .
This is also what we presented in a report for Parliament in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which we will discuss next week , about the reform of the supervisory system .
I think it is very important that we have a better link between the micro-prudential information that market and banking prudential supervisors have and the ECB information , and I think the ECB can take a leading role there .
You have said that you do not want to overhaul the supervisory systems - that is not what we proposed - but I think it should also be in your interest not to be too dependent on the voluntary cooperation of Member States and Member States ' supervisory authorities in this exchange of information .
Therefore , it is important that there will be more independent players in this area and there will be a stronger system and a stronger structure at European level .
Another element is the payment and settlement systems .
I am happy to hear that the Target 2-Securities proposal , which is elaborated by the ECB and other central banks , has now been received positively by the CSDs .
I think this could be an important basis for further improvement of that system .
I would also like to ask your opinion about what happens now , also from the market , in the sphere of derivatives and the over-the-counter market in order to create more central counterparties and a better system of supervision there .
My last remark is a parallel with the Bernanke speech yesterday , but I will not go into detail about it .
Madam President , I wish to commend the rapporteur on his work .
An annual report can speak volumes about achievements and also about policy intricacies and trade-offs .
The current inflation rates in Europe are tormenting policymakers and citizens .
The European Central Bank has built up its credibility through consistent policies .
This performance has been enhanced by this inflation import on the wave of globalisation and the Asian economic rise .
Unfortunately , a reverse situation is under way nowadays because of huge energy and food price rises which reflect the increasing scarcity of available resources .
The cost-push pressure is straining markets worldwide .
The inflation rate in the euro area is at its highest level for 10 years .
This is very worrying , and stagflation also seems to be around the corner .
Moreover , the financial crisis has complicated the European Central Bank 's task enormously .
The ECB has to fight inflation tenaciously , and anchoring inflation expectations is key in this regard .
But the risks are high .
It is not clear how long the exogenous cost-push will last .
It is critical that a wage price spiral be averted .
As we used to talk about inflation moderation in the past decade , so we should strive to achieve moderation of price and wage dynamics in the period to come .
More economic divergence in the euro area , which would not foster a good climate for the European Central Bank 's moves .
In addition , when markets are increasingly global , what the European Central Bank does has to be examined in relation to what other major counterparts do .
Here it is about interest-rate differentials and overall policy stances .
A final note .
The grave systemic risks financial markets carry nowadays demand better supervision frameworks , better coordination among the ECB , the Fed and other major central banks .
The dangers of too-easy-money policies are to be underlined in this regard .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I very much hope that the main messages of this debate will reach the citizens of Europe .
The first main message of this debate , for me , is that the ECB and the euro are not the causes of the concerns and problems , but part of the solution .
The second main message is that the euro provides benefits and protection .
It benefits the citizens of the whole of the European Union , not just the euro zone , the political project of the European Union and the European Union growth and employment policy .
Apart from the internal market , the euro is the most effective answer to globalisation .
The euro and the European Central Bank do not , it is true , make us independent of global influences , but they make us much more able to deal with them .
I should therefore like to thank the European Central Bank for the steady and level-headed policy , because at a time when trust is being lost it is undoubtedly one of those that are gaining trust .
However , I should also like to say to all the Heads of State and Government on this occasion , hands off the Stability and Growth Pact , hands off the European Central Bank .
If you have internal problems and do not do your homework , it is too easy to say others are to blame .
For that reason we have to do everything possible to improve awareness and do away with the information deficit .
There is no general awareness of the connection between inflation , interest rates and price stability .
I am grateful to Mr Juncker for pointing out that indirect taxation should not be increased but reduced whenever possible .
We have to communicate the message that the euro is not responsible for higher energy and raw materials prices .
I also welcome the fact that the cooperation between the European Central Bank , the Commission and the financial services sector has contributed to the successful launch of SEPA , cross-border payments .
Let us use the sensitivity and the justified concerns and fears of the public to enter into a dialogue with them , provide answers and explain , and let us not just make complimentary speeches here .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the euro is an increasingly expensive currency by comparison with those of our main partners and competitors .
That is particularly true compared with the dollar .
Of course , the policy of systematically increasing European Central Bank reference rates , coupled with the reverse policy of the Fed , is merely accentuating the problem .
This exchange trend that is damaging the competitiveness of the European economy has been the subject of much comment , particularly by highly prominent European leaders .
The predominant view , in this House in particular , is that the ECB has sole and absolute competence for exchange rate trends .
The ECB itself refuses , through its President , to express any views on the subject , apart from a few vague international declarations .
Not only is this situation untransparent and undemocratic , it is , above all , contrary to the Treaty .
Article 111 of the Treaty reads , and I quote : ' In the absence of an exchange rate system in relation to one or more non-Community currencies as referred to in paragraph 1 , the Council , acting by a qualified majority either on a recommendation from the Commission and after consulting the ECB or on a recommendation from the ECB , may formulate general orientations for exchange rate policy in relation to these currencies ' .
I repeat : ' may formulate general orientations for exchange rate policy ' .
In other words , the euro zone has indeed equipped itself with the means to decide democratically on its exchange policy .
My question is simple and it is addressed to the Heads of State and Government : instead of moaning , what are the governments of the Union waiting for before they act ?
( NL ) Firstly , I must congratulate Mr Schmidt on his report .
As someone representing Sweden , which is not a member of the euro area , he has produced a very good , very clear report .
To my mind he has met the criteria for membership on Sweden 's behalf .
Last week the European Central Bank put up the interest rate .
Clearly the European Central Bank and its President , Mr Trichet , take the Bank 's mandate and the Maastricht criteria seriously .
I am glad that the ECB is independent .
The ECB must be protected against political meddling , by national authorities , for example , and I am glad too to hear Mr Juncker confirming this on behalf of the Eurogroup .
And the European Central Bank has responded well to the financial crisis .
It moved in a timely fashion to guarantee liquidity for the markets .
This has stabilised interest rates for the time being .
The crisis in the banking sector has been a wake-up call .
The lack of transparency in the financial risks to which institutions are exposed is producing losses which may be considerable .
A debate is currently under way in the European Parliament on financial scrutiny .
The European Central Bank can play a crucial role here , because it is well briefed by the central banks of the Member States .
But the Treaty says nothing about this .
I believe we need closer cooperation between the central banks and the European Central Bank , financial markets and regulatory authorities .
The European Central Bank should play a greater part in scrutiny and oversight .
It is in a position to organise the cross-border exchange of information , certainly when it comes to financial stability .
The ECB has proved its worth .
We must make use of its power in order to strengthen financial scrutiny .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the light of this debate it can be said that the ECB is a kind of rock in the waves .
That is to be welcomed .
Obviously price stability is the top priority in the economy , If that continues to be so in the future , that can only be positive .
We have noted that the average inflation rate in the euro zone is 4 % .
In some euro zone countries it is even higher , for instance 5.8 % in Belgium and 5.1 % in Spain .
That is bad news .
Therefore the signal - the European Central Bank decision - sent out this week is important .
We just have to note , here in Parliament too , that the ECB obviously cannot do anything to combat inflationary oil prices .
However , the secondary effects that will be felt in the euro zone , for instance higher wages , which the unions are demanding , and at the same time higher prices , which then affect businesses , hold a risk and ultimately lead to a vicious circle .
I should like to make two further comments on the politicisation of the European Central Bank .
We are constantly coming across that in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and it has also been made clear in this debate .
For instance , the question of transparency of the decision-making process is a signal in that direction , an attempt to find out more and more , and also to step up influence on the decision-making process .
Greater transparency - I am wary of that .
I think the Bank has to decide for itself and , of course , in consultation with Parliament and euro zone representatives .
Justification of decisions , though - that is going too far .
We should - and this will undoubtedly play a part in the next round - reconsider very carefully when extending the euro zone whether we can continue with this policy .
Slovakia was a warning sign for me .
We should be less concerned with politics in the future and pay more attention to the criteria .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the impact of the American financial crisis on the world economy has been an unexpected and unwanted present on the occasion of the 10th anniversary of Economic and Monetary Union .
Rising inflation is another current problem .
The ECB has perfectly managed the turmoil in world financial markets , provided liquidity in the amount of EUR 95 billion and carried out further fine-tuning operations to stabilise the very short-term interest rates .
Once again this has shown the benefits of the European Union 's common monetary policy for both the European economy and individual citizens in periods of instability .
According to Article 105 of the EC Treaty , the ECB shall also support the general economic policies in the Community .
Now the ECB has to meet the challenges of rising inflation on the one hand and an economic slowdown on the other hand .
This is not only a challenge but also a real test of the independence of the ECB and the European System of Central Banks .
By means of the Treaty of Lisbon , the ECB will become an institution with legal personality and a clearly established independent status .
On the other hand , the continuous integration of financial systems calls for closer cooperation with central banks of individual Member States .
There are voices warning that the independence of the ECB is in danger , one of the reasons being that the informal meetings of the Finance Ministers of the Eurozone will receive , under the Treaty of Lisbon , an official status .
We can already hear arguments as to the Ministers ' ability to debate whether or not the inflation target is set correctly .
I think that it is very important to distinguish between professional and political arguments that have their place in a democratic society and actual interference with the European Central Bank 's fiscal policy .
Considering the painful birth of the Treaty of Lisbon , making such a distinction will be an extremely important task both for us in this House and , of course , for the media .
To conclude , I should like to thank the rapporteurs for the balanced and highly professional report assessing the ECB annual report .

( EL ) Madam President , I listened very carefully to the speeches by the President of the Central Bank and by Jean-Claude Juncker , for whom I have considerable respect .
We are undoubtedly facing a major economic crisis , unparalleled in recent decades .
The frightening increase in the price of oil and of many other products , the high unemployment rate , the widespread poverty and the low rates of growth all contribute to this stark image .
There has been extended discussion of the criticism that has been voiced .
I believe that this criticism , which also came from official sources , has all had the same goal of highlighting the gravity of the situation .
Besides , as politicians , we must seek criticism , because it is only through criticism that we can improve , see the issues more clearly and thus reach solutions that benefit the community .
Finally , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his truly exceptional report .
( PT ) Madam President , it is clear from this debate that the alleged fight against inflation is limited to restricting pay rises .
In order to justify the ninth increase in the European Central Bank base rate in two and a half years , European Union monetary policy managers only talk about the need for pay restraint and ignore the scandalous increase in the profits made by big companies and economic and financial groups , which are about 30 % per year , while pay rises in some countries do not even cover the rate of inflation .
This is the case in Portugal , where most workers and pensioners have suffered serious losses in their purchasing power and where pay and pensions are among the lowest in the European Union .
The complete lack of social sensitivity of these monetary policies , with high interest rates and an over-valued euro , is exacerbating social and territorial inequalities , contributing to an increase in poverty and creating more and more problems for micro and small companies , especially in the countries with the weakest economies .
This policy should therefore be changed to do exactly the contrary and to prioritise economic growth and employment , eradicate poverty and promote social progress and development .
( RO ) The European Central Bank carries out its activity to maintain price stability under conditions of great uncertainties and inflationist pressures .
We do not know yet if the current level of energy and food prices is the one upon which the entire price structure will rely ; we also do not know what public policy actions the Member States will take to facilitate the adjustment of the population 's businesses and savings and households to the new price structure .
Also , the financial crisis is still far from having said its last word .
As a member of the European Parliament , I appreciate the competence and integrity of the European Central Bank 's monetary policies and its President 's determination to stay on the inflation target characterising the measure of price stability .
I express my confidence in the good judgment of the European Central Bank , in the integrity and independence of the European Central Bank and the politicians ' reserve to interfere with this bank 's decisions .
( EL ) Madam President , the Eurogroup formulates economic policy , the European Central Bank formulates monetary policy and we , here in the European Parliament , just do politics , without any other additional definitions , and this obliges us to be accountable for the full range of decisions made in the euro area .
As a newcomer to politics , while I fully respect the independence of the Central Bank , I believe I am able to offer some advice .
Imported inflation , however , which is our biggest problem , cannot , in my opinion , be fully countered if the only weapon we use is interest rates .
We need to take action on the causes of inflation .
We need to battle with the oil cartels , we need to battle with the raw material profiteers , we need more food on the market and , if we do not take action on the root of evil , I am afraid that we will continue to have debates similar to this , which have a logic that is understood in Brussels and Strasbourg but lack political justification in the eyes of the public .
Madam President , I think it is absolutely amazing how the ECB has delivered the main point of the mandate : price stability .
If we look at the D-mark period of 1948 to 1998 , the price stability track record of the ECB is actually better than that of the D-mark , which used to be the global benchmark .
I think you have delivered a very good result on that front .
But I am also equally happy that you , President Trichet , referred to financial stability .
This is also in the Treaty mandate of the ECB , and I think that the ECB 's role in financial supervision should be strengthened .
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa 's ' twin peaks ' model is very enchanting , and I think that it is now up to the Member States and the Council to take this model , to have more of a role in the ECB for financial stability supervision .
In the European Parliament the Van den Burg-Dăianu report about this is currently being drawn up .
It has a lot of good points which you can also use in your work when we try to deliver better financial stability supervision in Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , the economic and financial functioning of the EU creates real stability for growth .
A fundamental role here is played by the European Central Bank , which has , as its fundamental objective , the creation of monetary policy .
Member States and their governments are responsible for economic policy and for creating new jobs .
However , questions do come up about whether the ECB is functioning properly and about its impact on economic processes .
Should the Central Bank be more proactive , as in the USA , or not ?
Also , in the light of the global food crisis and the increases in the prices of energy and fuel , a number of questions present themselves .
First of all , what action should be taken to prevent the crisis deepening ?
Secondly , how to support growth in poor countries ?
Thirdly , how to monitor financial markets in order to avoid a repetition of the crisis in mortgage lending ?
Finally , at this point it should also be clearly stated that compliance with the criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact must be equally binding on all Member States .
President of the European Central Bank . - Madam President , I appreciate enormously the remarks that have been made both in the remarkable report of the rapporteur and in the very large number of interventions which echo the independence of the Central Bank , as mentioned very clearly by Mr Jean-Claude Juncker himself .
I think it is extremely important and I have to say that it is not questioned anywhere .
It is an essential part of the credibility of the institution and it is because we have this very visible independence and this primary mandate - which is clear on price stability - that we have been successful up until now in anchoring inflation expectations .
I strongly emphasised the point that anchoring inflation expectations is absolutely decisive , because it permits us to continue to have , in the medium- and long-term market rates , the incorporation of these inflation expectations over the medium and long run .
Some governments in Europe are borrowing on a 50-year basis . They are borrowing on a 50-year basis at rates which incorporate the credibility of the Central Bank to deliver price stability , not only over two , or five or ten or twenty years , but even much longer .
It is because we are entirely aiming at anchoring , preserving the solid anchoring of inflation expectations , that we have taken the decision which has been mentioned .
In the understanding of the ECB Governing Council - and I take it , in the decision which has been taken by the European democracies in creating the ECB , the euro system and the euro area - there is no contradiction between price stability , and solid anchoring of expectations of price stability , and growth and job creation .
I have to say that it is very much considered now at global level that the appropriate way of looking at things is that through price stability and credible price stability over time you are paving the way for sustainable growth and job creation .
The mention of the almost 16 million jobs which were created since the setting-up of the euro is an illustration of what I just said .
Having said that , I would also echo what was said by a large number of Members on the fact that in order to get price stability we had to get some cooperation from other decision-makers , authorities and the private sector .
That is the reason why we are so clear in our own messages , fully recognising that we are independent and that those who are taking those decisions are independent .
But we always insist on the Stability and Growth Pact because over-burdening of monetary policies through a lax fiscal policy is always a danger .
We are also calling on the price-setters in general - corporate businesses , the production sector , retail businesses - to incorporate the fact that we will deliver price stability over the medium term so that we do not have second-round effects in this domain .
I mentioned price-setters .
I also mention of course social partners and that is the reason why we are calling strongly not only on price-setters , but also on social partners to incorporate in their decisions the fact that we will deliver price stability in line with our definition in the medium run .
The situation is obviously difficult because of the price of oil , the price of commodities or the scarcity of raw materials , which are pushing up prices .
We should recall what happened in 1973-1974 .
It is absolutely clear that those economies which let the second-round effects gallop and had inflation on a lasting basis had both inflation and very low growth , and it was the start , in a large number of economies in Europe , of mass unemployment that we are still fighting and on our way to eliminating .
Therefore , there is much at stake here in this domain and that is important .
I would also like to mention here , because it seems to me an extremely important element , that it is the most vulnerable and the poorest of our fellow citizens who suffer the most in times of lasting high-level inflation .
Therefore , when we are aiming at delivering price stability in the medium run , not only do we respect the Treaty , not only do we respect the mandate - which we did not create ourselves but which was given to us by the democracies of Europe - but we are doing what is best for the most vulnerable of our fellow citizens .
On the question of the price of oil , commodities and energy and the price of food and more generally all those prices that are rising , I think that there is a triangle .
As was very eloquently said by a number of Members , we certainly have the demand-driven phenomenon ; the big emerging economies are introducing at global level a new element of buoyant demand and that has to be fully recognised .
We have , undoubtedly , a second side to the triangle , which is certainly the supply , and on the supply side we have a lot of responsibilities .
Cartels are not good , and it is clear that we have cartels operating in a number of domains .
Apart from the cartels , a number of countries and economies are also creating scarcity by preventing drilling , preventing exploration , preventing the construction of refineries .
So I draw your attention to that point too .
We have to see , on the supply side , whether we are doing all that we can .
As for the demand side , all economy , all energy savings are absolutely essential and are part of the mastering of the demand side ; as well as recognising the real price and not having artificial prices for oil and energy , which would continue to permit the demand to be buoyant .
There is the case of the third side of the triangle , which is the reallocation of capital at a global level in the direction of commodities .
That is not exactly the same in the case of oil , other energies or raw materials of all kinds .
But there is such a phenomenon and that phenomenon obviously plays a role , and we have to recognise that .
We have to call for markets to be as transparent as possible , to function in a fully transparent way .
That is the way I will present that phenomenon and I would say that , as is the case with certain diseases where you have to treat the disease on a multidimensional basis , you have to make all possible efforts on the three sides of the triangle .
Many Members mentioned prudential supervision and the necessity to improve the situation , I would certainly echo what many Members have said .
We have a situation which must be improved - that is absolutely clear .
Since the setting-up of the ECB we said that we would call on all authorities to cooperate as intimately as possible .
We also said that we were in favour of a very close relationship between the central banks and the supervisory authorities .
Recent events since the turbulence that started in August 2007 have proven that this doctrine was right : a very close relationship between central banks and supervisory authorities is necessary .
I would say at this stage that we fully support the orientation that has been retained by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on a consensus basis .
We think that there are a lot of workshops and that we have to proceed as rapidly and expeditiously as possible in this direction .
I know that Parliament is reflecting on perhaps bolder initiatives .
I would say that we , ourselves , would like all that has already been decided to be implemented - for nobody to take the pretext of a second stage , not to do what has been already decided .
Then , I think we have to look very carefully at the proposals before us , because we believe that the more intimately we cooperate - and more intimately than is the case today - the better , certainly , for Europe .
What I say for Europe is , in our opinion , valid for all other systemic parts in the global finance .
My last point concerns the exchange rate , which a number of Members mentioned .
I think that the Governing Council of the ECB is in favour of the full implementation of the Treaty as it is .
It seems to me that when we are in China , as Jean-Claude Juncker said , or when we are in the G7 , where Jean-Claude and I are signing the communiqué of the G7 , we are doing what is appropriate and if I am myself cautious - because it was mentioned that I am very prudent and very cautious when I speak on exchange rates - it is because we are in a domain which is extraordinarily touchy and a domain where , in my opinion , one has to fully respect the orientation which we have agreed upon .
That is the reason why I would say that , again , at this stage we agree with all the partners of the G7 on the message for China .
There is absolutely no ambiguity there .
We made that very clear in the last G7 communiqué .
We also consider it important that we look very carefully at the possible adverse effects of excessive fluctuations on both financial stability and growth .
I should also mention that it is very important that the US authorities repeat that a strong dollar is in the interests of the United States of America .
President of the Eurogroup and member of the European Council - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am not going to go back to the comments made by the President of the Central Bank during our debate .
It is better not to repeat what he said , since it was all correct , and anything I might say on the subject might be seen as an attempt to qualify his remarks , which is not necessary .
( DE ) Madam President , I am speaking in German to show Mr Trichet that I know that language too , as he now does .
Yes , a Frenchman who already has more than enough to do is to be complimented on taking the time , because he is living in Frankfurt , to learn the language of the people he is living amongst .
Not all French people do that .
( Applause )
I shall speak German , so that he understands me better .
I should like to make two or three final comments , because sometimes the debates in this House seem to be full of nostalgia for the 1970s and 1980s .
The Eurogroup is urged to coordinate the economic policy of the euro Member States better .
We are all trying our best to do that and we have now introduced a code of conduct in many areas of practical economic policy , which we are endeavouring to follow .
However , you cannot , on the one hand , call for coordination of economic policy and , on the other hand , regret it when the economic policy that is coordinated in that way is then enforced in practice .
Let me give you some examples .
We reformed the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 .
Part of the substance of the reform proposals was to strengthen the preventive arm of the Stability Pact , which was underdeveloped and weak .
To strengthen the preventive part of the Stability Pact , it is essential for governments to maintain budget consolidation and redouble their consolidation efforts when the economy is going well , in order to build up reserves for less favourable years , which , in the normal cyclical pattern of our economic systems , will occur regularly .
At the moment we are going through worse times .
These are no longer good times .
Governments that have consolidated have sufficiently wide budgetary margins for the automatic stabilisers to be brought into effect at a time when State revenue is falling .
Governments that did not consolidate enough in the good times cannot , of course , react in bad times .
When we in the Eurogroup agree that Member States that have achieved their medium-term financial target can now also act on the current economic downturn and rising oil and food prices , they can only do that because they have in the past worked out the budgetary margins that are necessary , so that they are not weakened and incapable of reacting in times of crisis .
We have not called for a wage freeze ; neither the Central Bank nor the Eurogroup has ever called for a wage freeze in the euro zone .
What we are saying is that wages should not automatically rise with inflation but that wage trends must take account of productivity gains , which can be achieved in the economy , and wages can also be raised accordingly without inflation .
We have made it quite clear that we absolutely cannot go on asking for wage restraint from working people in Europe , while managers and other capital owners receive extreme and excessive pay and salaries .
We have stated that several times .
( Applause )
Payments to the management of European firms - also and above all in the financial sector - have absolutely nothing to do with the productivity gains achieved there .
They just collect the money , and their actions are not economically sound or socially responsible .
( Applause )
Because we did not order a wage freeze , because I , more than others , am perhaps very much intent on keeping the social contract aspect of European action in mind , we have strongly urged that , instead of letting firms pay , in the light of rising raw materials and oil prices , we must consider what States can do in the field of social support for the less well-off sectors of the population , in view of the weakened purchasing power .
It is , after all , simply true that States that have consolidated their budgetary position now have the necessary resources at their disposal to be able to fund social support programmes for the less well-off sections of our population .
There are States that have introduced cost of living allowances , heating and rent subsidies , and that were able to afford that because of consolidation in the past .
There are also States that systematically adapt their tax systems so that less well-off sections of the population can obtain net gains from tax cuts , instead of tax cuts only benefiting those in the more prosperous population groups .
To that extent , I believe that the overall policy is , if not perfect , at least conclusive .
We do not want to and we must not repeat the mistakes of the 1970s and 1980s , even if that was somewhat easier in the short term .
We have to act against growing inflation .
In the 1970s and 1980s we allowed runaway inflation .
In the 1970s and 1980s we allowed State indebtness to keep on rising .
In the 1970s and 1980s we accepted public deficits , whilst playing down their effects .
The result was mass unemployment in Europe , which we have now brought down to 7.2 % with - and thanks to - the euro .
The result was that we had excessive social security contributions in nearly all our countries , which many of us still consider too high , and that is not to do with a rejection of social solidarity , but with sensible financing of our social security systems .
Labour was overtaxed and capital undertaxed .
Those were the effects of the mistaken policy of the 1970s and 1980s .
We are against inflation , because we are against unemployment and for growth .
Growth and combating inflation are not antonyms .
We need inflation-free growth , so that things will be better for people tomorrow .
Handing out gifts today , supposedly helping people and being feted for acting like a generous social benefactor , is the wrong policy .
To be successful now , you have to think about future generations , not vice versa .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Madam President , thank you for an extraordinarily interesting and stimulating debate .
It shows that there is broad support for the thinking and conclusions we present in the report .
I also want to thank you , Mr Juncker and Mr Trichet , for the good answers you have given .
You respond in a way which gives the impression that you will also take on board the views and ideas we have put forward here .
Finally , let me contribute my own experiences as a politician in the somewhat less populous country of Sweden in the north .
I was a Member of the Swedish Parliament and its finance committee during the 1990s , when Sweden ran into an economic wall .
Experiences in politics are salutary , my friends .
Those of you who believe that inflation and an unstable monetary policy will help the people who need our support most are wrong .
You are wrong !
As a member of the finance committee , I witnessed how the Swedish interest rate reached levels which no one could have imagined : 500 % .
In the 1990s , just as Mr Juncker says , we got mass unemployment , rising inflation and stagflation .
I remember those experiences vividly , and they have led me to hope that my own country , Sweden , will enter the euro zone and participate fully in European cooperation .
As our colleague , Mrs Kauppi , said and Mr Trichet repeats , no one believed that the euro would be the success that it has been .
I think that proves the value of European cooperation .
Mr Juncker , you said that the ECB acts with grace and determination .
I think that was a good phrase .
Let me offer my thanks for a good debate .
I am also grateful that , as somebody who stands outside the euro cooperation system , I was given the task of drawing up this report .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - As regards economic developments , the fundamentals of the euro-area economy remain sound due to investment growth and improved employment rates and labour-force participation .
While moderating , growth in the world economy is expected to remain resilient , benefiting in particular from continued robust growth in emerging economies .
With regard to price developments , annual HICP inflation has remained well above the level consistent with price stability since last autumn , reaching 3.7 % in May 2008 and - according to Eurostat 's flash estimate - 4.0 % in June .
This worrying level of inflation rates results largely from sharp increases in energy and food prices at the global level in recent months .
The uncertainty surrounding this outlook for economic activity remains high and downside risks prevail .
In particular , risks stem from the dampening impact on consumption and investment of further unanticipated increases in energy and food prices .
Moreover , downside risks continue to relate to the potential for the ongoing financial market tensions to affect the real economy more adversely than anticipated .
In these circumstances the decision taken by the ECB to raise by 25 basis points to 4.25 % the minimum bid rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem is welcome and should be congratulated !
Coordination of social security systems - Coordination of social security systems - Extending Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 to third country nationals otherwise excluded ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
the report by Jean Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 on the coordination of social security systems - C6-0037 / 2006 - ;
the report by Emine Bozkurt , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 on the coordination of social security systems , and determining the content of Annex XI - C6-0029 / 2006 - ; and
the report by Jean Lambert , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council regulation extending the provisions of Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 and Regulation ( EC ) No [ ... ] to nationals of third countries who are not already covered by these provisions solely on the ground of their nationality - C6-0289 / 2007 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all four legislative resolutions under discussion concern issues that have a direct impact on the everyday lives of European citizens .
The right of people moving within Europe to be protected by social security systems is inseparable from the right of free movement in the Union .
The Commission 's proposals have one common goal , and that is to modernise and simplify the coordination of national social security systems .
The aim is to define mechanisms of cooperation between institutions and processes that would simplify and speed up calculating and paying social benefits to their recipients .
These are family benefits , pensions , unemployment benefits and so on , in other words a range of social benefits very important to the lives of people in the Union .
I should like to thank the Members and the rapporteurs for all the work they have done on these important texts in recent months .
The implementing regulation sets out how Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 , which we call the basic Regulation , should operate .
It extends to all persons who make use of the coordination of national social security systems : citizens , Member States ' social security institutions , health care providers and employers .
Its goal is to establish procedures , as clearly as possible , on the basis of which those insured persons who are in a cross-border situation will receive social benefits .
Who do I turn to in order to be granted family benefits ?
What steps must my employer take if he wants to post me , temporarily , to another Member State ?
My working career is coming to an end and as I have worked in several Member States , how do I find out how my pension will be calculated and what must I do in order to receive it ?
The procedures set out in said regulation are meant to help recipients get appropriate answers , by means of cooperation between the social security institutions .
In the process of trying to make this cooperation effective and meet the needs of citizens as quickly as possible , we realised the importance of electronically processing and exchanging data between the institutions of the various Member States .
The EESSI network ( Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information ) will ensure that data exchange will be quick and secure and will shorten the period of time that social security institutions take to reply and to process a cross-border situation .
If the implementing regulation is adopted soon , citizens will be able to make use of the progress achieved , by means of coordination , in the areas of simplification and modernisation , and also to make use of the new rights that could not be implemented to date although they are included in the basic Regulation .
The benefits of the new concept of coordination for European citizens will only really become apparent when the implementing regulation is adopted and when the regulation amending the annexes to Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 is adopted .
Two further draft resolutions pertain to Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 and its annexes .
They aim to amend the basic Regulation so that it takes into account legislative changes in the Member States , in particular those that joined the Union after 29 April 2004 when the basic Regulation was adopted .
These resolutions also amend the annexes to Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 that were left empty when the basic Regulation was adopted .
In spite of the technical nature of these texts , their goal remains the same : to ensure the transparency of mechanisms and procedures applied to persons moving within the European Union .
For example , Annex XI contains a special provision that takes into account the specifics of national legislation .
The annexes are therefore vital for ensuring transparency and legal certainty in regard to national regulations that are also fairly extensive .
Coordination of national social security systems , to which you are contributing in your role as co-legislative authority , will ensure that two fundamental principles ( equal treatment and non-discrimination ) are fully applied on behalf of those European citizens taking advantage of free movement .
The implementing regulation also envisages extending the provisions of Regulation No 883 / 2004 to third-country nationals who are not already covered by these provisions on the grounds of their nationality .
The aim of this regulation is to ensure that third-country nationals who are legally resident in the European Union and who are in a cross-border situation can take advantage of the modernised and simplified coordination of social security systems .
In fact , it is essential that a single and uniform coordination rule is applied in administrative matters and in order to achieve simplification .
Reaching consensus in regard to these regulations will mean significant progress for all those who use the regulations and will ensure a better service for persons moving within the Union .
This will show that the regulations on the coordination of social security systems are ready for the new challenges of the 21st century in relation to mobility .
I should like to add that this work is the result of exemplary cooperation between the Member States and that the will to find solutions for citizens has helped overcome the differences between individual systems and the complexity of this area .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me say that the Commission explicitly supports Amendments 2 and 161 that make it possible to use the electronic data processing system , which is especially important in regard to the operations of the electronic data registry and to electronic processing of cross-border cases .
The Commission also notably supports Amendment 90 , dealing with the granting of sickness benefits and long-term care benefits .
These two amendments significantly empower citizens within the whole system .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I want to bring together my two reports in the luxurious amount of time I have for my introduction in this House .
Firstly , I would like to start by thanking colleagues , the Council and the Commission for the good cooperation so far on what appears a very complex dossier - but it always is when you try to set down in writing what you do in practice , in a way that you think will at least be clear for practitioners and those needing to understand the system .
As the Commissioner has said , the basic Regulation ( ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 ) concerns the coordination , but not the harmonisation - and I want to make that clear - of social security systems between Member States for people who are living or working in another Member State or even simply travelling there .
It cannot come into force until this implementing regulation has been agreed between Parliament and the Council in a codecision procedure requiring unanimity in the Council - not the least of the complexities .
The implementing regulation sets out the administrative architecture for how this should work .
It sets out the rules on how each Member State , each competent authority , will deal with the various dimensions of social security in respect to cross-border issues .
Central to the new basic regulation and the implementing regulation is this exchange of electronic data , with a view to providing greater speed and also greater accuracy of communication .
Hopefully , amongst other things , this will see an end to the situation - or at least a reduction in the time required - where thousands of pieces of paper land on an official 's desk : prescriptions filled out in the always of course totally legible handwriting of numerous doctors , and other claims relating to cross-border healthcare .
By trying to simplify and clarify that , hopefully we can also reduce the amount of fraud currently in the system .
For example , people exploit the current resulting inertia by manipulating the reimbursement system for cross-border care .
Equally , it could also ensure that more providers and individuals make claims as they feel there is a hope of being paid , rather than it being passed to their inheritors .
Articles 78 and 79 of the basic regulation set out the role for the Commission in terms of supporting the development of the exchange of electronic data , including potential financing , so I am a bit surprised and disappointed at the move to delete Amendments 2 and 161 , which relate to implementing this essential development .
When we were discussing the issue of data exchange , the committee felt that Parliament should make very explicit the safeguards and the need for proportionate collection of data .
Thus we have reinforced the requirements concerning data protection in our proposals .
The basic regulation also deals with aspects of access to benefits in kind for healthcare for people staying in another Member State - for example on holiday - or for whom scheduled treatment becomes necessary on medical grounds , not simply from choice .
The recent publication of the directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border healthcare has links to this basic regulation .
Parliament will have to ensure that there is no conflict between the two pieces of legislation .
The committee has also anticipated the proposed extension of the Equalities Directives and has proposed two measures particularly relating to people with disabilities - one a cross-cutting measure to ensure that Member States take the needs of people with particular disabilities into account when they are communicating with them and , secondly , in terms of providing for payment for the expenses of someone to accompany a disabled person who needs urgent medical treatment abroad .
We are aware that this is an issue requiring further discussion with the Council .
The implementing regulation also concerns a number of deadlines .
I know that there are varying opinions on that , which will be reflected in certain of the amendments that we discuss today .
The committee also chose to support a revised schedule concerning the assessment and payment of long-term care cash benefits and the additional clarity relating to frontier workers who become unemployed .
I would hope that the House will be able to support those amendments from the committee .
In terms of the other report concerning the rights of third-country nationals when they travel within the European Union , there is already a regulation in existence which links those who are legally resident and in a cross-border situation with the coordination of social security systems .
This now needs to be updated : because we are updating the overarching regulation , we also need to update the linking one .
The new proposal is substantially the same as the existing one .
Again it clarifies the scope and maintains the rights people already have .
It introduces no new rights and it will become even more important as the European Union develops its common immigration policy .
The so-called blue card proposal will also benefit from this update of the regulation .
Again I hope that the House can support the committee amendments on this .
We want a clear statement of principle and that is why I am recommending - as indeed the committee did - that we do not support the amendments concerning the addition of annexes .
( Applause )
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Ladies and gentlemen , we are voting today on a proposal to coordinate European social security more clearly and more flexibly and we are thus voting in favour of clarifying the annex .
The European Parliament , Council and Commission have worked to simplify the proposal so that Europeans can have a better understanding of the complex rules applied in the coordination of social security .
I must start by thanking the shadow rapporteurs with whom it has been my pleasure to work on this document in recent months and years .
Jean Lambert , of course , who was shadow rapporteur for my report on behalf of the Greens , as I was shadow rapporteur for her report , Ria Oomen-Ruijten of the EPP-ED Group , Bilyana Raeva of the ALDE Group , Dimitrios Papadimoulis of the GUE / NGL Group and Ewa Tomaszewska of the UEN Group , along with all those other members who made a valuable contribution to the debate .
I should also emphasise that talks with the Commission and Council went extremely well .
I am especially grateful here to Hélène Michard and Rob Cornelissen of the European Commission .
Cooperation with the Council has involved a succession of presidencies .
Given that it has taken several years to reach the point of voting on the coordination of social security we have had the pleasure of working with Finland , Germany , Portugal , Slovenia and France .
Ladies and gentlemen , it has indeed been a lengthy process , but one with a successful outcome .
We now have a good compromise , which all the Member States and all the European institutions , including the European Parliament , can take forward .
Our guiding principle in evaluating the amendments was always the conviction that changes to the current system of coordination should in no event lead to a reduction of citizens ' rights .
One very important illustration of this is the scrapping of Annex III , since Annex III allows Member States the freedom to curb their citizens ' rights .
This report reflects our efforts on behalf of a Europe which gives more rights to its citizens in as many areas as possible .
The good thing about European cooperation is that it enables European countries to look after their people collectively .
Social justice is a major part of that and it does not stop at borders .
Citizens must be able to count on their social rights being protected , even outside the borders of their own country .
The single market enables people to move around freely within the European Union .
And we are keen to encourage that .
People can then be confident that their social security rights travel with them , that their pensions are in order , regardless of where they are living or working , and that proper care is guaranteed , everywhere in Europe and not just for themselves but for their families too .
That is European cooperation as it ought to be .
Ladies and gentlemen , as draftsman of the opinion on this report , I regret that the committee responsible has not adopted my key proposals .
Once again it has squandered the chance to ensure clear rules for social security provisions applying to all family members moving across all Member States , in regard to reimbursement in respect of non-urgent health care , in accordance with judgments of the European Court of Justice .
Consequently we still have to clarify that the amount of reimbursement for planned care abroad should correspond , at a minimum , to the cost of similar care in the country in which the patient is insured .
The citizen planning to take advantage of hospital care must apply for permission in advance but has the right to appeal if his application is refused .
Advance notification of outpatient treatment is not mandatory .
Citizens will now have to wait for the new directive on cross-border health care to be adopted , although reimbursement of costs is part of this regulation .
In addition , the directive will not make a significant contribution in the area of subsidiarity in health care but adopting the policy may be delayed , perhaps for years .
I regret that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs underestimated this angle .
Apart from that , the report is very good and I will support it .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , I should like to say something about the Lambert report on the implementation of the regulation , which relates to the details of coordination of social security systems .
As the rapporteur has said , the purpose of the regulation is coordination , not harmonisation , for which we in the EU do not in any case have any legal basis .
However , some of the amendments adopted in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs go beyond coordination and form the basis for new competencies and services .
In our opinion , for instance , it is not necessary for the Commission to be given the power to establish its own neutral central database and manage it independently , in order to ensure prompt payments to citizens .
That is the task of the Member States , which have already been performing it up to now and which , furthermore , now have to designate a liaison body for it .
For citizens seeking advice too , it is also more convenient and closer to go to the authorities of the Member States and not to a remote and anonymous Commission database .
I should therefore like to take issue with the Commissioner specifically on that point .
Nor do we consider it appropriate for every disabled insured person to be entitled to the costs of travel and stay for an accompanying person .
The payment of travel expenses for an accompanying person should be linked to the severe disability concept , which is in any case largely defined perfectly by law in the Member States .
We also believe that unemployed persons who have failed to fulfil obligations in their country of employment , in particular have not taken all the required steps to find a job there , should not be able to claim benefits in their country of residence as if they had always complied with the law .
That is not right .
The other three amendments by my Group concern periods , for all of which we consider six months sufficient .
They should not vary between 12 and 18 months .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) On behalf of the PSE Group , a word of thanks to the rapporteurs , the Commission 's officials and the Slovenian Presidency .
This subject has a long history .
After all , the earlier Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 is one of the first items of legislation on the free movement of workers in Europe .
The proposed simplification is designed to ensure a faster service for the European citizen when he claims entitlements and at the same time better verification of the legitimacy of such claims .
Cooperation between payment agencies and improved data exchange are very important factors here .
The implementing rules must also ensure that frontier workers and other entitled persons do not have any break in their entitlement .
From the second reading our Group sees three remaining points which may need further consideration .
Firstly , there are still two different rules in deciding whether someone is an employee or a self-employed person with no staff .
In the social security context the definition used is the one applicable in the country of origin , whilst in the employment context the definition applied to seconded workers is that applicable in the country of employment .
Until such time as we arrive at a clear European definition of self-employment , this subject is guaranteed to keep coming up for discussion in Parliament .
A second point is that of information to entitled persons .
In the Commission text , since amended , details of when entitled persons should receive information from the competent authorities , and on what topics , were scattered too widely over a number of different articles .
A clear summary of the right to information , given at a central point in this legislation , would make the position substantially clearer for entitled persons .
A third point of concern is the scrutiny of compliance .
We know from the earlier Regulation that registration in the Member States and cooperation and coordination between the competent authorities sometimes worked very poorly .
It would be a very good idea for Parliament to be kept informed of how the relevant rules are being implemented in future .
May I congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Lambert , and thank him for his cooperation in the preparation of this document .
The regulation determines the order and solves practical everyday human problems .
It does not aim to unify social security systems .
It is a method of implementation , allowing for the existence of different social security systems in the Member States .
However , it prevents people from missing out on what they are entitled to .
A year ago , President Sarkozy delivered a speech in this House , in which he said that the French believed that the EU was not taking care of them and did not provide any social security .
The people of Ireland are probably not aware of what they can expect from the EU either .
Today France and indeed all of us have a chance to show the people that their everyday problems are being solved at EU level .
Regretfully , to my knowledge , not everyone in the Council is prepared to accept the set time periods proposed by the Commission for the Member States to reconcile their differences .
The rapporteur suggests that we should not rush .
My group is in favour of the proposals and amendments that oblige the Member States to resolve the issues of payment and compatibility in a six-month period instead of protracting it for a year and a half .
People should not miss out because of the institutions ' inactivity and delayed decision-making .
This regulation could be the best example of the EU 's efforts to gain the trust of its citizens .
Therefore , I call on my fellow Members to vote in favour of these amendments .
They concern practical and comprehensible help for every citizen of the EU .
We have been elected to represent the people , not governments or institutions .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , each European Union country has its own social security system that differs from those of other countries , depending on many years of tradition as well as on the country 's financial capabilities .
These systems are not subject to harmonisation .
The right of free movement to take up employment in other countries has created a need to coordinate social security systems .
Current regulations in this regard need to be simplified .
The introduction of electronic data transfer into the Polish pensions system has greatly reduced the number of errors in the transfer of insurance data between institutions .
There is a need to protect citizens against a reduction in their insurance rights .
Workers should have the opportunity to know which system will be used to calculate their entitlements .
They have the right to know how their contributions will be calculated and what will be the resulting entitlements .
For this reason it is important that the regulations and procedures concerning the coordination of systems , which by their nature are quite complicated , should be simplified to the extent that this is possible , and also that they should not act retrospectively to the detriment of the insured .
Madam President , I would firstly like to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Lambert and Mrs Bozkurt , for their detailed and painstaking work , as well as for their outstanding cooperation with all the shadow rapporteurs and for their efforts to make good use of our proposals and of our contribution .
These are exceptionally difficult reports containing a great deal of complex technical details , but they are also exceptionally useful for European citizens .
Citizens have seized every opportunity , including the recent referendum in Ireland , to protest over the great social deficit seen in the policies of the Council and the Commission .
They seek a European Union that safeguards their rights , and here we are now , debating Regulation 883 / 2004 , which , thanks to the Council and the Commission , not Parliament , has been on stand-by for years , waiting for the implementing regulations for the annexes to be adopted .
This results in red tape , lack of information , confusion , violation of the fundamental social security and social rights of employees , who are caught in the middle ; an à la carte Europe , the way the neo-liberals and the large corporations want it , with a single currency but no coordination or harmonisation of the social and social security rights of employees .
In the midst of this legislative gap , the Commission submits its proposal for a ' Bolkestein directive through the back door ' for health services .
These reports reveal another way .
We do not need a Bolkestein directive on health services ; we need an improved Regulation 883 / 2004 , through which , according to the reports , all the issues that come to light can be dealt with , by safeguarding the rights of employees and their families while also supporting the necessary mobility .
Therefore , Commissioner , please stop the Bolkestein experiments on health services and promptly proceed , together with the Council , with the procedures for the processing of the remaining chapters and annexes of Regulation 883 / 2004 so that it can enter into force as soon as possible .
I urge you not to vote in favour of any amendments that weaken the content of the reports by Mrs Lambert and Mrs Bozkurt .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , in , Amendment 4 mentioned ' mobility for the unemployed ' .
Does that mean bussing unemployed around the EU looking for work - at taxpayers ' expense ?
A Member State is liable for social security payments for someone who worked there but moved to another Member State and then became unemployed .
Amendment 148 suggests that the taxpayer should pay for travel for a medical examination in another Member State with a reimbursement system between Member States , no doubt using a complex EU formula .
Member States may make decisions on invalidity which are binding on another Member State , although complicated by the degree of invalidity , but they may have rules against overlapping of benefits .
The rules will concern all EU citizens moving within the EU for any reason whatever .
This includes legally resident third-country nationals who have worked in more than one Member State as well as , soon , stateless persons and refugees .
In several places these reports claim to simplify regulations and modernise existing legislation for social security authorities , employers and citizens , while being very inclusive .
There will be , apparently , no implication for the Community budget .
It says that financial and administrative burdens will be reduced by the rules for coordination - which can only be done at Community level - but that this is not harmonisation .
How can one have reimbursement , EU-determined formulae , a rule covering all movement and rules for coordination , without it being harmonisation ?
All in all , these reports are a mass of conflicting statements .
If they are adopted , they will need a great deal of administrative effort , costing money which the report says is not needed .
Finally , the family here has an identity crisis .
Birth and adoption allowances are , evidently , not family benefits .
So when is a family not a family , and an adopted child is - well , what exactly ?
I too would like to avoid an identity crisis .
A ' frontier worker ' is a person working in one Member State but residing in another providing they return home once a week .
Well , this is France and I am going home tomorrow .
Am I a frontier worker , even though I live right in the middle of England ?
Madam President , mobility of labour is supposed to be a key feature of the EU and of the Lisbon Strategy , yet as an MEP - like other MEPs - I regularly get complaints about lack of health-care cover , inadequate social cover and - perhaps most frustrating of all - conflicting advice from different state agencies .
It is not uncommon for an employee from one Member State to be working in another at the behest of a company which exists in a third Member State , and that is where the real issue for many seems to lie , causing issues about where and how they are covered .
Within our midst we have this very problem affecting parliamentary assistants and , despite the struggle of the Parliamentary Assistants ' Association , this problem persists .
I have to say it is scandalous that we cannot even get our own house in order in this regard , yet here we are legislating for others .
My primary concern is for usefully employed individuals , not benefit tourists .
I want to see any loopholes which help benefit tourists well and truly sealed in this legislation .
( NL ) My thanks to all the rapporteurs for the excellent job they have done , because this was no easy task .
We need good rules on the free movement of workers in Europe , Madam President , rules to ensure that workers who make use of that freedom do not fall between two stools .
That is now taken care of in the new coordination regulation .
That regulation was necessary because the old one was not longer adequate and there was scope for simplifying the coordination procedures .
I wonder if the outcome is satisfactory .
Is everything really simplified now ?
I have my doubts .
We are coordinating social security , but what we are not coordinating is the tax treatment of benefits , when benefits are increasingly being given as tax credits .
I think we ought to reflect on that .
Another point is that coordination always takes place after the event .
National legislators should take far greater account of the consequences of system changes for people who are mobile , that is to say people who work in one country and live in another .
I would also draw attention to a change in the annex .
That change is very good for Dutch pensioners who go on paying social security contributions in the Netherlands but live abroad and have not hitherto been eligible to claim benefits in the Netherlands even though they have been paying into the system there .
So Dutch people living in Belgium or Germany , or even farther afield in France , la belle France , or in Spain , will now be entitled to treatment .
My thanks for this must also go to the Minister for Health , who was in favour of this change .
( SV ) Madam President , Commissioner , I want to thank the rapporteurs .
Jean Lambert has worked on these matters for as long as I can remember and has great experience .
Emine Bozkurt came in a little later , but both have done a fantastically good job and , in particular , have worked exceedingly well with the shadow rapporteurs from the various parties .
Some general points to begin with , since they bear repeating .
This is not about harmonisation .
We know that the social security systems in the EU differ .
It is about citizens and the right of citizens to make use of the internal market in order to look for jobs and to stay in other places within the internal market .
It is of the utmost importance that there is coordination of social security systems .
It is important to have coordination of pension rights .
It is important that the unemployed can make use of the internal market .
It is important that patients can seek treatment in other countries .
These things are crucial to the internal market .
Without coordination , the internal market would not function satisfactorily .
We have had coordination before .
It had its shortcomings .
Now improvements are being introduced , on the one hand through the coverage of more people , not just the economically active , and on the other hand through the coverage of more areas , such as early retirement pensions , which we regard as a positive development .
I would like to draw attention to some matters addressed by our rapporteurs .
Jean Lambert referred to the exchange of electronic data and is favourably disposed to it , since it offers many improvements .
However , it is also important to consider protection of the individual when information is exchanged in this way .
We therefore follow the recommendations of the Data Protection Supervisor .
As far as third country nationals are concerned , it is important that consideration be given to that aspect , not least because the blue card is on its way .
It is all the more urgent that we have equality of treatment .
As regards Emine Bozkurt 's report , I will merely say that the new regulation must not mean fewer rights but more .
That is important .
I thank the rapporteurs again and hope that we can get a final decision in the near future .
( ET ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I thank the rapporteur and the Committee who have done a great job on simplifying and updating these complex provisions .
The topic which we are debating today is one which falls directly within our citizens ' sphere of interest .
What is important to citizens , who are after all the subject of these provisions ?
First , the fact that their rights are safeguarded and , in view of the free movement of labour we have today , that there is social protection provision for them everywhere .
Secondly , the document should be comprehensible to them .
Thirdly , the benefits mechanism should deliver in reasonable time .
What are we achieving with these regulations ?
Our citizens ' primary concern - the right to social insurance - is very well safeguarded .
Their second concern , comprehensibility , is something we have not yet fully succeeded in .
I am not reproaching anybody here : this topic is complex , very technical and is not a work of great literature .
The third concern , the period of time by which citizens receive benefits , is dependent on the vote we are about to take today .
Social insurance benefits are not comparable to businessmen 's profits or bank dividends .
Applicants are people in difficulty for whom the benefit is generally the only source of income .
I therefore call upon you to support the proposals for a six-month benefits payment period .
In order to ensure the exercise and protection of citizens ' rights the clearing period between the competent institutions of the Member States must be the same , namely six months , particularly in view of the fact that an electronic procedure would be used .
An 18-month period for processing benefits is not appropriate in the 21st century .
( PL ) Madam President , creating a coordinated social security system is a very difficult task .
For this reason we should offer our congratulations to the rapporteur .
I would like , however , at this point , to draw attention to the issue of benefits paid to families of immigrants arriving from outside Europe .
Of course support should be provided to those who are there legally , and humanitarian aid should be given to illegal immigrants , but the provision of unrestricted social benefits to families for which this becomes their permanent and sole source of income is a misunderstanding .
Currently there are many families that are enjoying a wide range of benefits and have no intention of working , as they consider their standard of living to be quite satisfactory .
This is very demoralising for the economy as well as for the traditions and culture of work in Europe .
This is compounded by the fact that these families live in a way that does not integrate with the cultures and traditions of the country where they settle .
( EL ) Madam President , we consider Mrs Lambert 's report to be positive from a technical viewpoint , as it makes progress in the area of social security coordination .
It enables EU citizens to add up the periods for which they have lived or worked in another Member State , under the social security system at the time , in order to calculate their pension from the state or to establish other rights .
It thus contributes to the easier and smoother movement of citizens within the Union .
I must note , however , that we must not overlook the fact that , despite some objections raised in the report , there will be an electronic exchange of information and personal data , and we do not fully agree with this .
What I wish to stress in speaking now is another need , which we currently tend to overlook in the European Union .
The crucial issue is not taking measures to facilitate movement merely for the sake of taking them .
That is not the priority for employees ; what they seek and demand is respect for their fundamental rights .
Emigration from one country to another because of unemployment or poor working conditions in one 's country of origin is not a social need .
The social need is to ensure certainty and security in employment and , thus , in the family lives of all citizens .
Emigration for financial and social reasons should not be the objective ; far from it .
The course the European Union is choosing today - placing greater importance on the free movement of capital than on self-evident employment rights , as can be seen in a number of cases heard by the Court of Justice of the European Communities - suggests that we cannot content ourselves with the right to transfer our pension rights to demonstrate , ostensibly , that the free movement of persons has been established .
We need to fight for full employment with comprehensive social security , in contrast with current practices , which , on the pretext of demographic decline , are leading towards the logic of uncertain employment and are undermining the importance of collective negotiations in various countries .
( SK ) In the first place , I should like to thank the rapporteurs , Mrs Lambert and Mrs Bozkurt , for their excellent and challenging work .
The rapporteurs , we in this House and the Council as well as the Commission have all combined our efforts and , because of that , today we have in front of us , at last , the long-awaited new regulation that will make it possible to implement Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 which is due to replace the cumbersome Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 .

Together these documents simplify citizens ' access to benefits and services , as many of my fellow Members as well as the Commissioner have pointed out . Access to these benefits and services , granted by individual Member States through their social security systems , has so far been difficult for eligible persons in other Member States .
There can be no doubt that together these documents will help to simplify cross-border movement for work purposes , as a result of which the single labour market will be better used and will function better .
As the shadow rapporteur for the other report prepared by Mrs Lambert , I should like to highlight the broadened implementation of the principle of equal treatment and non-discrimination , by extending the provisions of the Regulation to third-country nationals .
I think that , as the debate shows , we cannot assume that this legislation will solve all our problems .
It does not even solve all our existing problems , let alone the future ones .
Clearly , many steps will have to be taken and a lot of work will have to be done in order to achieve sustainability and adapt to the new challenges , including further coordination .
( RO ) We have spoken about the simply technical nature of this regulation many times .
In fact , it was a wrong vision blocking a deeply political aspect .
In the European Union , we have the single market , but there are 27 different social security systems .
Millions of citizens work in other countries than their own and should benefit from the legal social rights due to them and their families .
Institutions should manage this situation and suppliers should deduct their services .
The rules according to which problems are solved today are from before the Internet era , when the Union had six Member States inhabited by sedentary citizens .
Today , they are 27 , inhabited by citizens who tend to become migratory .
The modernization , simplification and adjustment of these rules to the new reality were absolutely necessary .
This is the purpose of Regulation 883 / 2004 , which is still inapplicable without procedures .
We are now in 2008 - four years of delays unfavourable both to the employees claiming their rights and to the efficiency of companies and institutions involved .
A proverb says that " the devil is in the details ” .
Today , we have to congratulate Rapporteurs Jean Lambert and Emine Bozkurt because , by solving the issue of details , we are expecting a fluidization of the information flow , under conditions of data security and more efficient coordination .
These days , the new social agenda proposes minor improvements against the background of major shortcomings .
The enforcement of Regulation 883 is good news .
It scarcely mitigates the feeling that , in recent years , the European social agenda has been under stagnation .

( PL ) Madam President , Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 applies not only to employees and their families , but also to all those covered by social security systems .
It extends the coordination of those systems , and there are also other important changes including calculations for pensions , benefits and other entitlements .
How effective this coordination will turn out to be will depend on the contents of the new implementing regulation and on the effectiveness of electronic data exchange as well as on good communications .
It is also good that the regulation affects third countries , and that work is ongoing to improve it .
We should give recognition to the work and the proposals put forward by the rapporteur .
One cannot require any more from her , since the Council and the Commission have not yet completed their work and have not yet presented the final contents of the Annexes .
Work is continuing , and recipients of benefits are also continuing to wait , frustrated as they are by the failure to pay full benefits , by bureaucracy and by the long time one has to wait for refunds .
( EL ) Madam President , these are regulations that confirm the general direction of European policy and relate to solving practical problems regarding social security for European citizens , as well as all those living and working in EU Member States .
When they enter into force , once the implementing regulation , which is currently being reviewed within the codecision framework , has also been passed , they will strengthen the mobility of employees and make life easier for their families , during both employment and retirement .
According to the rapporteurs , who I wish to congratulate , the principles for the simplification of the regulations will alter the current coordination system without leading to lesser rights for citizens , as would have been the case with harmonisation .
The need for effectiveness and quick solutions is met through the simplification of bureaucratic procedures and through the resolution of inter-state administrative issues .
One of the main measures is for Member States to appoint cooperation authorities and special liaison organisations in order to cover the various aspects of social security in cross-border relations .
One of those is long-term care , an issue that is resolved in a very complex way under Parliament 's proposal .
We hope that an easier way will be found to solve the chronic problem of ageing Europe .
The payment systems , the settlement of disputes , the recovery of amounts paid and the difficulties that citizens face in accumulating rights from periods of employment in another Member State are currently great obstacles , and we hope to overcome these within a set period through the coordination that the new basic regulation , as well as the implementing regulation , sets out to reinstate .
The individual attributes of the national social security systems will be taken into account in the particular provisions for the implementation of national legislation in Annex XI .
The regulation will also cover the rights of foreign employees .
Madam President , we never fail to get remarks from the Far Right when we are debating this issue - remarks such as ' benefit tourists ' .
We never hear them talking about ' tax tourists ' or ' state aid tourists ' . It is always the poor and the less well-off who are attacked in this way .
I want to congratulate the two rapporteurs on these reports .
Unfortunately , their positive work is unlikely to attract much attention in the Member State media , which is generally more interested in negative stories .
These are complex resolutions seeking to coordinate Member States ' social security systems , which are also in themselves complex because they seek to address a variety of individual circumstances .
The regulations are essential to our citizens and residents , particularly those living in border areas who , not unusually , work in one Member State while living in another .
It is important to ensure that people who do work and live in this way are covered for unforeseen unemployment , sickness and accidents and , indeed , eventual retirement .
They need security if we are to ensure free movement in the European Union .
However , I want to raise one particular issue which is not covered by these regulations and is not generally covered in the Member States either .
That is the freedom of movement of people with disabilities , who often need personal assistance in order to move freely .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( RO ) The rules regarding the coordination of social security systems are closely related to the principle of the free movement of persons and should improve the living standard and employment conditions of citizens living in another European Union Member State .
The present regulation in the version amended by the Rapporteurs simplifies all these procedures and expands the scope of application to all categories of citizens , both those working and those unemployed .
The European citizens should be able to benefit from pension rights with a total amount corresponding to the length of service .
Once they settle into another European Union state , citizens should be able to find an administrative system able to collect all information regarding former employments , as well as the financial rights arising from the professional activity .
This is why I would have wanted the Commission 's proposal to include solutions as exact as possible for the way in which Member States can efficiently transfer information regarding social rights .
Moreover , I consider that the present regulation is fundamental for the European labour mobility .
A Eurobarometer survey shows that more than 50 % of the citizens feel discouraged by the social insecurity they expect following the change of the workplace to another Member State .
Consequently , only 2 % of the European citizens presently live in another Member State than their own .
If we want mobility to be a real driver of the European economy , we have to eliminate all administrative obstacles regarding the portability of social rights .
( PT ) Commissioner Špidla , ladies and gentlemen , we need to coordinate social security at the European level , hence this opportunity to debate the issue .
First , I would like to welcome the work done by the rapporteurs , Emine Bozkurt and Jean Lambert .
Second , I would like to highlight the following points : the absolute need to guarantee compatibility between national systems , in the private and mutualist sectors as well as the public sector .
Such compatibility will contribute to greater mobility and provide workers with the opportunity to move around the whole of Europe .
Mr President , in this context , it is important to make progress with aggregating deductions in different Member States , just as it is important to guarantee that the coordination of social security systems strengthens and never restricts citizens ' rights .
In addition , it is essential to simplify the rules so that citizens are able to understand the principles and language used by European Union institutions and feel that Europe is one entity .
We know it is not easy to manage social security systems , but it is essential that the citizens of Europe understand the criteria we are using .
I would go further and say that this coordination will certainly help us increase our mutual understanding of the different social security systems .
We need to move towards improved social security for all Europeans , towards a social security system that takes on board the best practices from the different systems , to improve coordination today and , who knows , harmonisation tomorrow .
( SK ) The internal market , embracing the four freedoms , is one of the fundamental achievements of the European Union .
Adopting the directive on services and free movement of people brings advantages for European Union citizens .
On the other hand , citizens turn to us with problems they encounter when in need of health and social care .
Individual Member States have their specific social security systems .
I am convinced that coordination of the systems , transparency , elimination of bureaucracy and the electronic information exchange system will be beneficial to all EU citizens .
I should like to thank all Members for today 's very interesting debate , and the rapporteurs for their challenging work .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the detailed debate that , in my opinion , is testimony to the high quality of the relevant report .
Right now we have reached a certain stage in regard to our work on the new regulation .
Indeed at this point not all problems have been solved but , as the debate has also shown , we have achieved success in all aspects .
The European system coordinates social security systems .
This does not mean that it defines new rights .
At this level we do not define new rights .
What we do is improve the practical application of rights for citizens moving across the European Union .
These are tens of millions of people , tens of millions of cases .
Consequently , allow me once again to stress how important this debate is given that it is extremely practical and affects almost every single citizen of the European Union .
Let me also stress that the technical proposals tabled also have some fundamental political purport because freedom of movement and access to rights belong , in my opinion , to the fundamental principles on which the European Union has been built .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to respond , just briefly , to a comment we heard regarding new directives on the movement of patients that will be tabled .
I want to emphasise that the issue is not free movement of services , in other words any parallels with any previous directive are inaccurate .
I am also of the opinion that the thorough debate in Parliament will prove that these proposals represent progress for European Union citizens .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to thank all those Members who have contributed to the debate .
It is clear that some people lead what appear to be complicated lives .
In fact the situation may be very straightforward if the border is within maybe 10 km of their homes and they are looking for work or indeed other things .
It is certainly clear from some speeches we have heard in this House that the current system is not well understood either in some Member States ' administrations or in this House itself .
Coordination of social security systems already exists - this is not new .
What this is doing is updating , implementing and simplifying .
All of you who have a European health insurance card with you - which , of course , you all will have - will know that even under the existing system we can simplify .
I recommend Amendment 30 to Article 11 ( 1 ) to the individual who was not sure whether or not he was frontier worker .
This implementing regulation is also trying to set out clearly the rights that people have .
That is the aim of Amendment 34 , and of Amendment 125 , which is a clarification and does not give new rights to somebody who is seeking work in two Member States .
I would once again urge people to support the committee text concerning the database .
If this is not up and running effectively - and it is something that Member States ' administrations want as well - then it becomes very difficult to meet whatever deadlines this House decides to put in place today .
I recommend the committee position for both the reports to the House and look forward to the vote in a few minutes .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) I haven 't really anything more to add .
My thanks to everyone who has contributed to the debate : thank you for your support .
I am now looking to see how the vote goes shortly .
( FR ) Madam President , on Monday evening we were gratified at the visit by the Minister , Mr Jouyet , and the importance that the French Presidency appeared to attach to the work of this Parliament .
Today , when we are discussing social security , the Presidency bench has remained hopelessly empty .
I hope that is not an indication that the French Presidency of the Union is not interested in a subject as important as social security .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Decision on urgent procedure
Proposal for a Council regulation instituting a temporary specific action aiming to promote the restructuring of the European Union fishing fleets affected by the economic crisis - C6-0270 / 2008 -
Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries - ( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , we have indeed received this request for the urgent procedure and it was considered by the Committee on Fisheries at the special meeting held here at 10 o 'clock .
The Committee on Fisheries was unanimously in favour of adopting this urgent procedure and I am grateful to it for its promptness in dealing with the matter .
( Parliament agreed to urgent procedure . )
1 .
Annual action programmes for Brazil and Argentina ( 2008 ) (
2 .
EU priorities for the 63rd Session of the UN General Assembly (
3 .
Safety on the Community 's railways (
4 .
Amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency (
5 .
Rules for the operation of air services in the Community ( recast ) (
6 .
Programme for the Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics ( MEETS ) (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to make a very few remarks on this report , one aspect of which , as you know , is that it contributes to the process of deregulation and the reduction of red tape .
The report provides for an obligation on the Commission to report annually to Parliament , informing us how this process of cutting red tape and deregulating is proceeding and , we hope , how well it is succeeding .
We in Parliament , however , can play a far more prominent role in this process .
It is therefore my hope and wish that , in addition to this reporting obligation on the part of the Commission , we ourselves can be far more actively involved in this process , for example through our work in committee .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in particular can take the lead in these matters , which includes engagement in dialogue with Commissioner Verheugen and the Stoiber group .
Accordingly , we in Parliament still have work to do on this dossier , and I would like to take this opportunity to emphasise that point .
7 .
Batteries and accumulators and their waste (
8 .
Restrictions on the marketing and use of certain dangerous substances and preparations (
9 .
Conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks (
10 .
Internal market in natural gas (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as a result of the limited time available yesterday , I could not , as I wanted , thank all those who have worked with me .
This has been a difficult directive , and there have been very lengthy discussions , but in my view we have ultimately reached a successful conclusion .
I should like in particular to thank all my colleagues on the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy for their cooperation , especially the shadow rapporteurs , Mr Reul , Mr Swoboda , Mr Manders , Mr Turmes , Mr Seppänen , and obviously Commissioner Piebalgs - I hope I have not left anyone out - as well as Mr Vidal-Quadras for his cooperation .



I should also like to thank the secretariat as a whole , my staff and my fellow workers .

Only three seconds .
This is a directive which is of interest and is extremely important .
It is a directive - please may I speak for three seconds .
It is a directive - we lose so much time in this House ! - which is of interest to operators , often , unfortunately , in the form of monopolies , and to consumers .
I believe that in our work , we have tried not to penalise producers or consumers but have tried - and thank you for the applause , but I shall press on - we have tried to work for all European citizens in the sense ...
Right , you are in a hurry , let us conclude very briefly .
This , and I thank you , is a very pleasing expression of parliamentary democracy in Europe .
( Applause )
11 .
Coordination of social security systems (
- Before the vote on Amendment 79 :
Mr President , I would like to propose reversing the order of the vote .
Amendment 79 is broader and Amendment 163 restricts Amendment 79 , so Amendment 79 is the most far-reaching .
Therefore we would like to have that first .
The reason it has been placed in this order is the addition of the word ' severe ' in Amendment 163 .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I am happy to support the reversal that is proposed by the PSE Group .
12 .
Coordination of social security systems : Annex XI (
13 .
Extending Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 to third country nationals otherwise excluded (
14 .
Formation of political groups ( amendment of Rule 29 ) (
- Before the vote :
( FR ) Mr President , rather than invoking Rule 151 of our Rules of Procedure on the admissibility of amendments , since it seems , in fact , that an amendment bears only a distant relationship to the original text of the report , I should like to suggest that this House refer the text back to committee .
I shall explain that proposal very briefly .
The main purpose of the Corbett report , even in the opinion of Mr Corbett himself , is to prevent Members who share a belief in the defence of national identity , sovereignty and independence being able to form a group .
However , I should like to point out the pernicious effects of the report .
In the next parliamentary term , it might result in a very large number of non-attached Members who , having discovered their common ground , decide to form a group that would certainly be politically incorrect but would actually have even more Members than you fear .
I am therefore following the totally anti-democratic , partisan and sectarian logic of Mr Corbett and the originators of this plan and am drawing their attention to the pernicious effects of texts like this .
I suggest that the possible consequences of such a provision should be considered in committee .
Mr Gollnisch , I was in the chair when your group was dissolved .
Mr President , the worst possible reason to change the Rules is to aim it at one particular person or one particular group of people .
That is the difference between the rule of law and arbitrary rule .
In any case , I think this report , in the state that it now stands , is illegal because it was voted against in its original form in committee .
The amended version now before the House bears such little resemblance to the original one , which was defeated in committee , so I think that , if we duly follow our own procedures , we have no option but to refer it either back to committee or to the legal services for arbitration .
chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs . - ( DE ) Mr President , there is no reason to refer this report back to committee .
If Mr Gollnisch had wished to present his case , he could have attended our committee meeting , but he did not .
We have discussed all of this , and I put it to the House that that the number of Members of this Parliament has grown from 626 to the present level of 785 following the major enlargement , and is now set to rise from 732 to 751 , and that , when such changes are made , the minimum size of a political group naturally needs to be redefined too .
We have always done this in the past , and we are doing it again now .
As you will know , the amendments on the table are compromise motions .
For this reason , Mr President , I believe we should vote today rather than referring the matter back to committee again .
Referral would serve no useful purpose .
( The request for referral back to committee was rejected . )
- Before the vote on Amendment 3 :
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to briefly state the reasons for my oral amendment , and it actually concerns both Mr Corbett and Mr Leinen , who gave the size of Parliament as an argument for this change .
The present oral amendment , which I am tabling on behalf of my group , is a natural extension of the amendments that were adopted in 2002 when Mr Corbett was rapporteur .
I am therefore closely following his reasoning , which took account of the enlargement of the EU from 15 to 25 countries .
Using the same ratios for an EU now consisting of 27 countries , one arrives at a figure of 3 % , which must represent one fifth of these nations , resulting in a lower limit of 22 for the number of members .
I hope that my amendment is seen for what it is , namely a compromise text .
Yesterday 's negotiations made a plea for us to seek a compromise , one whose text was fully consistent with the reasoning used by Mr Corbett in 2002 .
The oral amendment reads as follows .
I shall read it out in English , as I have only the English version , which was circulated among Members today .
' A political group shall comprise Members elected in at least one fifth of the Member States .
The minimum number of Members required to form a political group shall be 3 % of the total number of Members . '
( DA ) I would urge my fellow Members to vote in favour of this oral amendment , as it would be a compromise in which we who are opposed to the original proposal indeed remain faithful to Mr Corbett 's logic .
( The oral amendment was not accepted . )
15 .
The role of the national judge in the European judicial system (
16 .
Airbus / Boeing WTO disputes ( vote )
17 .
European strategic energy technology plan (
18 .
Sovereign Wealth Funds ( vote )
19 .
Towards a new culture of urban mobility (
20 .
Report on the ECB annual report for 2007 (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For the results and other details on the vote : see minutes . )
Declaring 2011 ' European Year of Volunteering ' ( written declaration ) : see Minutes
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( LT ) Today in the European Parliament we have adopted the resolution on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community at second reading .
We are amending the Regulation that has been in force since 1992 , and I would like to point out once again the amendments that are of the greatest importance to our citizens , and primarily to passengers and aircraft crew .
I am talking about the measures under consideration that would enable us to achieve transparency in air fares and to be more active in banning misleading advertising and dishonest competition in the sphere of air transport .
The amendments intended to ensure greater adherence to flight security standards as well as social guarantees for aircraft crew are of great importance .
It looks as if all disagreements between the Commission and the Council have been resolved , so the Regulation should enter into force at the end of the year .
I do hope that the amended Regulation will be implemented appropriately in all EU Member States .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , today , after 16 years , we have finally given the green light to simplification , unification and at the same time tighter restrictions in regard to the granting and revoking of air operating licences .
I hope that the regulation will not result in the liquidation of small sports companies .
I voted for the regulation .
I sincerely believe that the regulation will truly make it possible to revoke the operating licences of companies that cheat customers by giving just their tariffs without any taxes , fees or fuel surcharges and therefore not giving the full price of air tickets .
I hope that the supervising agency will also focus on price discrimination due to the place of residence .
I believe that the amended regulation will lead to improved safety in the operation of air services , in particular by unifying the conditions governing the leasing of aircraft with crew in the EU , as well as from third countries .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Mr President .
As the Socialist responsible for this topic , I have supported the compromise recommendations brokered by Mr Ouzký .
I regard it as a success for Parliament and also for the Socialist Group that the Council has also accepted the fact that we should restrict the two glycol solvents more , thus protecting the health of our citizens .
The substance called DEGME damages health when absorbed through the skin .
It is well known that it also limits reproductive ability , so it is a major success that we have prohibited its use not only in paints but also in cleaning materials and floor care products .
Originally , the Commission would only have prohibited DEGME in paints , but through collaboration by all the parties we have also achieved its restriction in cleaning materials .
Inhaling the solvent called DEGME is harmful to human health .
According to the report by the European Commission , it would only have been banned in spray paints , but yet again , upon a recommendation from the Socialists , it has also been restricted in aerosol cleaning materials .
Since there was no plenary debate , I wanted to mention the substance of the compromise recommendations .
( MT ) It is important that the European Parliament is aware of the situation in my country regarding water and electricity prices and the effect of today 's decision , that is , regarding this case .
That is why I am explaining my vote .
Ever since the government raised the price of oil , it has raised the consumer 's bill by imposing a surcharge .
This month it announced that this will increase to 96 % .
This will cause new poverty , poverty that will be known as energy poverty .
At the same time , the government is not putting forward any short-term or long-term solution .
Policy on alternative energy is non-existent , despite the fact that in my country we have a lot of sun and wind , even with regard to cleaner energy such as gas , to the extent that the Government has still not begun to give it any consideration .
That is why I voted in this way and that is why what we have done today is important , if not historic .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me explain why I voted the way I did on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2003 / 55 / EC concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas .
The key part of the directive undoubtedly concerns the proposal for the separation of ownership , which would expressly prevent vertically integrated companies from holding an interest in both the supply and transmission of gas .
I voted for the amended compromise proposal because I am convinced that the concerns of countries that were against full ownership unbundling must be taken into account .
I agree with the Commission that the European market in natural gas suffers from lack of investment in transmission infrastructure and a low degree of coordination between individual transmission system operators .
In my opinion , however , we have to take into account the structural diversity of the natural gas and electricity markets and therefore make a distinction between them .
The liberalisation of the gas market must be conducted gradually and symmetrically .
It is necessary to focus especially on harmonisation of the degree of openness of the national markets .
( IT ) Mr President , I abstained from the final vote and voted against the proposal for the so-called ' third option ' as regards the separation of suppliers and networks in the gas market , because we have lost a major opportunity to affirm the principle of free competition in the gas market .
We should have followed what has taken place in the electricity market ; in contrast , this third option in practice offers a guarantee to monopolies and former monopolies in Europe ; our national markets will therefore continue to lack comparability , thereby making any prospect of a genuine European energy market even more remote .
What is even worse is that this ambiguous third option in practice means that the former monopolies will be further encouraged and helped to enter into agreements along the lines of those with the Russian gas giant , Gazprom .
( DE ) Mr President , as everyone in this House knows , we have had an EC Regulation on the coordination of the European social security systems since 2004 but , unfortunately , no implementing regulation .
The decision taken by the European Parliament finally gives us implementing rules too , which means that we have an instrument with which we can encourage mobility in the European Union without loss of social security .
The establishment of liaison bodies also enables us to provide practical assistance to those who work outside their home country , for example by answering questions on where and how they should apply for pensions .
In other words , we in the European Parliament have ensured that people can obtain real help on welfare matters .
( NL ) I abstained in the vote on the Bozkurt report , although in principle I have no objection to a limited form of coordination by the EU Member States of their various social security systems , certainly not if that works to the advantage of European citizens living in a Member State other than their own .
However , I would once again warn against harmonisation , or worse still , uniformity in the different social security systems in the various Member States .
As a Fleming I am , in a manner of speaking , a privileged observer of how a unitary system of social security in Belgium for just two population groups , Flemings and Walloons , is totally unworkable and leads to enormous abuses .
For goodness ' sake let each Member State organise and finance its own social security itself , otherwise one way or another you end up with an abuse-ridden system which is worse , more expensive and less efficient , and ultimately that creates less , not more solidarity amongst the peoples of Europe .
( DE ) Mr President , I also wanted to explain that I voted in favour of this report because it proposes a new regulation in place of the old one , thereby ensuring that our systems of social security can now be more effectively coordinated , because the relevant legal provisions have been simplified and amended .
The Lambert report also enables us to achieve our objectives of making another contribution to greater mobility in the European Union and enabling people to take their entitlement to welfare benefits with them when they find employment in another Member State .
That is a contribution to social security in the European Union .
( NL ) Thank you , Madam President .
So here we are today at stage two of Mr Corbett 's efforts to groom Parliament still better as the lapdog of the politically correct Eurocrat caste .
Yesterday it was decided that we MEPs are scarcely to be allowed to table parliamentary questions , and there is to be a system of self-censure by the President of Parliament .
Today it is being made easier to form groups , and the rapporteur emphatically , and to some degree honestly , acknowledges that this measure is aimed primarily at the Eurosceptic right in Parliament .
So things have come full circle .
Eurosceptic opinion in this House , certainly that on the political right , has to be muzzled .
The Eurosceptic vote in referendums in Ireland , the Netherlands and France is , as usual , simply ignored as if it did not exist .
This is a European version of Mugabe-style democracy .
Some democracy !


( FR ) Mr President , the rapporteur , Mr Corbett , actually expressed his views , using offensive language , I might add , outside the Constitutional Affairs Committee regarding the political family of which I am one of the representatives in this House ; this clearly gives rise to serious doubts as to his impartiality .
The report is highly questionable and its content was drastically reduced in committee ; all that remained were arrangements to ensure the survival of politically correct groups whose total number of members would fall below the minimum number required , and an amendment has been sneaked in specifically to prevent our political family from forming a group .
The reasons given are completely at odds with the facts ; you need only refer to the annex to the report to see that there is no national parliament where the minimum number of Members required to form a group is higher than 20 .
Incidentally , that number is often much lower , at 15 , 10 or 8 , and in some cases a single person is enough to form a political group .
The Corbett report is therefore an attack on democracy and , quite simply , on the basic rules of fair play .
( NL ) This Corbett report has just one purpose , and one purpose only , namely to muzzle the right-wing national voices in the European Parliament .
Mr Corbett 's group chairman makes no secret of the fact .
When the ITS Group was formed in January 2007 , he said quite openly that the Regulation would be amended specifically in order to block the formation of right-wing groups in future .
Other groups will undoubtedly suffer collateral damage as a result , but Mr Corbett will not lose any sleep over that .
His proposal is probably aimed at a Eurosceptic group .
Clearly it is anathema to the socialists in Parliament that groups of all political colours should have the same means and political rights .
This Mugabe-style thinking is an integral part of the democratic deficit in Europe , in the same way that the democratic verdict of the voters in France , the Netherlands and Ireland is being steadfastly ignored .
Rest assured , Mr President , we shall make this an election issue next year in Flanders .
Mr President , the fact that we voted at all on this today seems to me a breach of this Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
The committee voted down the report because I think the chairman of the committee had miscalculated who was in the room , at which point he simply tore up the rule book and proceeded on an amended version of it .
Why have we gone to such lengths ?
What is it that is so important that it requires us to tear up our rules like this ?
Well , the answer of course as we know - and the rapporteur has been clear about it - is to prevent Eurosceptics from forming a group .
But why are you so frightened ?
What is it that makes you so nervous ?
We are only 50 , maybe 60 people maximum , out of 785 MEPs .
Could it be that the people you are really worried about are your own voters and that you are sublimating and projecting on to us the contempt and fear you feel for the electorates of Europe who vote ' no ' whenever given an opportunity , that you take out on us , their visible spokesmen in this Chamber , what you dare not express about the people who return you to this place .
If I am wrong , prove me wrong : hold the referendums that you once promised .
Pactio Olisipiensis censenda est !

( PL ) Mr President , I voted against Mr Corbett 's report , as I believe it to be a symptom of extreme discrimination at the heart of the allegedly democratic European Parliament , which is trying to use administrative methods to make it impossible to form political groups that do not think or act in the way the majority consider to be politically correct .
This is a two-fold discrimination because administrative methods are being used to stop the formation of groups and , at the same time , considerable amounts of additional financial support are being given to organised political groups , which gives them an additional advantage .
This discrimination goes against the basis of the European Union and the foundations on which the EU is supposed to be built .
I protest most strongly against this move ; you should not have any illusions about the fact that even if you are able to carry this through , you will not be able to push it through the nations of Europe , which will definitely object .
Mr President , I have rarely heard such nonsense as I have just heard from the Vlaams Blok , the Front national and Dan Hannan .
This report does not censor anybody , nor would this rule change lead to anyone losing their vote , their right to speak and their right to act as Members of the European Parliament .
What this rule change is about is : at what threshold do you set the figure to enable Members to create a group and thereby access extra taxpayers ' money and extra resources to pursue political activities ?
Every national parliament that has a group system sets a threshold .
We had a particularly low one - lower as a percentage than almost any national parliament .
It is quite right that we stand back and examine it .
I notice that in the end almost all groups supported the compromise - large groups and small groups .
I notice that the speaker for the Independence / Democracy Group itself - the Eurosceptic IND / DEM Group - proposed an alternative figure of 3 % : 22 MEPs .
So they themselves recognise that our current figure needs to be raised , that it is currently too low .
Frankly , is the difference between their figure of 22 and the figure of 25 that has been adopted really an attack on democracy ?
Oh , come off it !
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Buzek 's report provides a detailed appraisal of all strategic measures in the area of energy technology .
Unfortunately , a lack of financing for all the research needed , together with the sudden increase in the prices of gas and oil , meant that we had to direct our research to issues linked to reducing their use for power generation purposes .
This priority will also reduce CO2 emissions and should be included in the strategy .
I believe it is important to promote research into the construction of safe , modern nuclear power stations and into the construction of the newest power stations based on producing helium and hydrogen , as well as on third generation biofuels that can be produced within local areas , easing overstretched fuel costs .
In the voting I supported the amendments that spoke of these priorities .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , we have accepted the important report prepared by Professor Buzek .
The European Union 's growing dependence on energy imports , which , in 2030 , are to reach a level of 65 % , has forced us to take steps to ensure the security of supplies of raw materials used for power generation , based on the principle of solidarity .
Additional instruments should also be created to reduce the risks to energy security of individual Member States caused by continuing liberalisation of the energy sector .
In order to reach EU objectives as regards renewable energy and the reduction of greenhouse gases , we must promote the development of new technologies , especially technologies for carbon capture and storage .
It is important to support clean coal technologies and to intensify our activities as regards second and third generation biofuels as well as to increase research into nuclear power .
Work on improvements in efficiency and energy savings has also become much more important .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I am voting for this resolution .
I am the Development Committee 's rapporteur on the Erasmus Mundus programme and my report has recently been adopted unanimously .
I hope that we will be able to endorse the final text in the September plenary , so that the new programme can start in January 2009 .
The aim is to export the excellence of our university system beyond the borders of the Union , enabling foreign students to come to study in our faculties - and giving students from the EU an opportunity , through support , to gain experience in a non-EU country .
I believe that Erasmus is a key instrument for sustainable development since , as my report stresses , it should promote the return of students to their own countries and thus contribute , through the fund of ideas , knowledge and international contacts that they have gained , to the growth of their country 's economies .
A substantial proportion of financing , in relation to action 2 , is taken from the appropriations earmarked for development .
In my view it is necessary to ensure that the financial appropriations for the 2008 annual action programmes for Argentina and Brazil , specifically earmarked for the promotion of economic development and welfare , are actually used for both education and concrete action in the field and that they provide infrastructure and means of production geared to sustainable development .
in writing . - ( PT ) As it is impossible to mention all the important points in this report , I would like to highlight that after the Irish people 's emphatic NO to the Treaty of Lisbon , this Parliament continues to pretend and act as though nothing has happened .
However , very much to the contrary , as shown by this report 's shameless ambition .
Among other aspects , the majority of the European Parliament considers that :
each country 's position , that is , their foreign policies should be linked to a binding political platform established by the EU ;
the EU should consider a reorganisation and expansion of its offices at the UN , in view of ' the increased powers and responsibilities that the EU 's representatives will be expected to exercise with a view to ratification of the Lisbon Treaty ' ;
the Council should define , ' as soon as possible , the operational nature of the EU 's observer status at the United Nations ' ;
Member States should agree ' a more cohesive position on the reform of the UN Security Council - one which , whilst maintaining the ultimate objective , within a reformed United Nations , of one permanent seat for the European Union , aims in the meantime at augmenting the weight of the Union ' .
Federalism , under the thumb of the great powers , with Germany at the head , in one of its ambitious and clear expressions ...
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party welcomes this report and in particular welcomes the strong calls on EU Member States to concentrate and strengthen their commitment towards the Millennium Development Goals .
We strongly agree that the focus must be on meeting the promises made and scaling up the existing procedures .
Labour Euro MPs , however , do not agree with the recommendation for a single EU seat on the UN Security Council and cannot support this recommendation .
We do not believe this would be a good thing for the scale of European representation .
Under Article 19 , European members of the UNSC do not explicitly present EU positions in the Council .
Furthermore , the UN Charter itself stipulates that this cannot be the case .
However there is a healthy informal co-ordination process both in New York and more widely , and it is this which should be encouraged .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Verts / ALE Group has always considered that the European Union should have a permanent seat in the United Nations Security Council , as set out in the Lambsdorff report .
Our Group does not , however , accept the ' priority ' status that has been afforded to the initiative known as the ' Overarching Process ' under which there would be an increase in the number of permanent national members and which , in our view , has to be seen as only one of a range of initiatives .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Lambsdorff 's report setting out the EU priorities for the 63rd Session of the UN General Assembly .
I particularly support the need to continue to push for an ambitious commitment to the Millennium Development Goals ( MDG ) at the Summit .
The EU MDG Agenda should set a global example and we should be pushing for this example to be followed by the rest of the international community at the UN General Assembly in September .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - Today the proposal of Mr. Lambsdorff for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on the EU priorities for the 63rd Session of the UN General Assembly was adopted without a vote in plenary .
Not only is this practice - that is enabled by ' rule 90 ' - very dubious , it also gives the false impression that the whole EP agrees with the content of the report , which is certainly not the case .
We strongly reject the recommendation that the current status of the Lisbon Treaty would call for a ' reorganisation and expansion of the offices of the Council and the Commission in New York and Geneva in view of the increased powers and responsibilities that the EU 's representatives will be expected to exercise with a view to ratification of the Lisbon Treaty . '
Not only is this an insult to the Irish voters that rejected the Lisbon Treaty by a wide majority during the referendum , it is also an attempt to interpret the Lisbon Treaty in such a way that it would ' confer legal personality upon the EU ' , thus making it a superstate .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Lambsdorff report ( and related recommendation ) gives a clear political signal for the strengthening of the European Union 's profile within the United Nations ; taking the Commission and the Member States together , the Union provides the UN with over 40 % of its funding , but has not as yet acquired any political sway or capacity of influence in return .
However , one part of the text is misleading and prejudicial to the discussions under way in New York on the reform of the Security Council .
While stressing the ultimate objective of a permanent seat for the EU as such , the recommendation cites , among the various negotiating initiatives , only the so-called ' Overarching Process ' , an exercise led by those countries committed to supporting only one of the various proposals on the table , i.e. that of an increase in the number of permanent national members .
That proposal , which has been supported by less than one third of the membership , has from the outset seemed divisive and unbalanced , as the President of the General Assembly has himself pointed out .
While we would stress that we very much welcome the political attention that the European Parliament is focusing on the overall strengthening of the European Union 's profile in the United Nations , we consider that our reservations and objection to the part of the recommendation on the ' Overarching Process ' should be minuted .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , I should like to give a favourable opinion on the Lambsdorff report , which once again highlights the European Parliament 's commitment to strengthening the European Union 's profile in the United Nations .
I should like , however , to stress that , on the issue of the reform of the Security Council , the report puts forward a value judgment prejudicial to the discussions still under way in New York .
In particular , among the various reform options on the table , mention is made of the ' Overarching Process ' ( paragraph Q ) , a proposal to increase the number of permanent national members of the Security Council .
That proposal has up to now been supported by less than one third of the Member States of the United Nations General Assembly .
I would therefore ask you to minute my reservation about this section of the recommendation .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Lambsdorff report gives a clear political signal for the strengthening of the European Union 's profile within the United Nations ; taking the Commission and the Member States together , the Union provides the UN with over 40 % of its funding , but has not as yet acquired any political sway or capacity of influence in return .
One part of the text is misleading and prejudicial to the discussions under way in New York on the reform of the Security Council .
While stressing the ultimate objective of a permanent seat for the EU as such , the recommendation cites , among the various negotiating initiatives , only the so-called ' Overarching Process ' , supported by countries which would like only one of the various proposals on the table , i.e. that of an increase in the number of permanent national members .
That proposal , which has been supported by less than one third of the membership , has from the outset seemed divisive and unbalanced , as the President of the General Assembly has himself pointed out .
While I would stress that I very much welcome the political attention that the European Parliament is focusing on the overall strengthening of the European Union 's profile in the United Nations , I consider that my reservation and objection to the part of the recommendation on the ' Overarching Process ' should be minuted .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is worrying that the issue of United Nations reform crops up so regularly .
The need for reform has been recognized for some years , but so has the impossibility of carrying out such reform .
This impasse is serious for two reasons .
First , it aggravates the factors contributing to the organisation 's failures , and there are quite a few of these .
Second , it promotes the emergence of a discourse sustained and justified by the need for alternatives .
Strengthening cooperation between democracies is clearly a worthy idea to promote , even though this does not imply comprehensive adherence to the League of Democracies project .
However , it would also be wise to be realistic .
That is why the UN needs to adapt to the realities of power , not so much because of the question of legitimacy but rather because of the question of viability .
Regarding the European Union 's role , we must recognise that none of the countries with a seat on the Security Council or that might gain a seat on it agree to their replacement by a single EU seat .
Finally , we have seen that the new United Nations Human Rights Council is a long way from overcoming the deficiencies of its predecessor .
in writing . - ( ES ) With regard to the recommendation to the 63rd Session of the UN General Assembly to be held in September in New York , Rule 90 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure establishes that a recommendation within the framework of the CFSP , which has been voted on in committee , shall be deemed adopted and be included on the agenda for the plenary sitting without the need for the plenary to ratify the text , and without any debate and amendment procedure .
Therefore , since we are happy with virtually all the document , except for one paragraph , my Group would like to reserve its opinion on the paragraph referring to sexual and reproductive health services .
That concept , which is somewhat ambiguous , incorporates questions which to a large extent are a matter for the individual conscience and morals , and we consider that they should NOT form the subject of any pronouncements on the part of this Parliament , especially in relation to the new session of the United Nations .
Our Group requested a separate vote in the AFET Committee and voted against for the reasons just given .
in writing . - The Lambsdorff report and recommendation are of high political importance in as much as they promote a reinforcement of the European Union inside the United Nations .
It may be useful to remember that though the Commission and the Member States provide more than 40 % of the UN budget , the EU impact and influence in the United Nations is still much weaker than it should be .
However , the text of the report contains a misleading part about the discussions which are currently taking place in New York on the reform of the Security Council .
While confirming the long-term target of a permanent seat for the EU , the recommendation quotes among many others only one of the various proposals on the floor , the so-called ' overarching process ' .
It is well known that this proposal has turned out to be highly divisive and has obtained the consensus of less than one third of the UN members , as noted by the President of the General Assembly .
Therefore , while expressing a strong appreciation for the overall content and structure of this European Parliament recommendation , I consider it necessary to stress our explicit reservation and objection on the part mentioning the ' overarching process ' .
in writing . - ( IT ) The Lambsdorff report ( and related recommendation ) gives a clear political signal for the strengthening of the European Union 's profile within the United Nations ; taking the Commission and the Member States together , the Union provides the UN with over 40 % of its funding , but has not as yet acquired any political sway or capacity of influence in return .
However , one part of the text is misleading and prejudicial to the discussions under way in New York on the reform of the Security Council .
While stressing the ultimate objective of a permanent seat for the EU as such , the recommendation cites , among the various negotiating initiatives , only the so-called ' Overarching Process ' , an exercise led by those countries committed to supporting only one of the various proposals on the table , i.e. that of an increase in the number of permanent national members .
That proposal , which has been supported by less than one third of the membership , has from the outset seemed divisive and unbalanced , as the President of the General Assembly has himself pointed out .
While I would stress that I very much welcome the political attention that the European Parliament is focusing on the overall strengthening of the European Union 's profile in the United Nations , I consider that my reservation and objection to the part of the recommendation on the ' Overarching Process ' should be minuted .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am very pleased that the European Parliament has today considered the issue of European Union priorities for the coming UN meeting .
The rapporteur 's proposal mentions the fact that the UN is looking for ' the establishment of new bodies , the radical overhaul of others , the reshaping of the management of its ground operations , the reorganisation of its assistance delivery and an in-depth reform of its Secretariat ' .
This is extremely important .
However , we should not forget that the purpose of all these activities is man and the human rights that flow from human dignity .
Pope John Paul II spoke of this some years ago at a UN forum , saying that the first type of systematic threat to human rights was linked to the area of the division of material goods , which was often unjust ; that a second type of threat related to the various forms of injustice in the field of the spirit , and that it was possible to harm a person in their internal attitude to truth , in their conscience , in the sphere of what are called citizens ' rights , to which all are entitled without discrimination on grounds of their background , race , sex , nationality , religion or political convictions .
In my opinion , his words should provide a signpost for the activities of the United Nations .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current proposal forms part of a package ( along with the proposals for directives on interoperability and the European Railway Agency ) that seeks ' the facilitation of the free movement of locomotives across the EU ' , as part of the liberalisation of railway transport in the EU .
Before any other considerations , we must therefore emphasise that this directive 's main objective is to eliminate any obstacle to the liberalisation of railway transport by harmonising railway safety legislation in each country .
There is no doubt that the most advanced standards regulating railway safety in each country must be adopted and applied .
However , we should remember that the liberalisation and privatisation of the railways was called into question in some countries , for example the United Kingdom , after a deterioration in services and other serious developments led to a rethink of the attack on this public service .
I stress that the harmonisation of railway safety legislation at the community level must never threaten the most advanced laws established in each country , nor should it remove each country 's right to keep such laws .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of Paolo Costa 's report concerning the amendment of Directive 2004 / 49 / EC on safety on the Community 's railways .
Safety on the European rail network cannot be achieved without common objectives and joint action , which is why I very much welcome the railway package .
One of its key aspects is the authorisation of rail vehicles ; according to manufacturers and railway operators , there is little technical justification for the current authorisation requirements imposed by the competent authorities .
The directives relating to the interoperability of railway systems must also be consolidated and merged .
Another good thing is that the new legislative proposal provides for clear rules on the maintenance of vehicles .
The next step is therefore a decision by the Commission in favour of a binding regulatory system for maintenance .
in writing . - I voted in support of Mr Costa 's report " Safety on the Community 's railways " .
The rapporteur 's recommendations will help streamline legislation and facilitate free movement of trains across the EU .
These recommendations will cut red tape and should boost the development of rail transport in Europe .
in writing . - ( PT ) It is essential to harmonise national safety procedures in Member States .
This issue provides one more example of how necessary it is to insist on investment in railway transport .
If we want sustained development of Europe 's transport system and if we are going to achieve the goals and respect the commitments made to citizens and also at the international level in recent years , we have to invest in railways and guarantee the interoperability of the European railway system .
Simplification measures and introduction of the principle of mutual recognition are the fundamental points in this report .
Another very important point is the use of more rigorous training and certification measures for all interested and responsible parties in the Community railway market , from railway companies to infrastructure managers .
I think that this report is one more positive step in our search for multi-modality as the main axis of European transport policy .
in writing . - I voted to exempt heritage railways from the scope of this directive .
This continues to reflect my appreciation of the very special case which these companies represent .
Had those companies had to comply with the terms of this directive it would have meant a crippling series of costs on largely volunteer / subscription organisations .
Such railways as the Romney , Hythe and Dymchurch Railway and the Kent and East Sussex Light Railway ( of which I am a life member ) are part of the historic fabric of the tourist industry in the South East of England and across the EU .
It is a shame that some in this House who purport to be ' nationalistic ' in leaning could not support this exemption .
in writing . - ( PL ) The creation of a common railway market for transport services requires changes to existing regulations .
Member States have developed their own safety standards , primarily for national routes , based on national technical and operational concepts .
It is becoming vital to create harmonised regulatory structures in Member States , common texts for safety regulations , uniform safety certificates for railway companies , similar responsibilities and competencies for safety authorities and for rail accident investigation procedures .
Independent bodies for regulating and monitoring rail safety should be created in every Member State .
In order to ensure proper cooperation between these bodies on the EU level , they should be given the same minimum range of tasks and responsibilities .
The protection of public safety and order , which includes maintaining order in railway communications designated for public use , should be one of the basic tasks for which the EU is responsible .
in writing . - I supported all the amendments to the Committee on Transport and Tourism 's report on the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency .
In the United Kingdom we have seen a growth of more than a fifth in the number of passengers on the train .
In the short term this has led to enormous difficulties as over-crowded trains have led to enormous congestion and as passengers in certain regions - including my own , the South West of England - have resented and protested at the movement of rolling stock around the country .
At the same time campaigns are moving to re-open long closed stations and lines to cope with demand and the need to reduce carbon emissions , such as the campaign in Radstock , Somerset .
In the longer term , new orders for rolling stock will alleviate the crisis but , if Europe 's railways are to continue to flourish , we need some strategic thinking that hopefully a strengthened European Railway Agency can provide .
in writing . - ( PT ) The current proposal forms part of a package of measures ( along with the proposals for directives on interoperability and safety ) to liberalise railway transport in the EU , in which the ' agency ' takes on the central role of ' regulator ' .
This policy will promote the gradual deterioration of railway transport as a public service and give the more profitable routes to private companies through privatisation ( public-private partnerships ) , at the cost of the taxpaying public and irrespective of the interests and needs of each country and their people .
In Portugal , as time has shown , implementation of this policy has led to a deterioration in public services , restricted mobility and increased fares .
It has resulted in the closure of hundreds of kilometres of railway track , the closure of stations , a reduction in the number of passengers and in service quality , a reduction in the number of workers employed in the railway sector and an attack on their pay and labour rights .
The railway sector is strategic for socioeconomic development .
We need a policy that promotes the development and improvement of public railway transport systems in our countries .

in writing . - ( DE ) I voted for Paolo Costa 's report on the amendment of Regulation ( EC ) No 881 / 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency .
Improving the technical legal framework for the Community 's railways as part of the third railway package is an essential and welcome development , which includes measures to strengthen the European Railway Agency .
As the central body , the Agency must ensure that a uniform strategy is pursued throughout Europe .
Particular importance attaches in this respect to the continued development of the European Railway Traffic Management System , the interoperability and compatibility of which must be ensured at all costs .
The creation of an EC verification procedure is a suitable means to this end , but its effectiveness will depend on a robust and efficient European Railway Agency .
For this reason I support further development of the Agency as proposed by the rapporteur .
in writing . - Paulo Costa 's report on the establishment of a European Railway Agency notably supports the call for a European Railway Traffic Management System , consisting of the most advanced rail safety technology .
I support this initiative which , in tandem with the " Safety on the Community Railways " report , will allow for a more cohesive European rail network .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) The issue of rail interoperability is critical to the development and the success of Europe 's railways .
I am therefore very pleased that we have been able to reach a compromise in the interest of improving Community legislation in this area .
Although I voted in favour of the proposals put forward by the rapporteur , Paolo Costa , I am not any less aware of the limits of this compromise .
Ten years to achieve the certification of all types of rolling stock is a considerable amount of time .
As for the role of the European Railway Agency , it could have been much more extensive , particularly with regard to the development and implementation of the European Rail Traffic Management System ( ERTMS ) .
The Member States decided otherwise for fear of seeing the railway agencies and other national bodies - newly established , it is true - doomed to obsolescence .
However , if this is where we are at now , then it is because , back in 2004 , they did not have the courage to give a truly European impetus to the railways .
This is how European integration proceeds : in fits and starts and in small steps .
However , if we adopt this cautious approach , we are likely to miss some opportunities , which is why I hope that the Member States will play the game by rigorously applying what they themselves have proposed .
in writing . - ( PT ) Reaffirming our critique of its main objective , that is the liberalisation of air transport as a public service within the EU , we would like to remind you of what we pointed out one year ago .
There is an attempt here :
to hide the fact that liberalisation had a negative impact on employment and working conditions .
The effects of this on safety and the maintenance of quality fleets should be evaluated ;
to avoid safeguarding full respect for workers ' rights and avoid mentioning that :
a ) the contracts and working conditions of cabin crews will be regulated by legislation , collective agreements and related rights of the country in which workers habitually perform their job or in which they begin and to which they return after work , even if temporarily deployed in another country ;
b ) employees of ' community ' air transport that provides services from an operational base located outside the territory of the Member States will be subject to the social legislation and collective agreements of the country in which the operator has its main office ;
c ) participation of representative workers ' organisations in the decisions taken on the air transport sector will be guaranteed .
in writing . - ( PL ) The regulation that has been passed by the European Parliament changes the legislation regulating the provision of air services in the European Union , to the benefit both of air carriers and of passengers .
The Regulation is important for the proper functioning of the internal market .
It creates a more competitive environment for the activities of European carriers that pit themselves against their international competitors .
Through it , the same conditions will be set out for the issue and revocation of operating licences , which should eliminate the distortions of competition that are currently prevalent in the market and which are due , among other factors , to different regulations as regards requirements for operating licences , to discrimination against certain EU carriers because of their nationality , or else discrimination in servicing routes to third countries .
However , the greatest beneficiary of the changes that have been introduced will be the consumer .
By making it compulsory to include all the taxes and additional charges in the price of air tickets , there will be greater price transparency and support for the principle of making additional payments voluntarily .
It will also stop consumers from having to pay higher tariffs and will make it possible for consumers to make informed decisions .
In addition , by eliminating airlines that are financially unsound , passengers will be free from the risk created by the possibility of their carrier going bankrupt .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted in favour of Arūnas Degutis 's report on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community .
Moves to strengthen and improve the existing legal provisions are to be encouraged , especially as regards the transparency of air fares .
Passengers are entitled to a full breakdown of the price of their air tickets .
The new instrument will make fares more transparent and comprehensible .
In this way the European Union is acting to combat misleading advertising and to create a level playing field based on quality , not on the apparent attractiveness of deals , particularly on the Internet .
The measures to ensure compliance with welfare provisions represent another improvement made by the new instrument , giving employees better cover and more uniform working conditions .
The common rules will safeguard consumers ' and employees ' rights and guarantee the necessary transparency and disclosure of information on the part of air carriers in the Community .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am in favour of the rapporteur 's view concerning adoption of the Council common position without any amendments .
I also think that this Regulation strengthens and improves existing legal provisions concerning monitoring of operating licences , leasing of aircraft , air traffic distribution and price transparency .
in writing . - Arūnas Degutis ' report on the rules for the operation of air services in the Community will ensure that the price you see for flights is the actual price you pay .
Final prices for flights must now include fares , taxes , airport charges and other charges .
This is a positive move towards greater transparency in the aviation sector and consumer protection .
Workers in the air services sector will also experience greater social protection under the report 's proposals .
I therefore voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - I fully support this report , which will put an end to the unfair practice of airlines advertising fares that exclude taxes , charges and a wide range of other extra fees .
The present situation allows airlines to get away with advertising misleading fares that , very simply , prove to be false .
As a result , there is a serious lack of price transparency regarding airfares , which is distorting competition and affecting the consumer 's ability to make informed choices .
In many cases , people end up paying a lot more than they originally expected , as the advertised fare bears little resemblance to the final cost .
The Commission and Parliament have worked together to ensure that this will change .
This report will mean that airfares must be advertised simply and clearly , inclusive of all taxes and extra charges .
The European Union 's ' crackdown ' on this practice is great news for the consumer .
in writing . - ( PL ) Statistics are widely used , not just by companies or institutions involved in the economy .
They play an important role in planning or following market trends .
For this reason it is important that the indicators used to collect these statistics should be reliable and should properly reflect reality and market changes .
Existing indicators should be reviewed , but consideration should also be given to new areas of data collection .
The need to modernise our statistics results also from the existence of different systems and different statistical practices in Member States , which often makes it difficult to compare data across the whole European Union .
Of course , changes in this area should not increase the reporting burden on companies , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
The sophisticated approach used in the Programme for the Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics should encourage rationalisation as well as the coordination of methods used to obtain statistics from different sources and , what is most important , will mean that companies will not have to supply the same data to different institutions that are involved in data collection .
I believe that the Programme for the Modernisation of European Enterprise and Trade Statistics is a good step towards reducing the administrative burden on businesses , which will help to achieve the target set by the European Commission , to reduce that burden by 25 % by 2012 .
in writing . - I support Mr Konrad 's report on the programme for the modernisation of the European enterprise and trade statistics .
The report seeks to provide investment to improve the efficiency of statistical production so that new demands can be met while business burdens are reduced .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) I am in favour of this report .
Batteries and accumulators that do not comply with the requirements of Directive 2006 / 66 / EC should be withdrawn and should not be allowed to be sold .
The Commission decided that batteries that comply with existing regulations that are placed on the European Union market prior to 26 September 2008 will not be withdrawn .
I consider this to be a very reasonable solution .
The withdrawal of batteries that do not comply with requirements will result in an increase in waste .
I believe that the simplest and best way to deal with this situation is to put stickers on these batteries and accumulators stating that they do not comply with EU regulations .
in writing . - With Mr Ouzky 's report the use of two substances 2- ( 2-methoxyethoxy ) ethanol ( DEGME ) and 2- ( 2-butoxyethoxy ) ethanol ( DEGBE ) will be greatly restricted and in some cases banned in products marketed to the general public .
The report 's recommendations bolster consumer protection and I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( PL ) Toxic substances contained in products used for cleaning , rinsing and disinfecting , as well as in paints and solvents , can pose a risk to human health by irritating respiratory pathways and eyes and by causing allergies .
Restricting market access to products that do not fulfil set safety standards could significantly help to protect our health and the environment .
The majority of these products can be harmful in use , causing various unpleasant symptoms .
They can also be harmful to the environment after entering the ecosystem .
Where they pollute the soil or water sources , it is often impossible to predict what the results will be .
Limiting the levels of MEE and BEE in various types of detergents or cleaning products is a very positive step and for this reason I believe that the European Union should make every effort and commitment to eliminate these unhealthy substances from our lives and from the environment .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this report because it forms part of the gas market liberalisation package and expressly supports steps to complete the internal market as quickly as possible even though it does not , in general , approve the instruments and regulations proposed by the European Commission .
There are some interesting critical observations directed at : the impact assessments submitted ; the failure , at times , to observe the subsidiarity principle ; and the inconsistent allocation of powers between the European structures .
However , the line taken by the report is to facilitate company access to the natural gas transmission networks , that is , facilitate the privatisation of what is left of the public sector and place it at the service of the strategy of economic groups that want to enter the market .
in writing . - Atanas Paparizov 's report on conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks will facilitate the integration of the EU internal gas market .
The report tackles cross-border issues between Member States and will increase regulatory oversight at European level .
It is important for the EU to work towards an internal market in gas and I voted in support of the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report deserves a vote in favour from myself and all my colleagues who believed that the consistency of the third energy package depended on the effective and not merely cosmetic regulation of trade in natural gas .
I welcome the willingness to create the conditions to increase investment in gas networks .
In itself , this will allow a potential increase in competitiveness and competition in the sector .
I welcome the efforts towards the effective liberalisation of national gas markets and third party access to the network , which increases the level of transparency .
Finally , I welcome the inherent willingness of this document to put into practice the desire of European citizens to see a more transparent and less monopolised energy market .
The third energy package needs the approval of this report as do our fellow European citizens .
in writing . - The position I have taken reflects my opinion regarding the importance of natural gas and its availability for consumers at the lowest possible price .
A gas pipeline is going to unite Libya and Sicily .
This will pass in the vicinity of Malta so that , in order for my country to benefit , it will have to either join the pipeline or , as has been proposed , there will have to be a pipeline from Sicily to Malta .
My country does not have a large domestic market and its consumption varies between 16 to 18 million units annually .
Should the use of natural gas become more widespread , it will no doubt change the policy on energy in both Malta and Gozo .
This can take place if gas is used in the production of energy itself .
I drew the attention of the then Nationalist Government to the importance of having gas-powered stations some 15 years ago .
The government did not pay any heed and eventually installed only one small gas-powered station as an extension .
Also , as distances in Malta are small , it is feasible to use gas for the propulsion of private and commercial vehicles .
The conversion of vehicle engines is not a problem .
Also gas is much cheaper and much cleaner than petrol or diesel .
But the government and its agency , EneMalta , have not even considered the infrastructure needed regarding its distribution .
The proposal for a directive on the internal gas market forms part of the ' third energy package ' , which completes the privatisation of natural gas supply services .
The proposal for a directive and the report aim to eliminate the high level of centralisation that still exists in certain countries , in order to complete the penetration of EU monopolies into the market , thus accelerating the implementation of liberalisation , while also imposing sanctions on the Member States that have not yet fully implemented it .
The package has two key points : ownership unbundling between gas supply activities and gas transportation and storage activities , so that capital can effectively make use of that public infrastructure for the production , storage and transportation of gas that remains in the Member States .
The empowerment of supposedly independent regulatory authorities , aimed at eliminating any ability on the part of the Member States to make national adjustments or state interventions , guarantees total immunity for the business groups that will be preying on the gas sector .
This EU policy will have the same dreadful results for employees as the privatisation of other energy sectors : increased prices and a deterioration in the quality of services .
The struggle against monopoly interests to overturn this policy is the only way to meet the current needs of working-class families .
in writing . - ( PT ) This measure unequivocally demonstrates our shared willingness to achieve the objective of liberalising the energy market .
I therefore vote in favour .
I believe that the ownership unbundling of natural gas production assets and transmission networks is necessary for this , but not per se a sufficient condition .
Hence the concern to create the necessary conditions to encourage transnational investments in network infrastructure .
Hence the concern to demand equal treatment for third countries that intend to invest in the European energy market .
Hence the concern to improve coordination between national energy sector regulators .
This measure will make the market competitive and is therefore in the interests of consumers , who will benefit from the new rules of a more healthy , free and transparent energy market .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting for this report because it will make life easier for people relocating and travelling between Member States , without any powers being transferred to the EU .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the Lambert report because it is an answer to the citizens ' needs .
We are living in a world of globalization where thousands of people are working in another country than their country of residence and we need a coordination of the social security systems for all people using their right to work in other states , in order to ensure and support mobility , which is a fundamental right in the European Union .
Europe allows us to move freely , but it should also provide us with more social rights , which should not stop at national borders .
Hoping that the European citizens will be able to benefit , from the point of view of social security , from equal treatment and non-discrimination , I support the initiative to facilitate the workers ' freedom of movement .
We have to eliminate all barriers to mobility .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am voting against this report because it contains proposals for the detailed regulation at EU level of such matters as the payment of Swedish parental allowances , which will create difficulties in individual assessments , and it gives the EU too much power .
in writing . - ( PL ) The purpose of this document is to make EU rules as regards the coordination of social security systems in individual Member States better and more effective .
The regulations it contains will definitely simplify the lives of the average EU citizen who benefits from the freedom of movement throughout the European Union .
Whether someone is an employee , an official in administration , a student , a pensioner or a businessman , everyone will be able to keep their entitlements to social security payments after changing their country of residence .
I definitely support the ending of yet another obstacle to the free movement of persons within the EU , and this document is another important step in this direction .
in writing . - ( FR ) I have two comments on the Lambert report and the regulation that it amends .
1 .
In spite of the rapporteur 's denials , the draft regulation assumes that third-country nationals enjoy free movement , freedom of establishment and free access to the labour market throughout the European Union ; it must be remembered that these are all things that , thank goodness , have not yet become a reality .
What it does is chip away a little bit more at the Member States ' prerogatives in the field of immigration policy , in other words , their sovereign right to select the foreigners who are permitted to enter their territory and to control the entry , residence and extent of the rights of those foreigners .
2 .
It seems appropriate to enable the citizens of the EU Member States to benefit from a coordination of social security systems and ensure that the social protection that they are entitled to expect ( owing to their work and their contributions ) is not adversely affected by ' international ' mobility in which they are encouraged to participate .
However , going all out to ensure , in this area , full equality of treatment between European citizens and nationals of third countries , without any concern for guaranteeing any reciprocal treatment , merely serves as a strong incentive to immigrate that already exists in the form of the enormous , indiscriminate and suicidal generosity of our social security systems .
in writing . - ( DE ) People 's trust in the EU depends to a great extent on their confidence in the social stability of Europe , and that is one of the areas that has seen the greatest changes in recent years and decades .
In practice , because of part-time work and new terms of employment ( ' McJobs ' ) European employees often end up earning little more than some unemployed people .
The dark side of unbridled economic growth and constant welfare savings is an increase in poverty and social exclusion .
In the European Union , one of the wealthiest parts of the world , 16 % of the population were living below the poverty line in 2005 .
As a result of the increasing oil and food prices , even more people have subsequently slipped below the poverty line or are now living on the brink of poverty .
The EU must devote itself to combating poverty among its own population as a matter of urgency , and welfare systems must be available primarily for Europeans .
in writing . - ( FR ) Today , I voted in favour of the Corbett report on the amendment of Rule 29 of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure regarding the formation of political groups , namely the requirement that a political group 's members represent at least one quarter of Member States ( instead of the current requirement of one fifth ) and that the minimum number of members is 25 ( instead of 20 ) , and I did this for several reasons .
Firstly , because I think that this reform is absolutely necessary to enable our institution to operate more efficiently and to put an end to its highly fragmented state , with rules that have remained unchanged despite successive enlargements and the increase in the size of our Assembly since 2004 .
In addition , the solution proposed by my Socialist colleague , thanks to whose untiring efforts a compromise was reached with the majority of political groups , seems to me to be very reasonable compared to what is practised at national level within the European Union .
Moreover , given the resources , both human and financial , made available to the political groups by the institution , clear representativeness also seems to me to be enough to justify this change .
Finally , the purpose is purely and simply to promote a certain consistency among political forces at European level ; our democracy can only emerge stronger .
in writing . - ( PL ) This document is yet another attempt by the majority to take over control at the cost of the minority .
The arrogance of the largest political groups within the European Parliament has reached new heights .
The thrust of this document is to increase the minimum number of MEPs required to create a political group from 21 to 30 .
Small groups such as , for example , the Independence and Democracy Group are seriously threatened by such a condition .
Obviously I voted against this document .
in writing . - The ALDE Group voted against a reform of Rule 29 for the following reasons :
the existence of the current seven groups causes no real problems of efficiency ;
minority opinions have just as much right to be organised professionally as majority opinions ;
a decent European Parliament must reflect the wider diversity of political opinion that we find in the Union : we need not copy exactly national parliaments whose job is to supply a government ;
closing down smaller groups would either force reluctant deputies to join larger groups , adding to their incoherence , or inflate the ranks of the non-attached , adding to inefficiency ;
the size of the Parliament is in any event set to fall from 785 to 751 ( Lisbon ) or 736 ( Nice ) .
in writing . - ( PT ) Our vote against this report and the respective commitment is coherent with our defence of pluralism , democracy and respect for different opinions .
It is unacceptable that this report changes the rules for the formation of political groups and imposes more barriers to the formation of political groups in the European Parliament after the next elections .
Until now , a minimum of 20 MEPs from six Member States were allowed to form a political group .
The proposal that has now been agreed requires 25 MEPs from seven Member States to form a political group .
This means it will be more difficult to form small political groups in the European Parliament , which is one more obstacle to the affirmation of positions that differ from those of the dominant ideology in this increasingly neoliberal , militarist and federalist European Union .
One final remark on the process followed by the majority groups , the PPE-DE and the PSE Groups .
They began by presenting a proposal requiring 30 members to form a political group .
They then blackmailed some smaller political groups to gain their support for a so-called compromise proposal , the one that has just been approved .
As far as we , the Portuguese Communist Party MEPs , are concerned , we have maintained , from the beginning , a coherent position against the creation of any additional barriers to forming political groups .
in writing . - ( ES ) My abstention in relation to this report is because , although pragmatic rules for the creation of parliamentary groups are certainly necessary , I feel that the proposed number of members and of Member States is too high .
If this Parliament is to defend plurality and diversity , it is better for those affected to form a political group rather than swell the ranks of a non-attached group which would become increasingly heterogeneous and inefficient .
in writing . - ( FI ) The bigger groups originally proposed that 30 members from seven Member States would be needed to form a group .
Fortunately , the project failed in the narrow vote by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs in May , when the vote was 15 to 14 .
I have also voted against the proposed amendments now , because the small groups will often remain on the sidelines when decisions are made .
It is wrong that a diversity of views should be restricted or the functioning of the small groups should now be made more difficult than previously .
It is also strange in light of the fact that the greatest differences in opinion are often found within the groups .
The largest group , the Conservatives , has split into two or even three groups on many large issues .
in writing . - Conservative MEPs have voted against both of Mr Corbett 's proposed amendments to raise the threshold for the establishment of political groups in the European Parliament .
The balance between the efficient operation of the Parliament and the need to recognise the plurality of voices and opinions within the Parliament must be struck with care .
This would be better achieved by retaining the thresholds for the constitution of a political group as they currently are .
Although we recognise there is a fair case for increasing the number of Members required to form a group , any increase in the requirement of the number of Member States would unfairly and unnecessarily disadvantage smaller groups and delegations .
Accordingly , after consideration of Mr Corbett 's report , the Constitutional Affairs Committee did not recommend any changes to the thresholds set out in Rule 29 .
Conservative MEPs did however vote in favour of the one amendment , originally tabled by Mr Kirkhope , that had been approved by the Constitutional Affairs Committee .
This amendment provides for a more pragmatic and reasonable approach to the circumstances in which a political group may fall below the required thresholds .
in writing . - I support Richard Corbett 's report amending the Rules of Procedure regarding the formation of political groups .
With 27 Member States the EU 's rules on this issue need to be updated .
The European Parliament cannot justify using millions of euros of taxpayers ' money to fund groupings of parties , especially fascists , who come together for nothing other than financial gain .
The European Parliament has the lowest threshold of almost any parliament for constituting groups .
There is no threat to any existing group - nor is the rule change an attempt to squash Eurosceptics , who have more than the new minimum number .
Consequently , I voted in favour of Mr Corbett 's report .
in writing . - ( NL ) The two biggest groups far prefer a two-party system .
The main feature of that kind of system is that the two parties share a common interest , namely that second , third or fourth parties are unable to get a toe in the door of political decision-making and so remain totally irrelevant in the eyes of the electorate .
Only the biggest groups count ; protests and alternatives have to be sidelined .
If , exceptionally , others still manage to get into parliament , they are ideally given the most unattractive place possible , as individuals with restricted rights .
Some members of this House do not belong to a group .
That is usually the result of pressure on the part of others .
That same pressure obliges other members to join a group with whose views they partly disagree .
For reasons of self-interest groups take in members even when they know that those members ' views deviate significantly from the party line .
The reason is that you cannot form a group here unless you have at least 20 more or less like-minded members .
If all shades of opinion in society are to be democratically represented it is better to do away with that minimum figure , instead of raising it to 25 or 30 and introducing rigid rules against dissenters .
I am totally against that .
in writing . - ( DE ) There is no plausible reason , in my opinion , to increase the minimum number of MEPs required for the creation of a political group .
On closer inspection , the arguments advanced by the rapporteur are spurious , particularly his reference to supposedly higher thresholds for the formation of a political group in the parliaments of Member States .
If a fair comparison is to be made with the European Parliament , the equation should include only directly elected chambers .
Second chambers generally comprise delegates from federal states or regions , and for this reason they are not comparable .
The average value used by directly elected national parliaments for the formation of political groups is virtually identical to the threshold used by the European Parliament .
In any case , this move to increase the cut-off figure for the formation of political groups is evidently driven by a different agenda .
In committee , for example , the rapporteur referred to the formation of the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty ( ITS ) Group as an unfortunate circumstance and emphasised the need to prevent any future recurrence .
Because of this attack on democracy and freedom of expression and on the equality of MEPs which is enshrined in the Treaty and in the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament , I naturally voted against this report .
The report , in its adopted form , complements the unacceptable Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament that aim to control and stifle the powers of those who do not fully subscribe to the EU .
This is a new undemocratic and authoritarian decision that further hinders the establishment of political groups .
The political objective is obvious : they wish to exclude radical forces , especially communist ones , to silence all voices that are opposed and every form of expression that challenges the EU and its policies .
This undemocratic operation was accompanied by the supposed political blackmail by the coalition of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Socialist Group in the European Parliament to also push other forces to accept this increase , threatening that , if they did not succumb to it , they would vote in favour of a proposal for an even greater increase in the number of MEPs required , to 30 .
The progress of the vote demonstrates that this match has been fixed by the forces of the European one-way street , as an alibi for their undemocratic decision .
The Nea Demokratia and PASOK MEPs and the Synaspismos MEP have voted in favour of this despicable amendment and the decision in its entirety , proving that , on key issues , the forces of the European one-way street are on a common course .
We , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , have voted against the increase in the number to 25 and against the report in its entirety , thus denouncing undemocratic machinations and political games .
in writing . - ( PT ) To make excessive restrictions and create barriers to the formation of political groups can never be a good thing for any parliament .
In addition to possibly being considered a violation of fundamental rights , the effect of such steps is often exactly the opposite of what the advocates intended .
This is therefore a bad reform .
The European Parliament must affirm itself as an essential democratic reference point , both in the European Union and in the world .
It will not achieve this if it falls short of maintaining an exemplary position .
I do not agree that this is the right direction to take .
In addition , more than ever , Europe needs to continuously maintain the confidence of its citizens , all its citizens , in its institutions .
All Europeans must feel they are represented , independently of their political positions .
That is why this is a bad and untimely reform .
I vote against .
in writing . - ( SV ) I am opposed to all attempts to reduce democracy and diversity of opinion in Parliament through such measures as altering the number of Members and Member States entitled to form political groups .
Despite this view , I voted for the compromise amendment of the Corbett report .
The reason is a pragmatic one - it was the only way of voting in order not to risk a decision which would be even worse from a democratic point of view and which would make it more difficult to form a political group .
in writing . - ( PL ) Today the European Parliament accepted an amendment to the Rules of Procedure , as a result of which the guidelines for the formation of political groups will change .
Following the elections in June 2009 political groups in the European Parliament will have to consist of at least 25 Members representing a minimum of 7 Member States .
I would like to give my full support to this increase in the threshold for the creation of political groups in the European Parliament , as this will help to avoid excessive parliamentary divisions and will make its work more effective .
Both the cohesion and the effectiveness of Parliament have suffered as a result of the excessive number of small groups in the House .
However , to strengthen democracy , small political groups need to be protected against temporary reductions in the number of members , if they fall below the required threshold .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted for the report , since better cooperation and more openness between national courts / judges and the EC Court of Justice is of the utmost importance for the working of the European legal system .
It must be made more transparent and its application improved through better training and facilities for networking and exchange of knowledge .
However , we consider that the discussion in paragraphs 26 and 27 regarding the jurisdiction of the EC Court of Justice in certain areas is a Treaty matter on which the European Parliament has already stated its opinion .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this report because of the unacceptable pressure it will put on Member States , including our national judges , who are the cornerstone of the judicial system in any sovereign country .
This report makes clear what was intended with the so-called European constitution and the defunct Treaty of Lisbon , which it seeks to revive in a truly anti-democratic way .
The report itself affirms the intent to establish a single European legal order .
To achieve this , they want ' to involve national judges more actively in , and accord them greater responsibility for , the implementation of Community law ' .
National judges play an essential role as guarantors of the rule of law , including Community law .
However , the principle of subsidiarity and constitutional issues in each Member State cannot be called into question in the name of ' the primacy of Community law , direct effect , consistency of interpretation and state liability for breaches of Community law ' , as intended by the Commission and the majority of the European Parliament .
It is unacceptable to continue with this pressure , now that the Treaty has been rejected .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report is completely frank with us .
Right from paragraph 1 , it sets its goal : the establishment of a single European legal order .
Indeed , this report , a veritable pamphlet in favour of Community law , seeks to involve national judges more actively in and accord them greater responsibility for the implementation of Community law .
Accordingly , it is suggested that Community legislation and related case-law be integrated into national codes as soon as possible .
The report proceeds with the idea of merging national and Community legal systems without , at any time , raising the issue of excessive Community standards , their confused wording and their frequent lack of consistency .
This move towards the simplification and codification of Community legislation is certainly a good thing .
The same applies to the adoption of regulations to ensure legal certainty ; I am thinking in particular of those relating to harmonisation of the rules governing conflicts of laws .
However , the case-law of the Court of Justice often proves to be unsafe for the enforcement of national laws that are subject to the Court 's binding principles and dogmas even if they are clearly contrary to the best-established legal traditions of the Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) ' Friends , friends , business aside ' ...
I refer to one more contradiction between the EU and the United States , this time in the aircraft industry where , despite the 1992 agreement on government support , each side tries to defend its interests , because that is how capitalist competition operates .
The European Parliament complains that ' the EU has consistently adhered to the spirit and letter of the 1992 Agreement and has regularly provided documented evidence of compliance ' while ' the US has largely ignored its obligations ' , ' unilaterally purported to withdraw ' from the agreement and brought ' a WTO case against the EU , citing European repayable financing which fully complied with the 1992 Agreement and which is similar to that benefiting Boeing ' .
At the same time , faced with the ' bitter attacks ' by Boeing and the US Congress , against the contract awarded to Northrop Grumman Corporation EADS for the US Air Force aerial tanker recapitalisation programme , the European Parliament seeks to pour oil on troubled waters , by pointing out the need to ' to arrive at a pragmatic balance between European civil support and the US military-industrial scheme ' .
It seems that not all countries are entitled to sovereignty and ' free trade ' ...
in writing . - I will be voting in favour of this report , not because I enjoy WTO disputes or have a paranoia about the United States , but because I am fed up with the protectionist actions of the United States over many years , particularly in the area of civil aviation .
The Americans have perfected the art of whinging and complaining about other countries and their lack of free trade , when they themselves have adopted measures which allow bankrupt airlines to carry on trading , and have allegedly sifted millions of dollars of aid into Boeing .
The International Trade Committee is right to support the EU in its case against the United States at the WTO .
What we all should be aiming for here is fair and open competition between aircraft manufacturers with a freedom of choice for airlines to choose the best aircraft to suit their needs at the best price .
The official motto of the USA is ' In God we Trust . '
Perhaps that should change to ' Don 't do as I do .
Do as I say . '
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish social Democrats voted in favour of Mr Buzek 's report on the European Strategic Energy Technology Plan .
We take a positive view of CO2 capture and storage but question whether it is necessary to support such things as coal to gas conversion for the further development of that technology .
We also take a positive view of research into and the development of new sources of energy with low or zero CO2 emissions .
We are in favour of the Union cofinancing this research , but do not think that we should pre-empt the budgetary process by calling on the Commission at this stage to set aside particular sums .
We have therefore chosen to abstain on these two points .
in writing . - I am voting against the second part of Paragraph 26 because I do not support Nuclear being one of the priority initiatives .
However I will vote in favour of the report because its objective is to accelerate innovation in cutting edge European low carbon technologies .
It is crucial that Europe has an energy research plan to support its ambitious energy policy and climate change goals .
in writing . - ( PL ) I agree with Mr Buzek 's views as regards the issue of introducing new power generation technologies in the light of the challenges facing the European Union , namely environmental protection , guaranteeing the security of energy supplies and maintaining the European Union 's high level of competitiveness .
I also agree with the point made by the rapporteur concerning insufficient resources allocated to new power generation technologies in the current financial framework of the European Union .
We must remember that success in the area of new power generation technology should be achieved by a partnership between the public and the private sectors .
in writing . - ( DE ) As we know to our cost , the EU 's aim of rapidly increasing the percentage use of biofuel has had adverse repercussions .
Monocultures , the felling of rainforests and competition with food and feed crops , which has contributed to the current food crisis , have seemingly prompted the EU ministers to think again and have dealt a blow to their target of increasing the share of renewables in the production of motor fuel to 10 % by 2020 .
While we should welcome the fact that biofuel is no longer to be produced from food crops and that there is a general desire to wait for second-generation biofuels such as those obtained from waste products , this must not lead in any way to a relaxation of EU efforts in the domain of renewables .
The alarming upward trend in the price of oil makes it more important than ever to promote the production and use of energy from renewable sources .
All those billions that are being spent on nuclear power generation , with all its problems , must be invested in renewables .
in writing . - ( FR ) Sovereign wealth funds , these state-owned funds that are invested all over the world , are they a good or a bad thing ?
Rather a good thing , if we are to believe this resolution .
However , it is true that a Europe that is stagnating economically on account of its own economic and monetary policies cannot afford to dismiss the thousands of billions of euros of potential investment that they represent .
It is true that , for the time being , sovereign wealth funds do not disturb the financial markets ( they have even come to the aid of the US banking system ) and would tend to be directed more towards long-term investment .
However , that may change .
We are all aware of the opacity of most of these funds with regard to the scale of their resources , the distribution of their assets , their governing structures and their investment strategies that range from ethical investment to the pursuit of high yields , positions of control and perhaps the potential to cause serious damage in the future .
The states that hold these funds are not all friends of Europe , far from it .
One of them has already evoked the threat of its ' financial nuclear weapon ' .
However , we shall abstain on this text instead of voting against it because , although it supports the free movement of capital worldwide , it cautiously calls for some monitoring of and protection against these funds .
in writing . - This resolution covers an important subject .
Sovereign Wealth Funds are playing an increasingly important role in global trade and investment .
Some of this is positive but that is not always the case as the unaccountable administrations make decisions that maximise short-term profits at the expense of countries , communities and families .
We must look at ways of increasing transparency and accountability to these resources that often outweigh those available to nation states .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , Mr Rack 's report on a new culture of urban mobility , in favour of which we have voted , is an important part of the new comprehensive approach of the Commission 's energy and climate package : significant reductions in emissions can be achieved in Europe using sensible , efficient community and transport planning .
It must , however , be taken into account that the Member States are different in their geographical locations and living conditions .
It is precisely for this reason that I voted in favour of the two amendments by our group .
I come from a country of long distances and comparatively small towns .
It is quite clear that the opportunities for reducing private motoring are significantly weaker in , for example , the sparsely populated urban communities of Finland , in the north , than in the densely populated areas of Central Europe .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted for Reinhard Rack 's report on a new culture of urban mobility .
The draft report on the Green Paper is an important contribution to the subject of urban development .
The economic development of a town or city and its accessibility depend on better mobility , but the latter must not be achieved at the expense of people 's wellbeing or the environment .
For this reason , the report ought to give more consideration to social factors and employment policy .
It must also be rooted in awareness that the diversity of the Member States will not permit a uniform European solution and that strict adherence to the subsidiarity principle must therefore continue to prevail .
I also believe that , in the countries where liberalisation has already taken place , its impact on employment should be assessed .
In addition , I call for a certification system for the retrofitting of particulate filters to cars , goods vehicles and off-road vehicles .
While the Green Paper highlights most of the problems that affect urban mobility today and also presents some new and innovative ideas for solving them , it falls far short of covering all the aspects that need to be addressed and so can only be regarded as a starting point for the discussion of this issue .
in writing . - ( PL ) The most important matter raised by the rapporteur is that of delineating the areas in which the European Union should participate in issues relating to urban mobility .
The rapporteur is right to point out that there are similar problems throughout the European Union in the area of urban mobility , but it is not possible to develop a uniform method to deal with these problems .
At this point , the rapporteur 's views concerning the town or city being able to choose a method to achieve set objectives is sensible and I would like to express my support for these views .
in writing . - ( NL ) Towns and cities are densely populated , with few open spaces and a lot of traffic travelling relatively short distances .
With space at a premium there just is no room for heavy motor traffic , and excessive noise and air pollution are further reasons to make us try to limit the number of cars in our towns as much as possible .
Of course towns must be accessible to the fire service , the police , ambulances , removal vans and the vehicles of persons with limited mobility , but scarce open spaces must be kept primarily for use by pedestrians , cyclists , trams , children 's playgrounds and parks and gardens .
Only then is the town somewhere you can live in .
The text being voted on today does not make that clear choice , but simply seeks to reconcile opposing interests and ideas .
Fortunately the EU has no competence in this area .
All the EU can do is help to foster best practice , good experience which has been built on and improved .
Such improvements are important not only for the town which has already made them , but also as an example to others .
Examples include central London 's congestion charging system , the new tram networks in Strasbourg and Bordeaux or the long-established restricted-traffic city centre of Groningen .
Unfortunately the EU will contribute hardly anything on the back of this report .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against this report , because the EU is not responsible for these matters .
It does nothing for legal certainty and brings Europe no closer to the people when Parliament takes the initiative to produce reports on matters that do not fall within the regulatory competence of the EU .
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted for Olle Schmidt 's report on the ECB annual report .
However , we would point out , with reference to the passage in the explanatory statement which speaks of the need for Sweden to introduce the euro , that we respect the outcome of the Swedish referendum in 2003 in which it was decided that Sweden would retain the krona as its currency .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against this report because it reaffirms support for the work of the European Central Bank , makes no criticism of successive increases in the base rate , even though this has already reached 4.25 % , much higher than the United States Federal Reserve base rate .
Moreover , the report ignores the fact that the bank 's activities are harming workers , the population in general and micro , small and medium-sized enterprises .
It only serves the objectives of the major economic groups and finance capital , even when they cause problems for the more fragile and dependent economies , such as that of Portugal .
For example , in Portugal , where the level of debt has reached 114 % of GDP , this increase , allied to the overvaluation of the euro , is another nail in the coffin of micro and SMEs , worsens the deficit in the balance of trade and increases the country 's dependency .
It will be more difficult to deal with unemployment , casualisation , low wages and the generalised increase in prices , considering that the level of debt of Portuguese families has now reached 129 % of their disposable income .
We therefore reaffirm the need for a break with this right-wing policy and the false autonomy of the ECB , which only serves to hide the fact that it is at the service of big capital .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Schmidt report is the annual pat on the back given by Parliament to the European Central Bank for its benevolence .
As usual , it seems to miss the key point : the dreaded margin squeeze that is crushing Europeans ' purchasing power and for which the ECB and the European Union are partly to blame .
No one believes that the official inflation figures ( 3 % for 2008 , according to the report ) , which are merely composite indices , reflect the reality of the rising cost of living for citizens , especially for commodities , energy and housing .
Everyone recalls the statements made by the ECB authorities , warning against the inflationary effects of wage increases , as if the salaries of those same Europeans were not subjected to constant downward pressure because of unfair global competition and the immigration policy promoted by the European Union .
With regard to the highly overvalued euro exchange rate , it is true that it is sparing us the worst in the face of rising oil prices .
However , it is threatening the competitiveness of many industries which are tempted to relocate , as Airbus has done , to the dollar zone .
We therefore cannot support this mutual back-patting .
in writing . - ( PL ) In his report on the ECB annual report , the rapporteur has focused on the challenges facing the Bank .
There has been a great deal of worrying information for European economies over the past few months ; and unfortunately there is much more of this than in 2007 .
The crisis in financial markets and the sudden increase in the price of oil and food are slowing down economic growth and increasing inflation , and there are concerns about a rise in unemployment figures .
The ECB will be one of the leading institutions that have to try to deal with these challenges .
The steps taken in August 2007 provided liquidity to financial markets , but they did not resolve the problem .
There is also an increase in the number of countries joining the common currency .
Slovakia will be the first country from Central and Eastern Europe to take this step . However , Slovakia will definitely not be the last .
Entry into the euro zone by the other new EU Member States seems to be just a matter of time .
The experiences of Slovakia in this regard will no doubt be closely observed by countries in the region that are also thinking about joining the single currency .
The rapporteur is also right to note that different levels of economic growth , different indicators of growth or different levels of maturity in EU economies could create problems for the ECB 's decision-making process .
For this reason I believe the suggestion to undertake a review of possibilities as regards making changes to the decision-making process to be a sensible one .
Such a review should include not just the present members of the euro zone , but also future and potential members .
in writing . - I welcome Olle Schmidt 's report on the ECB annual report .
I join the rapporteur in calling for the ECB to continue to improve its relationship with other central banks and relevant institutions .
Indeed , I would also echo Mr Schmidt 's recommendation that caution should be taken regarding further interest rate rises so as not to endanger economic growth .
I voted in support of the rapporteur 's evaluation .
The resolution that we , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , have voted against attempts to provocatively portray the 10-year implementation of the EMU and the establishment of the euro as a great ' success ' , while workers and the poor working-class sections of society in EU countries , including Greece , are experiencing their dire consequences , such as high prices , the wages and pensions freeze , unemployment , excessive taxation on employees and poor self-employed workers and the removal of employment , social and democratic rights .
Any ' success ' achieved relates solely to the profits and surplus profits of European plutocrats and runs absolutely counter to the interests of workers and the people .
The European Central Bank , as a pure instrument of European capital , is required to play a more active and effective role in that direction through anti-popular measures , such as interest rate increases and so on .
However , the remarks and concerns of the resolution on the monetary ' turmoil ' and the ' cohesion ' issues of the EU that remain and are , in fact , becoming more widespread , confirm our assessment regarding the continued and unavoidable crises of the capitalist system and of its disproportionate growth , as well as regarding the need to overthrow it and replace it with a planned popular economic system with power to the people and the need to cut the ties with the imperialist EU .
Within the EU there can be no path to growth that prioritises the common people .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 13.15 and resumed at 15.00 . )

European satellite navigation programmes ( EGNOS and Galileo ) ( signature )
Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , through this public signing of the legal instrument on the Galileo programme we are emphasising the importance we attach to the European satellite navigation programmes EGNOS and Galileo .
The regulation being signed today is a signal reminder that many aims can only be achieved in the framework of the European Union and not by individual Member States acting alone .
EGNOS and Galileo can and will give the European Union the means to establish a European alternative and complement to other systems .
At the same time , they will enable us to enhance the competitiveness of our industry in major strategic technological fields .
Galileo is to comprise a network of 30 satellites and a ground-control infrastructure .
The text of the regulation we shall be signing today is the result of negotiations between the European institutions which were brought to a successful conclusion at first reading .
The institutions found solutions that made it possible to establish such a highly complex technical system , particularly by agreeing on Community funding of EUR 3.4 billion .
As a result , Galileo can become operational from 2013 at the latest .
As President of the European Parliament I would like to express my very special thanks to the chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Angelika Niebler , and the rapporteur of the European Parliament , Etelka Barsi-Pataky , for their successful efforts , as well as to the Slovenian Presidency for its significant commitment to this very important strategic dossier .
( Applause )
I also hope that this public signing will underline that we intend to go on working with vigour and dedication to achieve tangible progress for our citizens .
Thank you for being here today , and thank you for your attention .
I now invite the representative of the Council , Jean-Pierre Jouyet , to address us .
( Applause )
President-in-Office . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it will now be possible to ascertain precise positioning and timing information with the satellite radio navigation system launched by the European Union and the European Space Agency .
I should like to join you , Mr President , in paying tribute to the Slovenian Presidency , which has brought this difficult agreement to a successful conclusion .
I should also like to pay tribute to Mrs Niebler , Chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , your rapporteur and those leading Members of the European Parliament who have made the adoption of this Regulation possible .
This is a major step forward that we are taking today by adopting this Regulation on Galileo .
It will enable the deployment of the publicly funded global satellite positioning system .
As Mr Pöttering has said , this system is based on a constellation of 30 satellites and ground stations and will provide users in many sectors with information on their location .
Therefore , for many of our citizens , this is an indication of real progress being made by Europe .
It will not only ensure our independence by providing a signal that could replace the American GPS signal , for example when that service is down , but it also goes much further , because it will provide services that are not currently available through GPS : the tracking of people in distress , which is also essential to the role that Europe must play in relation to its citizens , or the establishment of a safety of life service that is particularly suited to air traffic management .
Galileo will therefore bring tangible results to the daily lives of our citizens .
The European Commission , Commissioner , and the European Space Agency have launched the selection process for companies that will be involved in the deployment of the various lots awarded to implement this system ; the establishment of Galileo is obviously also of major importance for the competitiveness of European industry .
Overall , the management of the Galileo programme will be placed under the political control of Parliament and the Council .
You may rest assured that the French Presidency is determined to work very closely with the European Parliament ; it proposes that the Galileo Interinstitutional Panel , the GIP , which involves the three EU institutions - the Commission , Parliament and the Council - meet as soon as possible in order to discuss the conditions necessary for the successful implementation of this programme , which is very important for the European Union as a whole .
Thank you very much , Minister .
Mr Jouyet and I shall now sign the Galileo Regulation , and I would like to ask Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , Angelika Niebler , chairman of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , and Etelka Barsi-Pataky , the rapporteur , to step forward and join us .
( Signing of the Galileo Regulation )
( Applause )
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in China after the earthquake and before the Olympic Games ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in China after the earthquake and before the Olympic Games .
President-in-Office . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , China is a strategic partner of the European Union .
Our political and trade relations are particularly strong ; I would point out that the European Union is China 's largest trading partner .
China 's involvement at international level , like the resolution of major regional and global issues , is of great importance to the European Union .
The Union also has the aim of encouraging development and reforms in China for the benefit not only of the country itself but also , given its size , of the entire planet , and it is in this context that we have followed with grave concern the consequences of the earthquake that hit Sichuan Province in May and assessed the scale of this disaster ; with more than 70 000 dead and 18 000 missing , the final toll , unfortunately , is likely to exceed 80 000 .
In addition , more than 5 million people have lost their homes .
For several weeks , the earthquake and its great human and material losses have led China to mobilise its entire state apparatus , and the international community has recognised the efforts made by China to respond quickly and effectively to the disaster .

The European Union responded swiftly by providing humanitarian aid ; the Community Civil Protection Mechanism was immediately activated on 13 May to coordinate in-kind contributions from Member States ; aid totalling EUR 25 million provided by the European Union , including the Member States - EUR 2.2 million of which were contributed by the Commission - has been channelled through the Red Cross .
Broadly speaking , we feel that China has played an effective role during relief operations and that , with the assistance of the international community , it is making considerable efforts to mitigate the consequences of the disaster .
The Chinese authorities have been very open to foreign aid and media coverage of this event ; therefore , we pay tribute to them for their outstanding relief and reconstruction efforts .
On the other hand , as you are aware , we have all followed closely and with some concern the events that took place in Tibet , and we are continuing to keep a close eye on further developments in the region .
In the declaration made by the Slovenian Presidency on 17 March on behalf of the European Union , the EU expressed its deep concern about the ongoing reports of unrest in Tibet and conveyed its deepest sympathy and condolences to the families of the victims .
It called for restraint on all sides and urged the Chinese authorities to refrain from using force , as well as calling on demonstrators to desist from violence .
In our messages to the Chinese authorities , we have asked that a dialogue be established with the Dalai Lama in order to discuss key issues , such as the preservation of culture , religion and Tibetan traditions .
We have also urged that information be transparent and that the media , diplomats , tourists and UN agencies be allowed free access to Tibet .
Tibet was reopened to tourists in mid-June .
We also welcomed the informal meeting held on 4 May between the Chinese authorities and the envoys of the Dalai Lama ; we believe that this is a step in the right direction and we have expressed the hope that this will lead to a further round of constructive dialogue with the Dalai Lama .
The Chinese authorities and the representatives of the Dalai Lama met again on 1 , 2 and 3 July in Beijing .
It is , of course , too early to comment on this recent round of talks , but we hope that both sides will proceed in a constructive manner .
The Chinese authorities have confirmed that the central government in Beijing and the representative of the Dalai Lama have agreed to continue their contacts and consultations ; they also expressed the hope that Tibet could be opened to journalists and other people in the near future , once public order had been restored in the province .
As far as attendance at the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games is concerned , each Member State will decide the level at which it wishes to be represented .
Allow me to point out in this respect that China has said on several occasions that it would extend a warm welcome to all European Union leaders .
After having consulted with all his counterparts in the European Council , the President of the Republic has announced his intention to attend the opening ceremony in his dual capacity as President of the French Republic and President-in-Office of the Council .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , that concludes the information that I wished to bring to your attention today .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am convinced that strategic EU-China relations are vital for the European Union , and I believe they are for China too , as well as for the rest of the world .
Looking back , this spring has been a test for EU-China relations .
The unrest in Tibet led to widespread protests in Europe and to the disruption of the Olympic Torch relay in several European capitals .
The latter events in turn led to a surge of nationalist feeling in China and to anti-Europe feelings , which translated into boycott campaigns against European interests in China .
As a result , concern was rising about the widening gap between Chinese and European public opinions and perceptions of each other .
These developments were , fortunately , rather short-lived .
Two events were instrumental in reversing the emerging trend .
One was the Commission visit to Beijing on 24-26 April , in which I participated with President Barroso .
The other was the consequence of the terrible earthquake which affected the province of Sichuan in May .
Let me take each of those in turn .
First , our visit at the end of April focused on sustainable development and climate change but also provided an opportunity to raise EU concerns about the situation in Tibet directly with the Chinese leadership .
You will remember that , when I spoke in this House on 26 March , I called for a restart of talks between the representatives of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese Government .
During the talks in April , President Hu Jintao announced to us that China would shortly resume talks with the representatives of the Dalai Lama .
This had been a key request of the European Union .
This outcome of our visit to Beijing proved that the Commission 's consistent approach of constructive engagement with China brought tangible results and was thus the right approach .
The other event that marked a turning point in China 's relations with the rest of the world was , as has already been said by the President-in-Office of the Council , the earthquake in Sichuan .
The scale of the human catastrophe provoked by the earthquake and the suffering of the people were enormous : 70 000 persons were reported killed and up to 10 million were displaced .
This gave rise to an outpouring of international sympathy and support for the victims .
More importantly , the Chinese Government reacted in a swift and well-coordinated way on the earthquake , deploying over 130 000 soldiers for the rescue and allowing the press free access to the affected areas .
This reaction cast a more positive light on modern China .
The President-in-Office of the Council has already mentioned what we as the European Union as a whole have been donating , and therefore I do not need to say anything about it .
Let me immediately go to the situation as it is today .
Three events between now and the end of the year will have a crucial impact on EU-China relations from the Chinese point of view , and I think it is the same for us : the Beijing Olympics , the ASEM summit which will take place in Beijing on 24-25 October , and the EU-China Summit due to take place on 1 December in France .
During this time the Chinese leadership will be particularly sensitive to messages coming from abroad .
Now , more than ever , we need to avoid any misunderstandings and continue our policy of constructive engagement .
The situation in Tibet will continue to focus attention during these months .
Today we can say that we are back to a pre-14 March situation , because the talks between the Chinese Government and the representatives of the Dalai Lama resumed in early May and a new round of talks took place last week ; but I agree that we do not yet have a full assessment .
We will continue to encourage both sides to continue their talks in a fruitful and result-oriented way .
Last month , on 24 June , China also took a positive step by reopening access for foreign tourists to Tibet .
Although controlled visits by diplomats and foreign journalists have been taking place since March , we continue to urge them for full access for foreign journalists .
With regard to the Olympic Games , we all hope that there will be a chance for China and the world to come closer together .
We wish China success in this .
The ASEM Summit in October , in which I will participate , will be a good opportunity to underline our relations with China and , in doing this , to bring forward important global issues .
In conclusion , I hope that , at our next EU-China summit in particular , we can make concrete progress on a number of issues of mutual importance , such as climate change , ongoing negotiations to conclude an EU-China partnership and cooperation agreement , human rights , and economic and trade issues .
Those are our goals between now and 1 December .
I think it is vital that the EU-China strategic partnership continues to be developed in a steady way , one which also takes into consideration the concerns that exist .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , my Group wishes to refer first of all to the resolution on the natural disaster in China and on the situation in Tibet that the European Parliament adopted by a large majority on 22 May of this year .
The PPE-DE Group hails the dedicated commitment of the Chinese Government to the reconstruction of the areas hit by the earthquake .
At the same time , however , we expect the Chinese Government to ensure that the new houses and other new buildings are built to withstand earth tremors , for we must remember the sad fact that structural defects led to the collapse of many schools and that many pupils lost their lives .
We expect this matter to be investigated and those responsible to be called to account .
Die PPE-DE Group notes with grave concern that the Chinese Government has not yet taken the opportunity offered by the organisation of the Olympic Games to improve respect for universal human rights in China .
On the country , intimidation of Chinese citizens and restrictions on representatives of the media appear to be even more prevalent in the run-up to the Olympics .
For this reason we call on the Chinese Government to establish universal civil rights , particularly freedom of the press , in time for the Olympic Games and to continue to guarantee them thereafter .
( Applause )
Lastly , the PPE-DE Group calls on the Chinese Government to show goodwill in the current talks with the Dalai Lama and to bring them to a positive conclusion , which should include provision for the cultural autonomy of Tibet .
We would deem it unacceptable if the Chinese Government were to use these talks to tide itself over the period of the Olympic Games , only to have them break down afterwards .
We expect an outcome that boosts cultural autonomy and human rights in Tibet .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express my admiration for the way the Chinese authorities have been dealing with the aftermath of the destructive earthquake that shook the province of Sichuan and affected almost 10 million people .
I welcome the fact that China immediately opened its borders to foreign aid and I can promise , in the name of the PSE Group , that we will continue doing everything possible so that European aid is delivered in a fast and effective way .
Regarding Tibet , I welcome the re-establishment of contacts and the two rounds of talks that have taken place between the Chinese authorities and envoys of the Dalai Lama .
I think that this is a good start , considering what the March events were like , and I also believe that these contacts and talks will continue until a solution acceptable to both sides is found .
China recently re-opened Tibet to foreign tourists and , according to The New York Times , more than 1 000 Tibetans detained after the March demonstrations have already been released .
However , I still want to call on the Chinese authorities to give , to the families of those who are still under detention , at least information about their whereabouts .
Regarding the Olympic Games , I wish both China and the International Olympic Committee good and successful games because I am convinced that these games , if successfully organised , can help to improve the human rights ' situation in China .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nobody here would question the importance of relations of all kinds with the Chinese government and even less the solidarity resulting from the earthquake .
The statement that the President-in-Office has made does , however , raise a problem .
That statement says absolutely nothing about the role that this Union can and must play in fostering the civil and political rights of everyone living on Chinese soil , in Tibet and not just in Tibet .
( Applause )
I should like to say a word on this , because otherwise welcoming the fact that foreign tourists have been allowed in again , without saying a word about everything that has happened , about the convictions , the public trials , the militarisation of Lhasa when the Olympic torch was passing through , the freedoms that continue to be denied , the torture which continues to be handed out , is a rather one-sided way of tackling a problem .
The reaction to that one-sided approach may well be to brand it ingenuous , idealistic and meaningless , because there are people who think about serious things , about good relations with China , and then there are people who think about ingenuous and inconsistent things , i.e. us .
That is the outcome of a statement such as the one you have made : nor have you mentioned the Uighur people simply because they do not have a transnational leader supporting non-violence , such as the Dalai Lama , and I believe that that is serious when we are talking about China .
That Europe is then a Europe which says , while all this is going on : ' it is up to each Head of State to decide whether or not he is going and we French have meanwhile consulted our partners and we shall go as the Presidency of the European Union ' .
What Presidency is that ?
What European Union is that ?
That is the Europe of nations and China will rightly consider that the Europe of nations lacks the ability to come up with a policy able to force it do anything to respect the human rights of Chinese and other citizens .
( Applause )
It is very hard to ask a speaker to break off , especially when he is in full flow , but do try to keep to your speaking time .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would once again like to draw your attention to the incontrovertibly catastrophic political situation in Tibet .
As the Olympic Games draw nearer , the authorities in the People 's Republic of China are intensifying their policies as regards this province .
Sending the army into Tibetan monasteries on the pretext of looking for arms and terrorists has become a regular practice .
The result of these actions is the requisitioning of art works collected in those locations and this is accompanied by the destruction of religious objects .
Information from independent research institutions and human rights organisations tells us of the latest such event , which took place in the Tsendrok monastery in the Province of Amdo Maima .
The Games start in less than a month .
Every day that passes shows that the belief that we had that there would be changes in internal Chinese policy because of the Games has been groundless .
I do , however , hope that Europe 's interest in this matter will not become extinguished together with the Olympic flame in Beijing .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , congratulations on making hypocrisy , lies and cant into an Olympic event .
Enough is enough !
You are behaving in the way that governments behaved for years in the face of Soviet Communist totalitarianism .
It is always the same old story , and it is always the same old yarn that you spin for us here .
You talk about the state of play of the negotiations .
If you ask the Tibetans how the negotiations went , they will tell you that they were subjected to constant humiliation throughout the negotiations and faced ongoing blackmail - in this respect , the Dalai Lama and his representatives were treated in the same way that Brezhnev had treated Dubček - to the effect that ' if you move , we 'll shoot the lot of you ' .
This is what was said during the negotiations , and now the President-in-Office , the President of the French Republic , will say ' Well done , China !
You show us what to do when someone moves . '
This is Chinese overblown response , just as Sarkozy 's mention of ' cleaning the suburbs out with a high pressure hose ' was an overblown response .
That is the truth ; and then you say that this is a Europe of values .
On what basis , when and how ?
Well , now that everyone is present - and this is Black Wednesday for this House - I would congratulate the President of the Socialist Group and the President of the PPE Group , they are all here .
To say what , exactly ?
To say what , here today ?
Everyone tells me that ' things will get better thanks to the Olympic Games ' .
In 2001 , we said that , if we give the Olympics to the Chinese , things will get better .
Since 2001 , nothing has happened and things are going from bad to worse .
So , what are you telling us ?
That , in four weeks , things will get better ?
Why should they get any better ?
The Chinese are prevailing .
The Chinese Communist Party is prevailing .
The tougher they get , the more you sink to your knees ; and the more you sink to your knees , the more they triumph .
Why do you think that this should change ?
They will control everything at the Olympic Games .
They will control the radio stations , they will control the television networks , but they will not control Sarkozy , that is true .
They will even invite him to dinner with chopsticks .
It will be really nice .
They will fawn all over him and act all touchy-feely-cuddly .
Then , Sarkozy will say : ' that 's three nuclear power stations and 36 high-speed trains ' , and I do not know what else .
This is abhorrent .
It is despicable , and I believe that , if Europe does not wake up , if we continue to project this image of a Europe of merchants , incapable of defending the most fundamental rights in Europe or elsewhere in the world , well , it is not worth our while to build Europe , and this is what we should be saying to the President-in-Office of the Council .
( Loud applause )
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Thank you , Mr President .
It is always more difficult to see the beam in our own eye than the splinter in someone else 's eye .
In the first place , I should like to express my sympathy to the victims of this huge disaster and also my admiration , just like my fellow Member , Mr Rouček , of the way in which the Chinese Government reacted in order to help the victims .
I also want to thank the Commission , which was unusually quick in providing financial aid , and to say that I am certain that there will be no limit to this aid .
I think that I speak for the majority of us when I say that we want the Olympic Games to be conducted safely and in the spirit of fair play , and not just in the stadiums .
Of course we respect the typical aspects of Chinese history and culture .
However , these two events give us more opportunity to conduct an even more intense dialogue and to achieve tangible results , in discussions with our partners from the People 's Republic of China , both in regard to ecology and human rights .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) On the afternoon of Wednesday , 18 June I had an appointment with three respectable , peaceable Chinese citizens at a hotel in Beijing .
Barely an hour before we were due to meet I learned that two of them had been picked up by the security service and the third had been officially warned not to talk to me .
The two who had been detained were released about 31 hours later .
The official line was that they had not been released because they had not been arrested , merely ' interviewed ' .
Whatever the case , the Chinese authorities clearly wanted to prevent any personal contact between a member of the European Parliament and these three Chinese nationals .
But I fully understand their abominable behaviour .
Beijing certainly could not expect three leading representatives of the flourishing protestant house churches to trot out good propaganda about the Olympics .
On the eve of this grandiose sporting spectacle , the members of protestant churches that are not officially registered are being subjected to increasingly harsh religious persecution .
China 's progressive leaders prefer to keep the harrowing details of this repression firmly under wraps . Naturally .
After all , what honour is there in sentencing a simple minister of Beijing house church to do forced labour ?
For three years he had to spend ten to twelve hours a day making footballs for the upcoming Olympic Games .
Enough said about the Chinese form of forced labour !
And what are we to make of Chinese officials who had members of the house churches arrested for rushing to give practical help , voluntarily and out of deeply-held altruistic belief , to the victims of the terrible earthquake in Sichuan Province ?
That was really beyond the pale .
Mr President , long before the start of the Olympic Games in China , I would argue that Beijing has extinguished the Olympic flame by its flagrant disregard for fundamental rights !
Mr President , I wish to begin by expressing my condolences to the relatives of those who lost their lives and those who have suffered from the earthquake .
But I want in particular , if I may , to address my remarks to Mr Jouyet for his declaration today that President Sarkozy , who comes here tomorrow , will attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games .
I would like to recall the editorial in today 's local newspaper , Les Dernières Nouvelles d 'Alsace : ' L 'Europe a capitulé ' - Europe has capitulated .
Not only is President Sarkozy going to the Olympic Games , but also , on 16 June , broadcasts by a group that broadcast into China via Eutelsat , with the permission of the French authorities , were suspended .
This has been done before .
On this occasion I beg the French Government to allow NDTV to resume their broadcasts .
I am submitting today , to the United Nations rapporteurs on torture and religious freedom , a dossier relating to some of the people I had contact with when I was in Beijing two years ago .
Mr Cao Dong continues to be tortured in a prison in north-east China .
Mr Niu Jinping was re-arrested on 20 April 2008 and is being tortured .
His wife , Ms Zhang Lianying , has been tortured many times and has been imprisoned four times .
I am putting on my website a dossier of 50 sorts of torture that she is suffering .
Mr Gao Zhisheng , a Christian human rights lawyer , I know was very badly treated earlier this year .
He remains under house arrest .
Mr Hu Jia was arrested after giving evidence to the European Parliament 's Subcommittee on Human Rights .
This is an arbitrary , brutal and paranoid regime .
We should keep politics out of sport ; we should keep Mr Sarkozy away from Beijing .
( Applause )
Mr President , like many people here , seven years ago when the Olympic Games were awarded to China I had serious reservations .
But they were awarded only after a string of assurances had been given by the authorities that minority rights would be respected , that there would be an end to the torture and abuses and that the well-documented human rights violations would be addressed .
Fast forward to today and we know that our worries are as great as ever , if not more so .
Others have spoken about the abuses .
Mr Cappato was eloquent on Tibet , and Mr Cohn-Bendit and others also spoke .
We know about the violations of natural justice .
China executes more people every year than all the other countries in the world put together .
I think it will be to Europe 's shame next month if President Sarkozy and a line of EU Heads of Governments and Presidents and princes stand there and shake hands with the Chinese leaders , thereby giving them credibility when they do not deserve it and giving them the green light to carry on in the same vein as they have been doing .
The Olympic Games should be about the Olympic ideal and what is going on in China at the moment contravenes that .
( NL ) As chairman of the Delegation for relations with China I agree with the Commissioner when she says that we have strategic ties with the Chinese and that these are important to both of us .
We are aiming of course for economic ties , but more than that .
I think we need to keep emphasising that .
There are two other things I regard as important : individual human rights and freedom of expression .
These are issues which we raise again each time we have contact with the Delegation or members of the Delegation , with our Chinese colleagues .
We disagree , but we discuss them and we try to exchange ideas and arguments .
It is difficult , it is sometimes hard work , but it is something that Parliament must continue to do unceasingly .
Have we made progress ?
Too little and too slowly perhaps ; but I think we have made progress .
I would urge the European Parliament not to forget that we need to maintain contact with the Chinese and keep on raising these issues , however difficult it is , however tiresome and however frustrating sometimes .
But I think it is the only way forward .
Because the fate of the Chinese will be decided not here in this chamber but in China and by the Chinese themselves .
They are the ones we need to convince , not ourselves .
( DE ) Mr President , there has been a wave of global sympathy for the victims of the devastating earthquake in China on 12 May .
A considerable amount of international aid has poured into the country , yet within its borders distinctions have been made , anti-separatist measures going hand in hand with disaster-relief efforts .
It is utterly irrelevant whether people belong to the majority or a minority - they surely need to receive aid .
There should be no more calls to celebrate differences ; that is an impracticable notion .
China would be well advised to open up at long last .
This would include free access to all parts of China for foreign observers and journalists .
NTDTV , the only uncensored television station in China , must be allowed to resume its transmissions without delay .
Many Heads of State or Government have not yet acted on the recommendation made by our European Parliament that they refrain from attending the opening ceremony for the Olympic Games .
We support the position adopted by Angela Merkel in Germany , by the British Prime Minister , Gordon Brown , by our own President , Hans-Gert Pöttering , and by other leading public figures , who have decided to stay away from the ceremony on 8 August .
The President of France , Nicolas Sarkozy , has said that his position will depend on the outcome of the negotiations between the Chinese and the representatives of the Dalai Lama .
The negotiations have been fruitless and will remain so ; it follows that he will have to stay in Paris .
( Applause )
Before the Games , let me remind you of the Tibetans ' plight .
There were more than 200 dead following the protests of 14 March , and 5 000 Tibetans have been imprisoned , most of them without trial .
Thousands have sustained injuries as a result of physical violence used in the process of patriotic re-education .
That , Mr President , is meant as a reminder to those who still intend to set off for Beijing .
( Applause from the Verts / ALE Group )
( HU ) Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Organising the Olympics is a challenge from every perspective , but it is also an extraordinary opportunity for Chinese citizens to show the world that they have understood the universal values and spirit of the Olympics .
' One world , one dream ' : the slogan of the Beijing Olympic Games fully highlights and faithfully represents the fundamental principles of the Games .
I trust that the Olympics will ensure an excellent opportunity for us to deepen and extend our cooperation and dialogue with China in many areas .
However , we must not forget the earthquake in May and the destruction that left many tens of thousands dead and made millions homeless .
We must assure the country of our support in difficult times , but we must always remind the leadership of the importance of democratic reforms , and give constructive criticism in many areas .
I am one of those who believe that the European Union must continue results-oriented dialogue on human rights with China , but we must accept that the results will only come about step by step .
And yes , the results are coming : just a few days ago , a direct air connection started up again between China and Taiwan after a gap of many decades .
Discussions with the Dalai Lama have started again .
Here , too , we are interested in results-oriented , pragmatic dialogue that takes into account Tibetan and Chinese values and points the way to the future . Thank you very much .
( NL ) Mr President , the Olympic Games open in Beijing on the 8th day of the 8th month of 2008 .
Eight is a lucky number in Chinese culture and is associated with good fortune and prosperity .
I hope this date may prove lucky for the people of China .
Economically , China is doing very well indeed .
' It doesn 't matter if a cat is black or white , so long as it catches mice ' , as Deng Xiaoping used to say .
He opened up the country to foreign capitalist investment .
Little by little the Chinese economy is being liberalised .
China is now a solid partner for economic development .
It is happy , for example , for its currency to be pegged not only to the dollar but also to the euro and other currencies .
China has a constructive role in the world economy .
Where human rights are concerned things are not good , regrettably , and certainly not when it comes to the human rights of China 's own population .
I find it disappointing that on the occasion of a festive event like the Olympic Games restrictions are being placed on the Chinese-language satellite broadcaster which transmits from the West .
I hope the Chinese authorities will use the opportunity of the Games to show their people that rules apply not only in the sporting arena , but above all to the duty incumbent on officialdom to respect human rights and freedom of expression .
( PL ) Mr President , 69 000 people died as a result of the earthquake of 12 May 2008 , over 18 000 are missing and the number of wounded is over 37 000 .
This event has shaken not just the Chinese , but also the entire world .
I was probably the only person in the House today who was present at that time : I was in Beijing and Shanghai and I saw the solidarity of those people , the Chinese , who identified with the victims and the tragedy .
Taking advantage of this opportunity , I would like to express my admiration for the thousands of rescue personnel and volunteers from the whole world , from Taiwan , Japan , Australia and above all from China , whose solidarity and commitment in these tragic circumstances deserve special praise .
The actions taken by the European Union should also be recognised .
The Chinese government , with the support of local authorities , allocated the sum of EUR 10 billion to help disaster victims .
The total foreign support received by Beijing amounted to EUR 5 billion .
Most of these funds came from the Chinese diaspora living in different parts of the world .
I believe that activities directed towards specific humanitarian assistance are more useful , and that dialogue is more successful than slogans and calls for boycotts and protests .
Mr President , this House must promote statesmanship , which sadly today it is not doing .
Ten million homeless people is an enormous disaster - the worst in the world .
We saw a people-concerned , people-centred Chinese Government and leadership in action in an area which has one of the biggest populations , including more than one million Tibetans .
Unlike in Burma where the rulers did not and do not care , the Chinese Government demonstrably cares for its own people .
This was self-evident to anyone who saw the relief effort .
Human rights in China cannot be decided by other countries , powers , organisations or people in the rest of the world .
It can only be decided by the 1.3 billion Chinese population for themselves .
We well know that this population can be articulate , can demonstrate and show their anger , and they do show it when something is wrong .
The human rights situation in China is improving and can be improved further .
Parliament and my colleagues shouting about it is not going to make any difference .
We are , as usual , deluding ourselves about how important we are .
It will be the Chinese people who , having been lifted out of poverty , will ask for themselves greater democratic expression .
Four hundred million people have been lifted out of poverty - a remarkable achievement .
But the Chinese people are afraid .
By turning our backs on them as we did over the Olympic Torch , we only infuriate the people of China , not their government .
This distinction is important and should be understood .
( ET ) Colleagues , through the ages the Olympic movement has striven for a better world .
The great event about to begin in Beijing has helped draw attention to Tibet and human rights .
Dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama must definitely continue .
By giving China the opportunity to host this worldwide sporting event , the International Olympic Committee imposed the very clear condition that by the year 2008 China should respect human rights .
We know that this has not happened .
The Olympic Games has never been all about sport .
The principles of the Olympic Charter echo those of the EU to a considerable extent , I refer to citizens ' basic rights and human rights where no compromise is given .
The Charter states that the host country is required to uphold human dignity and not to oppress citizens on grounds of nationality or religious belief .
As a result I share the view that President Sarkozy 's place is in Paris in front of his TV , not in the Olympic stadium in Beijing .

( ES ) Mr President , the experience of the Olympics being held in China has taught us a lesson : if you are systematically going to violate human rights , you need to be a large , economically strong nation ; not a Zimbabwe or a Cuba .
Nor indeed a Burma .
You need to be a country where hundreds of western firms have a base , a country where millions of people work in conditions akin to slavery .
You have to be a country with grandiose and aggressive style , and then Europe will bow and scrape to you .
( FR ) Mr President , I offer my condolences to the relatives of the victims of the earthquake and I wish to express my sincere sadness .
However , there are other issues that we must discuss and I say this especially to the Council , for I recall the remarks made by President Sarkozy a few months ago , at the time of the incidents in Tibet .
What we have just heard is a proposal to turn sports into bad politics and politics into a ridiculous sport , and this is unacceptable .
It is unacceptable that President Sarkozy is going to represent the European Union in Beijing without visiting the political prisoners there .
It would be shameful for our leaders to go to Beijing without uttering a single word about the harsh reality of the situation .
That would be shameful , and these leaders could then no longer appear with dignity before the European institutions .
It is essential that we come back to this issue in September .
( EL ) Mr President , just one month before the Beijing Olympic Games , China is still experiencing the tragic impact of the earthquake .
Unfortunately , it took an earthquake with thousands of casualties and homeless people for the Government of the People 's Republic of China to realise that solidarity from the nations that offered to help was essential .
However , this obliged China to open up its borders , thus enabling all the mass media and humanitarian aid agencies to reach areas where , until then , one could hardly get to even as a visitor .
The events that followed the earthquakes in China led to a softening , which has resulted in the whole world now being concerned with the peaceful coexistence of the peoples .
The Olympic flag and the sacred flame of ancient Olympia will hold the ideal position among the things that separate us , but also , above all , among the things that unite us .
( DE ) Mr President , when President Sarkozy spoke out in the wake of the unrest in Tibet , I had a great deal of admiration for France in its role as guardian of human rights .
Since then the situation has become far worse , with the number of detainees reaching record levels .
The situation in Tibet has never been so tense .
Censorship of the media has never been so rigid as it is now .
And in my view the President 's reaction is a slap in the face for those who are campaigning for human rights .
We are thwarting the hopes of all those people in China who are relying on our pressure to help them in their efforts to introduce democracy in China .
Mr President , the International Olympic Committee justified their granting of the 2008 Olympic Games to China by claiming that this would help open the country up to improvements in its human rights situation .
However , Chinese authorities have not heeded international calls to stop pursuing their follow-up to the riots of 14 March 2008 in Tibet .
Participants in the protest are still being traced , detained and arbitrarily arrested and their families are being given no information as to their whereabouts , although this is required by Chinese law .
I call on China to abide by the public commitments it has made regarding respect for human rights , minority rights , democracy and the rule of law .
This was the deal struck with the IOC when it agreed to allow China to host the games in the first place .
This is a historic and unique opportunity for China to demonstrate its willingness to improve its human rights record to the world but in my opinion we are not seeing sufficient progress in this regard .
Mr President , I support the Olympic Games being held in Beijing , but I also urge the European governments and institutions to demand that China abide by its commitments regarding human rights , namely those undertaken in order to have the Olympic Games in Beijing .
This requires that the European representatives who will - or will not - be attending the Olympic Games use this opportunity to draw attention to the situation of human rights in China .
It is very serious .
There are many people in jail , including Hu Jia , who was jailed after speaking to us here in the European Parliament via a video-conference .
We cannot accept that these people will continue to be kept in jail for no account by the Chinese authorities .
( PL ) Mr President , many countries and their leaders , including those in Europe , are keen to have good contacts with China in order to obtain lucrative contract or economic agreements , paying scant attention to the lack of democracy and the failure to respect human rights in China .
World opinion , world leaders and global institutions should act together and should apply various types of pressure in defence of such values as freedom , human rights and democracy .
If we are divided then we will not be able to act together and we will have little effect .
The Olympic Games are a good opportunity for such measures .
The international community should act to help a population that has suffered as a result of the tragic earthquake .
President-in-Office . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , it was not the European Union which decided , back in 2001 , that the Olympic Games should be held in Beijing ; it was the International Olympic Committee .
Secondly , as you have said , the Olympic ideals do exist , but they are not about politics , they are about sports , something that the International Olympic Committee is saying over and over again .
Thirdly , I do not know if the best way to fight for human rights in China and to have a comprehensive dialogue is to ease one 's conscience by saying ' I 'm not going to go , but I 'll still watch the opening ceremony on television ' , as a Member said just now .
I do not think that the problem really revolves around this issue .
I note , moreover , that a number of Members from various political groups and of varying persuasions have also expressed their views in your House on the dialogue that we should have with the Chinese authorities .
Whatever the current difficulties , we must continue to make the most of the EU 's relations with China .
Only a strong Union will enable the two sides to conduct open discussions - that we all have been advocating - on any issue , even those that appear to be the thorniest ; the European Union did not wait for the events to take place in Tibet to initiate such a dialogue .
We want to establish dialogue with China on an increasing number of issues of bilateral and global concern that are not purely commercial - it is a gross misrepresentation to suggest otherwise .
This point was also made by Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
We need a comprehensive dialogue with China because that country has an important role to play in the international community , and we must do everything we can - the Olympic Games are also a means to that end - to ensure that China is more effectively integrated into the international community .
In addition , I should like to point out that we shall have to hold strategic dialogue with China , particularly at the forthcoming summit to be held under the French Presidency .
It was not the French Presidency which selected the date for this summit .
The summit will take place in the second half of 2008 .
It falls to us to ensure that preparations are made in the best possible circumstances , and this summit should provide an opportunity for the partnership between China and the European Union to address new issues , in particular those relating to action against climate change and to environmental and social standards - as many of you have said .
China 's determination to play a more important role in the international arena must be accompanied by new responsibilities in the field of human rights , in the social sphere and in relation to environmental protection .
We are aware of that and we are prepared to work towards that goal , and the European Union is undoubtedly the most suitable partner to help China follow this path .
In this respect , after having consulted his colleagues and counterparts and received their consent , President Sarkozy , in his capacity as President of the European Union , assumes the responsibilities of engaging in a comprehensive dialogue between the European Union and China .
If China wishes to play a bigger role on the world stage , it must shoulder the resultant responsibilities .
Many comparisons have been made , for example by Mr Cohn-Bendit .
I noted the comparison with the USSR of Brezhnev .
Do we really want a conflict between two antagonistic blocs ?
Was not some progress made in the dialogue that has also been made with this great country ?
We played a key role in achieving this progress , and it is also through dialogue and through democratic developments that our values prevailed , as always .
We must have a challenging dialogue with China where no subject is taboo , and we must encourage it to make commitments in all areas , in the political , human rights and social fields .
Indeed , some Members have mentioned the death penalty .
We should also address this issue with China , but we must also address it with all the other countries , and I hope that the same conservative Members who have spoken just now on the subject will do so .
I should like to remind you that there are other countries where the death penalty is in force that have relations with the European Union ; however , we do need to have this comprehensive dialogue .
We must also proceed with caution , and I am in full agreement with what the Commission said with regard to the Council , that we should not exacerbate nationalist feelings in China at a time when it is playing host to a very important event for the whole country , a country which is seeking to achieve its integration into the international arena .
It is in that spirit , assuming all the responsibilities that are associated with his role and acting in full awareness of the nature of European values , that President Sarkozy , in his new role , will visit Beijing to convey this message and also to demonstrate that we have faith in the positive development of this great country with regard to its integration into the international arena .
We have already seen tangible signs of progress in Burma and in the resolution of conflicts with Iran and with North Korea ; these are all areas where we also need China 's assistance .
This clearly involves much more than purely commercial interests .
Finally , I would say to Mr Cappato that , in all our relations , whether within the EU , with regard to minorities , or in relations between the Union and some of its partners , we must also have the same requirements and be careful before giving the whole world lessons in morality .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I shall be very brief because much has been said .
I would just like to reiterate that the relationship with China is a very multifaceted one .
That means that we have huge scope in this strategic relationship .
Apart from the environment , trade , culture - whatever the various sectoral talks and dialogues that we have - we also take the concerns with regard to human rights that have been particularly expressed here today very seriously .
We take them seriously whether they concern human rights defenders or petitioners who are in jail or the application of the death penalty .
It is true that very high numbers of people are being executed .
We have always mentioned this very clearly , also the alleged cases of torture and ill-treatment .
We have this human rights dialogue .
It is true that sometimes it is not satisfactory , but we do not have another instrument .
We have to continue having a dialogue with China .
We have a saying in German : Steter Tropfen höhlt den Stein ( Constant dripping wears the stone ) .
This is what we are trying to do .
( Applause )
To close this debate , five proposals for a resolution have been submitted in accordance with Article 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m. , by way of exception , due to the presentation of the programme for the French Presidency .
Written statements ( Article 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( SK ) The Olympic Games in Beijing are approaching but , according to my information , the human rights ' situation in China has not improved .
Rather , on the contrary , the Chinese regime keeps arresting more and more people in order to prevent potential demonstrations during the Olympic Games .
Press freedom is extremely important because the independent media are the ones that provide uncensored information on the human rights ' situation in China .
Therefore it is vital that independent TV stations , such as NTDTV , can also broadcast .
This TV station broadcasts 24 / 7 in Chinese and English via satellites over Asia , Europe , Australia and North America .
The French company Eutelsat that transmits NTDTV suddenly stopped NTDTV 's signal over Asia on 16 June 2008 , apparently because of the pressure applied by the Communist Party of China .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , I appeal to you in the hope that you will use , in the name of the Commission , all possible means to restore NTDTV broadcasts over Asia .
I also call on the French Presidency to prevent , in the name of the Council , the restrictions on freedom of speech in China .
I call on the Chinese authorities to show the world that the fact that the Olympic Games were given to Beijing has resulted in an improved human rights ' situation in China .
I believe that opening Tibet to tourists , journalists and all media will be for real and will allow uncensored information to be provided about the situation in this area .
in writing . - ( HU ) Enlargement is one of the EU 's most successful policies , and at the same time perhaps one of the most effective instruments of external policy ever known .
Every enlargement up to now has strengthened the Union , and has stabilised and generally aligned the countries that have acceded .
The four years that have passed since the enlargement of 2004 have put to rest all the unfounded fears and misleading information that preceded it : the enlargement is an overwhelming success , and both old and new have gained a great deal from it .
Unfortunately , some politicians , either consciously or from sheer stupidity , deny the success of the enlargement and mislead citizens in the old Member States .
It is therefore of paramount importance that we acquaint society with the advantages and benefits of enlargement .
The rejection of the Lisbon Treaty by Ireland really is a major barrier to further enlargement of the Union .
I still trust that the EU will quickly find a solution in order to save the Lisbon Treaty .
However , Croatia 's admission should not be held hostage : the accession of Croatia is legally possible even without Lisbon coming to life .
Croatia could therefore become a member at the end of 2009 or the start of 2010 , depending on the progress of the accession negotiations .
The relationship between enlargement strategy and the European Neighbourhood Policy is a complicated question .
I basically agree that our European neighbours who do not yet have the prospect of membership should move from one category to the other according to their fulfilment of measurable objectives .
At the same time , it is important that the Union be able to protect its geopolitical area of freedom of movement and , with regard to integration capacity , it should itself decide in some specific cases what prospects to offer its partners .
The Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Elmar Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , we have to say that the previous enlargements of the European Union have been major political and economic successes .
Of that there is no doubt .
In the cases of Romania and Bulgaria , Commissioner , we shall certainly have separate discussions to conduct here in the coming weeks , but my opening remark remains generally valid .
At the same time , we must make it clear that , when we negotiate with countries and promise them further negotiations , we keep those promises and that , when we bestow candidate status on a country , it is actually treated as a candidate country .
The promises made in Thessaloniki must be honoured too .
At the same time , however , we must make it clear that this in no way implies an automatic sequence of events but that each individual country must fulfil the conditions - the Copenhagen criteria - for membership of the Union so that the transition is made successfully from the viewpoint of both the acceding countries and the European Union as a whole .
We must also consider whether , with our membership having risen to 27 countries - and perhaps Croatia will shortly become the 28th member - we do not now need a consolidation phase so as to ensure that everything in the European Union is actually put into proper working order .
It is precisely those who pick holes in the Treaty of Lisbon while supporting enlargement who must realise that they are pursuing a politically inconsistent line .
The Treaty of Lisbon , in fact , was intended as the prerequisite for the last round of enlargement , not as preparation for the next one .
Those who seek enlargement but are opposed to the Treaty of Lisbon are actually working to eliminate the possibility of enlargement .
That must be spelled out very clearly .
Another point of paramount importance we must appreciate is that strength does not depend on sheer size alone but that inner cohesion , by which I mean taking care not to overstretch our capacity , is a crucial factor , as history has taught us .
The European Union we want is not a free-trade area but a politically effective unit .
This means that our capacity for internal reform is just as much a prerequisite for enlargement as internal reform in applicant countries is a prerequisite for their accession .
' Deepening and enlarging ' has become the standard description of this twofold process .
At the same time , we must be aware of the vital importance attaching to the European perspective for countries in the Western Balkans , but also for Ukraine and other countries , as a key to the success of their internal reform process in pursuit of more democracy and the rule of law , focusing their aspirations more sharply on Brussels than in any other direction .
In the circumstances I have described , however , this path will not lead to immediate full membership in every case , because these countries are not yet ready and because the Union is not yet ready either .
In many cases full membership will not be an option .
For this reason we need new instruments in the area between full membership and the neighbourhood policy , so that these countries ' European perspective does not merely give them hope but is actually associated with real progress in areas such as free trade and the Schengen system .
We need instruments modelled on the European Economic Area within which we engage in free trade with the EFTA countries , instruments that would allow partner countries to adopt 30 , 50 or 70 % of the body of established Community law and practice .
This means that negotiations on full membership could be very brief .
Sweden , Austria and Finland took that route , while countries such as Switzerland , Iceland and Norway followed a different path .
But who is aware today that Norway is a party to the Schengen Accords and that Switzerland contributes to the Union 's structural policy in the new Member States ?
In other words , we can develop very close relations , and then a decision can be taken in each case as to whether both sides want this close cooperation to continue on a permanent basis or whether they want it to be a transitional stage on the way to full membership .
Accordingly , even in the Western Balkans - though not in Croatia , where it would now be a totally illogical step - countries where accession would be a lengthier process could take advantage of this transitional stage , if they so wished , to use it as an instrument .
They must be given the choice .
On this basis , ladies and gentlemen , I believe we should be able to reinforce the European perspective for use as an instrument in the area between membership and the neighbourhood policy and thereby widen the area of stability , peace and freedom in Europe without endangering the development potential of the European Union .

President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , the Council would like to thank the European Parliament and in particular Mr Brok , for his report on the Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper , and to take advantage of this opportunity to applaud the active part played by Parliament , and its invaluable contribution to the enlargement process .
Mr Brok 's report shows that the latest enlargement has been a success both for the European Union and for the Member States that have acceded to it .
We believe that it has been a success for the EU , and that it has made it possible to overcome the division of Europe and helped to ensure peace and stability throughout the continent .
It has inspired reforms , and has reinforced the common principles of liberty , democracy , respect for human rights and the fundamental freedoms , the rule of law and the market economy .
Enlargement of the single market and expansion of economic cooperation have reinforced prosperity and competitiveness , which has enabled the European Union to improve its response to the challenge of globalisation , and has also facilitated exchanges with our partners .
Enlargement has undoubtedly given the European Union greater weight in the world , and has made it a stronger international player .
Our enlargement policy is well established , and has taken on board the lessons learned from previous enlargements .
In December 2007 , the Union agreed that future enlargement strategy would be based on consolidation of commitments , on equitable and rigorous conditionality , and on improved communication .
This remains the basis for our approach to enlargement .
The Union has concluded that , in order for it to be able to maintain its capacity for integration , candidate countries must be prepared to accept in full the obligations that ensue for them from accession , and that the Union must be able to function effectively and to move forward , as Mr Brok stressed in his speech .
These two aspects are essential if we are to win widespread , lasting support from the public .
They should be mobilised by means of greater transparency and improved communication on these issues , and I am counting on the European Parliament to help us in this .
The European Union will fulfil its commitments as regards the negotiations under way .
With regard to Turkey , the screening , that is to say the first formal stage for each chapter , has been completed for 23 chapters , in eight of which negotiations have been opened .
With regard to Croatia , negotiations have been opened in 20 chapters , and have been provisionally closed in two of them .
On 17 June , intergovernmental conferences were held at ministerial level with Turkey and Croatia to open negotiations with Turkey in Chapter 6 , ' Company law ' , and Chapter 7 , ' Intellectual property law ' , and with Croatia in Chapter 2 , ' Freedom of movement for workers ' , and Chapter 19 , ' Social policy and employment ' .
Our aim is to take these negotiations forward , and I would remind you that with regard to our relations with Turkey , we want the reform process to continue and to be stepped up .
It is this that will ensure that the process is irreversible and durable , and we shall continue to monitor closely the progress achieved in all areas , particularly as regards compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
Naturally , progress also needs to be made towards normalising bilateral relations with the Republic of Cyprus .
As regards Croatia , negotiations are going well , and this year they have entered a decisive phase .
The main objective is now to continue to turn the progress achieved to good account , and to speed up the rate of reform .
Thus the European Union is encouraging Croatia to continue its efforts to establish good relations with neighbouring countries , including work designed to find definitive solutions that are acceptable to both parties , and , of course , to resolve the remaining bilateral issues with its neighbours .
However , I should also like to take advantage of this speech , if you will allow me to do so , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , strongly to condemn , on behalf of the Presidency , the violent events of this morning in Istanbul , whose victims were police officers on duty outside the United States Embassy in Istanbul .
On behalf of the Presidency , we denounce this appalling attack , and of course we are currently in close contact with the Turkish authorities .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me first thank Elmar Brok and the committee for a highly interesting report .
Your debate takes place while the EU is reflecting on the situation created by the Irish ' no ' .
At the same time , the course of events in south-eastern Europe reminds us of our immediate responsibility to promote stability and democracy on the European continent .
The EU 's consolidated enlargement agenda covers the Western Balkans and Turkey .
I welcome the report 's firm commitment towards their membership perspective .
The Commission shares many points of the report , including integration capacity , which is definitely an important issue to be taken into account in EU enlargement .
I note with interest the report 's proposal on a European Economic Area Plus for relations with countries that are not part of the current enlargement agenda .
In the face of economic globalisation , it makes sense to extend the European legal and economic space and thus to make the wider Europe stronger in terms of our soft regulatory power .
Yet for the Western Balkans and Turkey , which have a clear membership perspective , the EU must not impose new intermediate stages before candidacy or accession .
That would only create doubts about the EU 's commitment , thus weakening the necessary incentive for democratic reform .
The June European Council last month reaffirmed its full support for the European perspective of the Western Balkans .
It is a powerful message : the EU keeps its word .
This is also a vital message to Turkey .
The EU accession process is advancing : two more chapters were opened in mid-June .
With regard to Turkey , last year we kept the process alive together and muddled through very troubled waters .
It was a victory that required vision and stamina .
The stage was set for success in 2008 , so as to revitalise Turkey 's EU accession process this year .
Sadly , we have not seen such revitalisation , for reasons mainly internal to Turkey .
We in the EU want to continue the process according to the terms defined in the negotiating framework .
For its part , Turkey now needs to improve the democratic functioning of its state institutions and work towards the necessary compromises to continue EU-related reforms .
I sincerely hope that calm and reason will prevail , so that Turkey can avoid stagnation and instead make progress and continue on its European journey with a clear sense of direction and determination .
I would like to use this opportunity to add a few words concerning today 's events in Turkey and join Minister Jean-Pierre Jouyet in this matter .
The Commission strongly condemns the kidnapping of three German tourists in eastern Turkey , and we call for their immediate release .
The Commission strongly condemns the violent armed attack in Istanbul this morning .
I would like to express my condolences to the family and friends of the policemen who were killed , and I wish the injured policemen a speedy recovery .
To conclude , enlargement was always going to be a long-term effort and one which has to ride out political storms in Ankara , Belgrade , Brussels and many other capitals in Europe .
We cannot take any sabbaticals from this work for peace and prosperity that serves the fundamental interest of the European Union and its citizens .
I trust I can count on your support in this regard .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( RO ) The European Union enlargement strategy should be based upon the experience gathered so far and the current political and economic situation .
Previous enlargements have brought benefits both to the Union and the Member States .
Nevertheless , we should note that the countries that joined the EU went through unequal periods for negotiations and have had different routes in the real integration into the European Union .
The European institutions have had difficulties in adjusting to the increase in the number of Member States .
There are arguments for continuing the Union enlargement .
I believe it would be to the Union 's detriment if countries such as those in the Balkans or the Republic of Moldova stayed outside the Union .
The countries of Eastern Europe benefit from historical and geographical considerations for requesting to join the European Union .
There are economic requirements that do not allow us to suspend the enlargement , for instance the energy file .
We also have to deal with external political influences that may have unfavourable repercussions .
We need neighbouring countries that develop strong democracies , functional market economies and the rule of law .
At this moment , the Neighbouring Policy is materialized in cooperation or association pacts , which carry out activities similar to those in a negotiation process , but at a much less substantial level .
I believe these agreements should include and apply procedures identical to those in the negotiation chapters .
I am convinced that the countries that truly want to be part of the Union would accept such conditions , even if they have not signed a preliminary candidate country agreement , and the benefits would be very important for both parties .
Thus , the moment of enlargement will find the countries in a position that would allow them a rapid integration .
Yet , in order to consolidate the European Union and arrive at the moment of a new enlargement , there is a mandatory condition : to reform the European institutions .
For this reason , the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty is a requirement that all Member States must understand and meet .
The content of the Brok report brings clarifications regarding the steps to be taken by the Union in the next period , which the European Commission must take into consideration .
Ladies and gentlemen , you will note that , when we ask someone to speak , we wait after he or she has finished , because the interpreters have told us that we need to leave ten to fifteen seconds , the time taken to relay the speech , before asking the following speaker to take the floor .
You will understand that this is to allow the interpretation to reach everyone in the correct manner .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) On behalf of my Group may I echo and endorse what the Council President and the Commissioner have just said about events in Turkey .
Secondly , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the way he has worked with us in preparing this debate and , thirdly , I would repeat on behalf of my Group that in our view - and the Council President said the same - enlargement has so far proved a success and is making a significant contribution to the development of a wider European Union .
We need to stress that fact right at the beginning of my speech , and Mr Brok 's report makes the point too : we stand - as the Commissioner has said - by the promises made to Turkey and the countries of the Western Balkans in our discussion of enlargement strategy .
So there is no change in strategy vis à vis those countries , but greater attention will be paid to the way in which the accession criteria are applied and managed during the negotiation process .
Secondly , we agree with the rapporteur that more attention needs to be paid to the Union 's own capacity to absorb new members .
On the one hand we are asking more of applicant countries during the preparation phase , but on the other hand the European Union clearly has to do rather more to manage the arrival of new members appropriately .
And we think this means completing the necessary institutional reforms .
The Treaty of Nice is not an adequate basis for successful further enlargement .
Thirdly , and to my mind most importantly : this report also looks beyond the current enlargement agenda to countries that are not on the list of potential applicants .
Our existing European Neighbourhood Policy is not enough .
That is true of our neighbours to the south , and the EU has put forward a proposal for a Mediterranean Union , but it is truer still of our neighbours to the east .
We have reached the clear conclusion that the European Union must offer more , more than the Neighbourhood Policy .
We think it has to encompass both relations between those countries and the Union and bilateral relations between the countries .
The Black Sea would be a good geographic framework here , with a role for both Russia and Turkey .
Without these two countries the main challenges and problems in that region will not be resolved .
Turkey would have a pivotal role between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean and this would give it the chance to show just how important Turkey is in Europe and how valuable it is to the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , first of all I would like to support the position taken by the Council and the Commission in the light of the dramatic events in Turkey .
This important issue is the subject of our discussions today .
Mr Brok 's report confirms the sense of the European Union 's enlargement strategy .
I say this as a citizen of a country that has benefited from this strategy .
The report states that the new accessions to the European Union have been a success .
The report also states that the hopes of European nations that are aspiring to join the European Union and are ready to comply with its entry criteria will find support from the EU .
The concept of integration capacity , which is a condition for a decision on accession , has been accurately defined in this report .
Perhaps it should also be said that those who expected the European Parliament to announce an end to EU enlargement and to introduce some substitute for full accession have been disappointed .
The EU is expanding and is increasing in strength .
I was very pleased to hear Commissioner Rehn say that we should not create any new ante-rooms for countries that wish to join the European Union , but should allow them to apply for direct access to the sitting room .
However , we do have to think about the fact that future enlargement has to be understood and supported by European citizens .
This is an essential part of the EU 's ability to accept new Member States , and also a factor in increasing trust in Europe among its citizens .
We know that this trust is undergoing a time of crisis .
We also know that Europe will come out of this crisis .
I belong to those who believe in the power of European ideas and the Community institutions .
The purpose of the enlargement strategy that the European Parliament is carefully considering today is to consolidate the EU 's inner strength and to respond to the aspirations of European citizens .
It has responded in the same way that it responded to the aspirations of Central Europe in 2004 .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , my main objection to the report we are discussing today is the lack of a clear plan for opening the European Union to the east .
Here I would like to point out a lack of consistency in the way this House has acted .
Last year we adopted a report prepared by my colleague Mr Michał Kamiński , which spoke about presenting Ukraine with a clear prospect of membership .
However , the document we are now discussing is more likely to ring alarm bells in those countries thinking about joining the European Union , especially our closest neighbour , Ukraine .
A report that speaks of the need to strengthen the Union 's capacity to accept new countries is a de facto brake on further expansion of the European Union .
Natural candidates , such as the Ukrainians , a European nation , are being offered an alternative of doubtful value instead of full membership .
Taking our geostrategic interests into consideration , we should see it as important to have the closest possible cooperation with Ukraine .
In this situation it would be better to show Kiev an open door to the European Union , rather than making the possibility of membership more nebulous and thus pushing the Ukrainians into orbit round Russia .
This is particularly true today , when the danger to Ukraine from the Kremlin is becoming more acute .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , let me also thank Elmar Brok , who has taken the process concept on board in this report .
I see a change of strategy between the working paper and the present report , and that is right and proper .
Past enlargements have been a success for the entire Community , even though some criticism is necessary here and there .
That , too , is only right and proper .
Nevertheless , the enlargement process is not finished .
Like many other speakers , I should like to mention the Western Balkans , which must not be consigned to a black hole , surrounded by Member States of the Union .
It is in our interests to avoid that .
We need an unequivocal enlargement strategy , not one that varies according to circumstances .
The EU must be a reliable and trustworthy partner .
This also means that we must be willing to effect reforms ourselves .
If there is currently a question mark about that willingness , we need to engage in critical self-analysis .
It is careless and erroneous to ascribe every sign of Euroscepticism to previous enlargements and fatigue .
So let us wake up !
Let us work for balanced economic , social and environmental development , and let us communicate the extent of the economic , cultural and historical enrichment that comes with enlargement .
Let us also tell people what it would cost if there were another conflagration on our borders or within Europe .
Having clear objectives and discussing them fully and openly create trust .
The Union also nurtures trust by keeping its promises , and I expect us to do that by approving this report .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , after the first accession waves of 2004 and 2007 enlargement is now stagnating .
Croatia has to wait until 2011 , Macedonia will not be in before 2014 at the earliest and for the other five countries of the Western Balkans the wait will be even longer .
Negotiations are ongoing with Turkey , but it is possible that Turkey may not be able to join for decades yet .
Now that all the states previously within the Soviet sphere of influence have joined , the European Union appears to be suffering from enlargement fatigue .
Behind the debate on enlargement and neighbourhood policy there are two different kinds of thinking .
One is that the European Union is a world power and a superstate which is gradually making more and more of the decisions that affect its Member States .
This superstate wants to make neighbouring states dependent on it , but without giving them influence as equal partners within the Union .
Countries which have not made the necessary adjustments or whose economy is weak will not be allowed to join .
They must be kept outside the Union , but nevertheless forcibly drawn into the EU sphere of influence where they have no voice .
My Group abhors that tactic .
The other view wants cooperation involving diverse and equal partners .
The Union is open to any European state that wants to join and meets the requisite criteria such as democracy and human rights .
That kind of Union does not seek ways of imposing decisions which lack support in the Member States , but tries to solve the cross-border problems of its citizens through cooperation .
That kind of Union is the most fit for purpose and has the best chances of survival long-term .
Mr President , Mr Brok 's endeavours are indeed commendable , and I wish to thank him for his speech , in which he provided some very useful explanations .
However , despite the commendable endeavours , this haste by the European Union to once again haphazardly incorporate new Member States is inexplicable .
Into what kind of Union and what kind of Europe would they be incorporated ?
Would it be into a Europe of high oil prices , of high food prices , of unemployment - a Europe of misery , if you will ?
What is it that we wish to create ?
Should we create a new network of intercontinental misery ?
This cannot be in Europe 's interests .
I believe that it could be in the interests of others .
We must bear in mind the outcome of the Irish referendum , which possibly would not allow such simplistic enlargements as the ones we have chosen .
( SK ) I should like to thank the rapporteur for his work on this topical subject , aimed at solving such a sensitive issue for today 's European Union .
Enlargement by 10 new Member States in 2004 and by a further two in 2007 was undoubtedly a success for both the European Union and the above-mentioned countries that joined it .
The competitiveness and the importance of the European Union are growing , thanks to enhanced human as well as economic potential .
However , I can safely say that , in spite of this fact , the 12 new Member States still perceive , on an ongoing basis , the differences between them and the 15 old Member States .
We talk about discrimination and this discrimination is caused by a lack of maturity , whether economic or social .
However , I am taken aback by the fact that enlargement is presented as a reason why the Lisbon Treaty must be ratified .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Nice is dead .
It is a document belonging to history that is not applicable to today 's political life .
It has lost its purpose of acting as a contract between the 15 old Member States .
Today there are 27 of us and therefore the Lisbon Treaty must be ratified , but not because of enlargement .
Enlargement can be achieved through a separate bilateral treaty between the European Union and the Member State .
Mr President , Britain , my country , was one of three countries to join in the first wave of enlargement back in 1973 .
Since then , my party , the British Conservatives , has actively supported the enlargement process to the current 27 Member States .
Enlargement expands the EU single market , creating more opportunities for economic growth and trade .
It creates more jobs and social stability , as well as projecting a greater EU voice on the global stage .
Enlargement consolidates the EU 's values of democracy , human rights and the rule of law in those new Member States , as we have witnessed in the past with the former dictatorships of Spain , Greece and Portugal who then joined , and the Warsaw Pact former Communist countries , who have joined more recently .
For those who question the EU 's movement towards ever-closer Union , enlargement should theoretically produce a wider , looser and more flexible Europe and more debate about the EU 's future direction .
President Sarkozy , as the President-in-Office , has recently raised the issue of enlargement in the context of the paralysis of the Lisbon Treaty , following its rejection by the Irish referendum .
Mr Sarkozy has said that the next foreseen enlargement to Croatia could not happen without the Lisbon Treaty .
I believe this is a mistake and it is an attempt to keep the Treaty alive .
I am convinced that a way can be found for Croatia to join the EU without the Lisbon Treaty .
Indeed , there are undoubtedly other aspects of the Treaty where attempts will be made to implement them without the documents for ratification .
It is now clear that Europeans want less focus on institutional tinkering and more on making the case for the EU by reconnecting with the people .
I personally support future enlargement to the Western Balkans and eventually to Ukraine , Moldova and hopefully a democratic Belarus .
It is a tangible example of the good thing that the EU could bring to its peoples .

( DE ) Mr President , let me begin by expressing my sincere thanks to Mr Brok for his willingness to engage in very constructive cooperation .
The message is fairly clear : the enlargement process will not be interrupted , but we all need to do even more to prepare ourselves .
That applies to those of us who are in the European Union and those who want to come into the European Union .
Better preparation , of course , also entails institutional reforms and consolidation of the European Union .
I need hardly add , moreover , that better preparation also means unequivocal acceptance of the Copenhagen criteria , which must be applied and enforced , not merely incorporated into the statute book .
I am also very grateful to Mr Brok for adopting our idea of a Black Sea Union together with Jan Marinus Wiersma , albeit perhaps in a somewhat more cautious form .
The point is that we must send clear signals to Ukraine and to the other countries of the Black Sea region that are covered by the neighbourhood policy .
In order to help these countries , however , it is also important to include Turkey and Russia in this cooperation .
I do value the ideas of the French Presidency on a Mediterranean Union , but we must not sideline the Black Sea region .
We must fly the flag there too , and the European Union must make appropriate cooperation proposals .
As far as the Balkan countries are concerned , Mr Brok makes a few offers in his report .
As he emphasised clearly and precisely today , these are optional offers .
' Wait a while with your reforms - there is ample time ' is a message that no one should be receiving from here .
No , the reforms must be expedited , both in Croatia and , of course , in the other countries .
Particularly when a new government takes office , as has now happened in Serbia , our signal must be clear .
It must say , ' We want you in the European Union as soon as possible , but we cannot offer an alternative to your reform process .
You yourselves will have to pursue it , and you will have to apply a pro-European strategy . '
The Union is incomplete without the Balkan countries of south-eastern Europe , but the work must be done in those countries , and it must be done as quickly as possible , so that we can build a new Europe together .
( HU ) The history of the EU up to now has been a history of continuous enlargement , and this enlargement is also one of the most obvious testaments to the success and attractiveness of the European Union .
All the same , a sort of tiredness and apathy with enlargement can be felt more and more in public opinion .
This gives us all good reason to deal with the question of enlargement realistically .
However , realism cannot mean scepticism .
It cannot mean halting the enlargement process , and even less can it mean drafting new admission conditions that cannot be fulfilled , or repeating the obligations assumed previously , since this would undermine our credibility .
Since the Irish referendum , it has been our main basic concern to prove that the European Union is still working , and enlargement is still an important and real goal for the European Union .
This is at least as much in the interests of the Member States as it is for the countries that want to accede .
Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , academic jargon has started to loom larger than policy in our enlargement strategy .
The theory of enlargement capacity is just a set of pretexts for a totally arbitrary and political decision to close the Union to the world .
This is a bad and harmful direction for Europe to take , as it is this enlargement that has given the EU weight in the international arena and made it possible for the Union to spread its social , political and economic model .
If we accept this report , we are sending a negative signal to Kiev and Tbilisi and we are weakening pro-Western and pro-European forces there .
To drum up support for Treaty reforms it was announced , in Poland among other countries , that they were essential for enlargement .
This makes it all the more surprising to hear that despite accepting the Lisbon Treaty we have to work on additional treaty reforms in the context of further enlargement .
Elmar , your presentation was certainly better than the report , but please tell me one thing : how many reform treaties do we have to accept before you think we are ready to accept Ukraine into the European Union ?
( EL ) Mr President , our view on enlargement is that the peoples of Europe have the right , if they so judge , and provided that they meet the required criteria , to seek accession to the European Union .
This principle is also the basis for our views in the case of Turkey , the accession process of which also affects the resolution of the Cyprus issue .
We insist , however , that Turkey 's compliance with the commitments it has made towards the European Union is an essential condition for the completion of its accession .
While there should be no waiver of the obligation of the European Union to honour its own commitments , Turkey must comply fully with the principles of international legality , the UN resolutions and European law for an end to the occupation in Cyprus , the opening up of ports and airports to Cypriot ships and aeroplanes and the abrogation of the veto so that the Republic of Cyprus can participate in international forums and agreements .
Especially at this point in time , following the initiative of the newly elected President , Demetris Christofias , and the efforts being made by the leaders of the two communities , Turkey ought to comply and to refrain from placing any obstacle in the way of this new phase in the Cyprus issue .
Mr President , there is an acknowledgement in this report that enlargement has not been an unqualified success .
Mr Brok concedes that , without a serious alteration in the current EU policies , the EU 's internal cohesion may be undermined by enlargement .
The EU has let in countries that it knew full well did not meet its own entry criteria , as was the case with Romania and Bulgaria .
This may well be repeated with yet more Eastern European states and Turkey .
Tremendous strains are being put on Member States such as the United Kingdom as a result of uncontrolled , unlimited and indiscriminate immigration resulting from continued EU enlargement .
This is just one of the reasons for the growing hostility to the European Union among its citizens .
Mr Brok 's solution is to propose a massive propaganda budget to convince people of the benefit of enlargement .
The solution for Britain is to leave the European Union and regain control of its borders .
( NL ) Commissioner Rehn again said just now that Turkey has a clear perspective for full membership and that no new requirements should be imposed .
I suggest the Commissioner takes a good look at the Eurobarometer polls .
There is no democratic support for Turkish accession .
The gulf between policy and people is steadily increasing , getting wider and deeper .
The promise was given that negotiations would be suspended if Turkey was manifestly failing to meet its obligations .
That promise has not been kept .
Another promise was that the negotiations would proceed in step with the process of reforms in Turkey .
That is not happening either .
The reform process in Turkey has effectively ground to a halt and yet two weeks ago it was decided to open two new chapters in the negotiations .
This mismatch between word and deed will prove fatal to the European Union unless radical changes are made to our policy and attitudes .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Union today is already very large , but it is still incomplete .
In order to be cohesive , a united Europe needs common values at its base , as well as the goodwill of its inhabitants .
In order to achieve the goals that we set ourselves , such as a better economy , greater political influence in the international arena , better demographics , or better quality of life , there are certain conditions that need to be fulfilled .
As regards the points presented by our colleague Mr Brok , of course greater internal integration is important .
The members of the Union must also want to continue enlargement , and of course the candidate countries must fulfil the necessary criteria .
What is the strategy for this enlargement ?
It is simply to motivate the candidates to make efforts , to work with them and to support them by means of various instruments , including the neighbourhood policy .
The eastern dimension is important for us , because there is a large section of Europe there that is not in Europe proper , not in the European Union .
The only option here is to make the effort to get to know these eastern neighbours and prepare the ground as regards legal , economic and social issues .
In all this , common values are important , or at least the possibility of common values .
It seems to me , and I am convinced of this fact , that the greatest social and political experiment in the whole of history - the completion of the Union of Europe - has a real chance of success .
( FR ) Mr President , there is a famous painting by the Belgian artist René Magritte which shows a pipe with , below it , the caption ' ceci n 'est pas une pipe ' .
Magnificently painted it may be , but this pipe can never be smoked .
The Brok report is rather like this .
Despite its title , it is not an enlargement strategy , for it is not a matter of strategy or of those key questions that citizens ask themselves .
Why enlarge the European Union ?
In what direction ?
At what risk or with what benefits ?
What Mr Brok is talking about is a consolidation method , a defensive tactic .
To put it simply , enlargement is a contract between Europe and the candidate countries .
The latter have to fulfil the Copenhagen criteria , and Europe has to demonstrate the capacity to absorb them .
And there is the rub .
Trapped in a Treaty of Nice that is too constricting , from which it cannot escape , Europe is not ready for further enlargement .
Accordingly , the crisis in the European institutions should have the effect of putting a stop to enlargement .
That is what many European citizens think and , up to a point , that is my view too .
We need to be careful though , as , put baldly like this , devoid of any ambitious strategy , this slogan is dangerous .
It opens up the way to all those who are prepared to reject a new treaty , with a view to turning in on ourselves , to rejecting Turkey or even the Balkan countries - the way to all those nationalists who distrust foreigners who might one day dress up as Europeans .
For them , this slogan is just a charade - in fact they want neither enlargement nor greater depth .
We have to prove to our citizens that the successive enlargements have constituted an opportunity for Europe , to emphasise to them that multiculturalism is a blessing , that immigration is our democratic future .
We have to get beyond the institutional crisis .
It does not signal a victory either for the Eurosceptics or for the left , but it reveals a somewhat inglorious impotence from which everyone risks suffering .
The Brok report manages this impotence well and intelligently , and I congratulate him , but sadly he does not take us forward .
( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , the results of EU enlargement are positive , and therefore it is essential that we create the right conditions to develop them .
Our institutions and governments ought to provide the public with honest and complete information about both the benefits and risks of enlargement .
Citizens need to be certain that , after enlargement , they will not have to worry about their opportunities for retaining and developing their languages , cultures , faiths and traditions , and they need to be certain that their welfare and values will not be under threat .
If existing nations within states feel at home in their countries , there will be less fear surrounding an influx of immigrants and the enlargement process as a whole will be seen in a positive light .
We need to listen to citizens , and we need to develop a dialogue .
I support various types of cooperation with potential Member States .
This would result not only in a more honest attitude towards the European Union 's capacity for integration , which was successfully defined in the report , but also in a clear roadmap for our partners .
Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , The European Union cannot perform its function as a reliable and stable global partner unless it remains able to act and pursues a refined strategy that responds to the specific needs of different countries .
We cannot admit all our neighbours as members and are therefore obliged , if only in their own interests , to offer them an appealing and worthwhile alternative .
We must devise an efficient neighbourhood policy worthy of the name .
The opening of our education , culture and youth programmes and the establishment of a special economic area are examples of such an approach .
The options enumerated in Mr Brok 's excellent report must therefore be fully developed and fleshed out as quickly as possible .
This is the only way to promote stability , peace , respect for human rights and economic reforms in the countries that are our neighbours .
The situation is different , however , in the countries of the Western Balkans , which have had a clear prospect of accession for some time .
A glance at the map will suffice to see clearly that they are in the heartland of the European Union , by which I mean that they are surrounded by Member States .
Our policy there is based on logical steps .
One country is already negotiating its accession to the EU , while others have signed stabilisation and association agreements with the EU - all of them except Kosovo , in fact .
Our political action there is the litmus test of our credibility in the field of foreign policy and the guarantor of lasting peace and stability in the EU .
I do not like it when Turkey and Croatia are invariably mentioned in the same breath .
The conditions and backgrounds are entirely different , and everyone should be aware of that .
Croatia is the first of the Western Balkan countries whose accession negotiations could be completed in 2009 .
The EU should expedite Croatia 's accession , thereby signalling to Macedonia , Albania , Montenegro , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Serbia and Kosovo that the essential and often painful social , judicial and economic reforms are worth the effort .
Responsibility for the future accession of these countries , however , will then lie primarily in the hands of their own politicians , who are accountable to the electorate in their respective countries .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , it is the opinion of the rapporteur , the Council and the Commission that past enlargements have generally been a great success .
I fully agree with this view .
An example of this is my own country , the Czech Republic .
It benefits enormously from its membership and is fast catching up with the most economically advanced countries .
In spite of this , there are people in the country , including President Klaus , who constantly voice their doubts about EU membership , as well as doubts about the reason for the very existence of the EU .
In the neighbouring country of Austria , similar views are being expressed .
Although 150 000 jobs were created in this country of eight million people thanks to enlargement , only 28 % of Austrians see their country 's membership of the European Union as something positive .
I should therefore like to single out one aspect of Mr Elmar Brok 's report and that is the need to introduce a comprehensive communication strategy for informing the public about the purpose of enlargement , about its advantages as well as its potential future disadvantages .
For me , this is the most important issue , apart from ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and apart from making good on the promise we gave particularly to the West Balkan countries in Solun in 2003 .
( PL ) Mr President , in the report on the enlargement strategy that we are debating , there is a reference to a clause in the Treaty of Rome , according to which ' any European state may apply to become a member of the Community ' .
We note with some satisfaction the signals concerning acceptance of the Polish and Swedish initiative for eastern partnership , including closer cooperation with our eastern neighbours , among them Ukraine and Belarus .
It should be pointed out that Ukraine is expecting full membership .
In the context of the priorities of the French Presidency , which is concentrating on contacts with the Union 's southern neighbours , we should also strengthen our eastern partnership , in order to prevent a serious asymmetry in external policy .
One of the instruments could be to set up an EU-East parliamentary session , the so-called Euronest .
Putting such a proposal at the top of the agenda would strengthen the signal being sent to our eastern neighbours and to their Community aspirations .
It should be stated clearly that these should not be suppressed and linked with the Lisbon Treaty debacle , as certain senior European politicians are currently doing .

( EL ) Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mr Brok on his report , in which there is a great deal of truth .
Personally , I am a not too optimistic about new accessions and about a new enlargement , at least in the immediate future , with the exception of Croatia .
However , we do wish for the world around us to enjoy political and economic stability .
We wish for peace and prosperity to prevail .
We wish for the world around us to be alive and very healthy .
A tool to aid us in that direction , as Mr Brok also admits , is the European Neighbourhood Policy .
However , the European Neighbourhood Policy does not create partners in a common enterprise .
It is based on the bilateral relations of the Union with each of these countries and , in my view , that is its weak point .
We must therefore create something that goes beyond just being neighbours but not as far as being a Member State .
My proposal for the construction of a European Commonwealth is a step towards that direction : it will be a kind of enhanced cooperation , a zone of states neighbouring the European Union that will adopt a European approach .
This will manage to both reinforce security and raise the international prestige of the European Union .
It will be the alternative tool to enlargement , enabling us to extend our influence on the neighbours in question at a time when objections to a further enlargement are apparent .
Finally , I wish to add that , even though this proposal may sound very ambitious , I believe that the European Union must finally boost its prestige and extend its influence , and I think this is one way to achieve this .
Mr President , there can be no strategy without a scope of purpose .
The ambiguity of the European Union purpose when we come to the enlargement policy is an obstacle which no rapporteur could overcome .
This report is a victim of such ambiguity .
Our duty and our ultimate scope is to grant security to our citizens .
Our citizens feel unprotected .
In order to protect them , the European Union needs power .
In order to be powerful in a global world , the European Union needs both enlargement and internal reform .
Since we failed to tell our citizens that the rights they have already acquired are not sustainable , they think that they can preserve those rights by opposing both enlargement and reform .
Under such circumstances the future of the European Union is in jeopardy .
Enlargement is not a concession made to the candidate countries .
Some of them , such as Ukraine , Serbia , Moldova and Turkey , have alternatives - maybe worse , but alternatives .
In these cases we are in competition with others .
Some of their internal problems could be solved better inside , rather than outside , the European Union .
If we do not offer them prospects , we do not offer our citizens security .
It is not the candidate countries or the new Member States that are indigestible : our digestive system is too slow .
Either we find a good digestive quickly or we will be obliged to starve for a long time .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I think it is right to conclude that enlargement has been a success .
I am glad to hear confirmation that countries to which we previously gave clear pledges and a clear EU perspective still enjoy those advantages .
However , I am seriously concerned that the atmosphere becomes cooler every time we discuss enlargement .
Words such as ' adequate ' , ' absorption capacity ' , ' political consolidation ' , ' risks to social and economic cohesion ' are increasingly used .
These are words which , to my ears , do not sound like a vision or a goal but more like a way to avoid committing ourselves to possible future enlargements .
More and more references are made to enlargement fatigue in public opinion at home , but not enough is being done to change that opinion .
It is not by chance that Germany and France , two countries that had waged war with one another for centuries , were the very countries which launched the entire EU project .
It is not by chance that it was precisely the leaders of France and Germany who had a vision for Europe 's future .
They understood that the European Union was , first and foremost , a project for peace and security , much more than just an economic project .
It is this vision and this kind of leadership which I am really looking for and which I so often find lacking here .
I therefore appreciate Commissioner Rehn 's plain speaking : we must not create a waiting room for countries which aspire to membership , and enlargement has a future .
I am particularly grateful to the Commissioner for that .
( DE ) Mr President , in my view the European enlargement policy has been a great success story .
Within fifty years the EU has managed to create a peaceful , democratic and prosperous continent .
What strikes me about this report on the EU enlargement strategy , however , is that it also focuses on relations between the EU and countries with no accession prospects .
This attempt to water down the enlargement strategy and blend it with the European Neighbourhood Policy poses problems .
Although the report deals with many very interesting substantive issues and makes good points , these would be at home in a report on the ENP but are out of place in an enlargement report .
I am thinking , for example , of the proposals for a Mediterranean Union and a Black Sea Union .
The enlargement policy of the EU should remain quite separate from the European Neighbourhood Policy .
Instead , I regret to say that the report contains some very vague and even confusing statements which leave room for diverse interpretations .
( ES ) Mr President , the Brok report relates to one of the most outstanding successes of the European Union : the enlargement process .
If you will allow me , I would like to make three comments .
First , enlargement has highlighted the Union 's so-called ' capacity for change ' .
The desire for integration has been a powerful stimulus for profound political and economic change in many European countries .
Those countries have gone on to become members of the Union , thereby benefiting themselves and also the existing Member States .
The fifth enlargement is the most recent proof of this success .
Second , I endorse the concepts , advocated by the Commission , of conditionality , consolidation and communication , concepts which also inform the Brok report .
I also support the requirement that the Union must strengthen its integration capacity .
In fact , enlargements demand that the Union be able to assimilate them and continue to function properly .
In order to do so , it needs to carry out institutional reforms where necessary and , for example , secure its financial resources .
Enlargements must not endanger the common policies or the objectives of the Union .
Furthermore , I endorse the need for an ambitious communication policy , something which the Union has so far lacked .
It is true that we have not been able to put over the benefits of enlargement to our citizens .
Finally , the Brok report refers to the possibility of creating a specific area of the Union for eastern countries which as yet have no membership prospects .
As paragraph 19 of the report indicates , such an area or zone would be based on common policies in various areas , from the rule of law and democracy to education and migration .
In my view , many of these common policies should not just be implemented with respect to our eastern neighbours but should also be extended to countries bordering the Mediterranean .
The latter have enjoyed very close relations with the European Union for over fifty years .
The European Neighbourhood Policy and the so-called Barcelona Process - now the Mediterranean Union - need to ensure that countries on the southern shore do not feel as though they are being treated as second class citizens .
( ES ) Mr President , just a warning : in one minute there is no time for subtleties and so I am speaking solely on my own behalf .
Enlargement has not always been successful .
The political elites of four or five countries in the latest 2004 enlargement have not , in my view , either understood or taken on board European policy or the Community acquis .
They are prioritising relations with the United States and placing more emphasis on NATO than on a genuine and secure process of integration with the European Union .
There can be no more enlargements until the Lisbon Treaty comes into force .
Current negotiations with candidate countries should continue without interruption but I emphatically believe that those negotiations should not be closed until the Lisbon Treaty is approved .
Finally , we should not prevent those countries which want to progress further from being impeded by the more Eurosceptic , nationalist or sovereignty-seeking countries .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the Brok report the European Parliament demonstrates very clearly that it has learned the lessons of the last major wave of enlargement which saw the accession of twelve new Member States and that it has been able to catalogue all the resulting problems while effectively highlighting all the benefits that enlargement has brought to both the new and the old Member States .
The main thing , however , is to draw the appropriate conclusions , and this it has done , particularly in two areas to which I attach importance .
First of all , we shall have to examine the absorption capacity of the European Union prior to any future enlargement and , secondly , candidate countries really will have to meet the criteria before they are admitted .
When we come to discuss the absorption capacity of the European Union , I believe there are important points to consider , such as the principle that new accessions must not jeopardise the European integration project .
By this I mean that the Union 's development impetus and the pursuit of its aims must be boosted , not deflected , by the admission of new Member States .
The institutional framework of the Union must first be created and consolidated .
The fact is that we need a treaty , be it the Treaty of Lisbon or another adequate treaty , and enlargement must also be affordable for the European Union , otherwise it would jeopardise the integration project .
Our overarching aim is continued progress .
Subsequent accessions of additional countries should not be excluded , but everything must be done in accordance with rules and conditions .
( RO ) The strengthening of the European Union 's role as an actor on the international scene is impossible without continuous adjustment to the 21st century global context .
A geostrategic element in this respect is enlargement and the previous enlargements , including the latest , of 2007 , have proved the unquestionable advantages of this process .
Therefore , it is essential that this process continues and I welcome the reiteration of the firm commitment to the Western Balkan countries in the report .
Nevertheless , it is not less important to provide a clear European perspective to the European partners in the Neighbouring Policy , including the Republic of Moldova .
I remind you that we are speaking about European countries that have already stated their objective to acquire a European prospect and the Treaty of Rome stipulates explicitly that any European state can request to become a Community member , provided that it meets the Copenhagen criteria .
I request the Commission and the Council to ...
( The President revoked the speaker 's admittance to the floor . )
Mr President , the Irish setback to the Lisbon Treaty has provided enlargement sceptics with an unexpected opportunity : The EU has to stop considering new members , because there is simply no room for them .
Of course , in strict legal terms , this is true at the moment , but , at the same time , we should make a clear distinction between the Lisbon Treaty and enlargement .
Firstly , because the rationale for the Treaty has not been enlargement per se but the adaptation of the EU to a globalised context and , secondly , because enlargement is a political rather than a strictly legal matter .
Enlargement is a power ingredient showing attractiveness and authority as well as the absorption capacity - things we do not miss a chance to claim for our Union .
Therefore , strategic planning , actual negotiations and new initiatives in relation to further enlargement should continue in parallel to the efforts to ratify the Lisbon Treaty .

Mr President , could Mr Jouyet explain and justify the extraordinary situation inside the French Parliament about the use of referendums to sanction Turkish accession ?
Does he not agree that the choice of such a populist device is entirely wrong for the ratification of an international treaty ?
( RO ) Enlargement has proved to be one of the strongest political instruments of the European Union , serving the Union 's strategic interests of stability , security and conflict prevention .
This has contributed to more prosperity , growth opportunities , as well as to ensuring vital transport and energy corridors .
The European Union policy on enlargement has been a success both for the European Union and for Europe , in general .
In this context , it is important to maintain the open door policy both for the candidate or potential candidate countries and for the countries with European prospects in the Eastern part of the continent , an approach that is conditioned , of course , by the fulfilment of required criteria and commitments .
However , in order to continue the enlargement , we need a viable solution for the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
( SK ) We have heard words such as enlargement fatigue , crisis or the need for consolidation .
These are very depressing words and attitudes , more a testimony to helplessness and elitism than to the ability to actively push ahead with the vision of a united Europe .
Consolidation is not a problem for those countries that joined the Union during the last two enlargements .
It is mostly a problem for the old Member States .
They should ask themselves why they need consolidation .
As regards enlargement fatigue , it is us who are bedevilled by contradictory views and standpoints , not the countries that are ready to meet all our requirements and conditions in order to become EU members .
For example , our conduct towards Turkey is tragicomic because today we cannot even say whether we will be willing to accept Turkey into our elitist circle when the Copenhagen criteria are met , and consequently the question or all questions which ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , it is reassuring to hear the French Minister stating in essence that , in order for Turkey to prove its wish to proceed with its European aspirations , it must normalise its relations with Cyprus .
It is indeed inconceivable and defies any sense of logic that the EU will continue accession negotiations with a country that continues not to recognise one of its Member States and continues to occupy part of that state .
I understand that the carrot-and-stick policy must be used in the case of a country where democracy is constantly under attack by its military , but there are limits to our patience and to our tolerance .
We have been to communal talks in Cyprus .
This is a good time for the Commission and Council to strongly impress on Turkey the need to show goodwill - not only to Cyprus but to the EU in general - by urgently removing its occupation troops from the island of Cyprus and by immediately implementing the Ankara Protocol .
Such moves will undoubtedly act as a catalyst to finding a solution to the Cyprus problem .
( The President cut off the speaker . )
I am told that we are running very short of time , so we are not going to be able to allow everyone to speak .
I would like to point out to those who have asked to speak that they can submit their intervention in writing , for inclusion in the minutes of the sitting .
Welcome
I would like to point out , ladies and gentlemen , that on the rostrum we have a delegation from the Republic of South Africa , led by Mr D. Obed Bapela , Chairman of the International Relations Committee , who is known to all of us for his friendship towards Europe and for his involvement in the fight against apartheid .
( Applause )
I would like to extend a welcome to our guests , to this the twelfth European Parliament / Parliament of South Africa interparliamentary meeting .
This is a very important visit .
The frequency of these visits is enhancing political dialogue , which is a vital element of the joint action plan , which we adopted in May last year , for the implementation of the European Union / South Africa Strategic Partnership .
Heightening our cooperation with a view to increasing international security and stability is without a doubt more necessary now than ever before , in view of the current tense regional situation in southern Africa and , especially , the crisis in Zimbabwe with which we are all familiar .
I would therefore like to welcome our friends from South Africa .
The Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper ( continuation of debate )
We will now continue our debate on the Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , I should like to make three comments before I turn to this debate , which has been extremely productive and exciting .
First , on behalf of the Council , I would like to welcome the South African delegation who are here with us , and to tell them that we shall be seeing their country 's leaders very soon , as that will be the first European Union summit that will take place in France , at the end of July .
Secondly , I should like to join Mr Rehn in expressing great sympathy for the German tourists who , according to a dispatch , have been kidnapped by Kurdish rebels in Turkey .
We in the Council very much hope that , if this is confirmed , these people will be found safe and sound as quickly as possible , and we would stress that our thoughts are with them .
Thirdly , I want to thank Mr Duff for his knowledge of French politics , and of the positions I personally hold .
I shall , of course , be happy to talk to him in greater depth over a coffee , but unfortunately my duties today do not allow me to comment on them now .
To move on to our debate , enlargement is definitely part of the story of European development , and to date we have always ensured that enlargement and strengthening of the Union go hand in hand .
It is important that this should continue , as Mr Brok emphasised .
All debates are helpful in making our citizens aware of the issues involved in enlargement , and so we pay particular attention to the European Parliament 's debates and positions on this topic .
Following on from what many Members have said , I wish to emphasise the stabilising role of enlargement .
This is obvious in the case of the Balkans .
The rapid progress made by Croatia , which the French Presidency wishes to expedite further if all the Member States agree , shows that countries that experienced conflict in the 1990s have a genuine prospect of accession .
This is an important message for Serbia in particular , given that it has just acquired a government that also aspires to strengthening its links with the European Union .
The same is equally true of Turkey , and in this context I should like to remind you that the current status of the negotiations is linked not to the position of one or other of the EU Member States , but to Turkey itself , and the rate of reform there .
Above all , it is linked to Turkey 's fulfilment of its obligations to all the EU Member States and , in particular , with fulfilment of the Ankara Protocol .
The policy of enlargement does not mean that we are neglecting the European Union 's other neighbours .
The Council is currently discussing how we can enable Ukraine to reach a new stage in its relations with the European Union in the forthcoming EU-Ukraine summit , which will be held in Evian on 9 September .
We also wish to advance relations between the EU and Moldova , a country in which the Council has already invested a great deal .
As the Council Presidency , we also support the regional processes that have been described .
I myself attended the conference that launched the synergy on the Black Sea , and the summit of the Baltic countries .
And of course I cannot fail to mention the forthcoming summit on the Barcelona Process and the Mediterranean Union , which will take place in Paris on 13 July .
Finally , as you can see , the enlargement process has not broken down .
It is continuing to make many demands on the candidate countries , and also on Member States , which have to explain this process to their citizens .
Mr Rouček and Mrs De Keyser are absolutely right to say that a great deal of education is needed , with or without Magritte .
However , it is true that , as you emphasised , citizens also need to be reassured .
It is precisely to make it possible to continue this process , the strategic import of which has been mentioned by some of you , and Mr Brok in particular , that the Treaty of Lisbon sets out to reform our institutions so that the new Member States - we must be clear about this - can be welcomed under the best conditions , without calling into question the European Union 's capacity for action .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am particularly happy to conclude my part in this debate in the presence of a parliamentary delegation from South Africa , as I started my political activity some decades ago in a campaign to free Nelson Mandela .
We are lucky that in this House the only prisoners left seem to be my friend , Elmar Brok , and myself , as publicly announced on the table .
( Laughter )
I would like to thank the Members for a very substantive and responsible debate today .
I only want to make one cross-cutting point of a general nature .
I am glad that the Brok report and today 's debate essentially endorse the renewed consensus on EU enlargement , which was achieved in December 2006 - not least because of the events in 2005 .
The key virtue of this strategy is that it strikes a carefully calibrated balance between the underlying strategic importance of enlargement in extending the zone of peace and prosperity , liberty and democracy on the one hand , and our own capacity to integrate new members with rigorous conditionality and our internal reform on the other .
I cannot help recalling - I have an elephant 's memory - that in the autumn of 2004 , after a parliamentary hearing , I was criticised by the Committee on Foreign Affairs for a lack of vision because I did not immediately want to provide an accession perspective for Ukraine .
I only said that we should not prejudge the future as regards Ukraine .
A year later I was criticised for emphasising absorption capacity and stopping the motion of enlargement .
In this light I particularly welcome today 's debate , which strikes the right balance between the strategic importance of enlargement and our own capacity to integrate new members .
This debate and the report find a solid third way by combining both a deepening of political integration with the gradual widening of the European Union .
In my view this clearly shows a convincing convergence of the use of the European Parliament and of the Commission , and of the European Union as a whole , and I certainly welcome this phenomenon and the direction towards the renewed consensus on enlargement which has been prevailing since 2006 .
I would like to inform you that tonight , at the meeting of the Bureau , I am intending to express my concern about the ' catch the eye ' procedure , for which there are no rules , the matter being left exclusively to the arbitrariness or judgment of the President or of his or her eye , and I think it is essential to lay down some ground rules , because the procedure is becoming unsatisfactory .
Today we had as many as fifteen requests and this is altering the normal procedure and the amount of time given to each Group to speak .
Therefore , I would like to leave you to think about this , particularly those of you who may have been disappointed , because many people have asked to speak but few have been able to do so .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , first I want to thank the Commission and the Council Presidency for the solidarity they have expressed regarding the German tourists in Turkey .
We are looking at a whole range of subjects and need to find a balance among them .
They range from the Mediterranean Union - which is an important step forward if it is supported by the Community as a whole rather than being a priority of certain countries from certain regions - via the Swedish-Polish proposal , to the proposal for a Black Sea Union .
These are all ideas we must look at together as a Community while also making it clear that some of these options offer the prospect of accession while others do not .
The statement by the Polish Foreign Minister , Mr Sikorski , that some countries are Europe 's neighbours while others are European neighbours is perhaps an indication of the fact that the two are equally important but that there are differences as regards method and objective .
If , however , we have the scope to do so - bilateral relations , multilateral intermediate solutions or even permanent solutions somewhere between Neighbourhood Policy and full membership - and therefore have a whole range of instruments at our disposal , we should consider how we can also safeguard this balance , to which the Commissioner referred , politically and administratively in the long term ; that would maintain both the European Union 's potential for development and those countries ' prospects of accession to Europe and their stability .
Let me ask some of the critics of the EU who have spoken here one question : which European Union do they mean ?
The European Union that we have now and that represents the greatest success story in terms of peace , freedom and prosperity in the history of this continent !
We want to continue with this project and expand it as much as we can in order to continue achieving this kind of success and this objective and to bring in more countries .
That is the issue !
That is why , when we talk of the Western Balkans , we have to say : if yesterday or this week we have a government in Serbia that says it wants to look towards Brussels , towards Europe , then for the sake of ensuring lasting peace in a region that has been a source of conflict for the past 150 years we should accept that offer and further that prospect in order to continue with the peaceful development of our continent .
Mr President , on a point of order , because the debate on Palestinian prisoners held by the Israeli authorities is to start so late - almost an hour late now - I am afraid I have to withdraw my name from the speaker 's list .
But I ask that my minute , allocated to me by the PSE Group , be added to Ms De Keyser 's time allocation .
She is leading for the PSE Group .
I express my deep regret that I have to do this , but unfortunately I have to go to the airport .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 July 2008 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The prospect of countries of South-Eastern Europe joining the European Union is the driver of reforms for the democratic transformation of these countries .
The Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper should send a clear signal regarding the firm commitment toward the countries with which accession negotiations have started or the countries with accession prospects .
This is the case , among others , of Serbia and the Republic of Moldova .
For the latter country , Romania represents a window by which the Moldavian citizens can preserve their hope in a European , more democratic and more prosperous future .
A future accession to the European Union is an impulse for the democratic opposition in the Republic of Moldova to continue the fight for establishing democratic legislative and institutional structures , a process that the EU has committed itself to encouraging .
The need for institutional internal reforms in the EU , by the coming into force of the Lisbon Treaty , cannot represent a preliminary reason and a pretext to block the Union enlargement .
in writing . - ( RO ) The EU enlargement has always been only a matter of time and of making political and economic systems compatible between the Member States .
A short evaluation of the 2004 and 2007 enlargement process shows us a stronger and more dynamic Union , both regarding internal and external matters , which proves to us that the enlargement process has been beneficial both to the Union and to the newly-acceded countries , as well as that , inside the Union , we gather only our values and not our problems too .
The political and economic , European and global context is probably not the most favourable for a rapid enlargement , but this should not prevent us from developing and even reforming the strategies and mechanisms for enlargement .
The Western Balkan countries , Moldova , Ukraine and Turkey are countries that have stated their interest in joining the EU and that benefit from privileged partnerships with the EU , but also have to solve , at an internal level , compliance with the European standards , democracy , stability and prosperity .
In this context , I congratulate Mr. Brok for the sense of balance and pragmatism used in the report he drafted and I also hope in a rapid solution for the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty by all Member States .
in writing . - The process of enlargement has been an integral part of the development of the EU over the last 50 years .
From the six founding members , the EU has enlarged to 27 member states and represents more than 450 million people The European Union is more stable , more secure and has a bigger voice on international issues than before .
We have experienced through the years that enlargement has been at the core of the success and development of the EU .
Enlargement has enabled the peaceful reunification of Europe across the Cold War divide .
We have to agree that development of the EU has gone hand in hand with enlargement .
But what is the current attitude towards enlargement inside our society ?
Attitudes towards further enlargement are unenthusiastic , mostly influenced by non-enlargement-related issues and partly related to the lack of information about enlargement .
I am one of those who are convinced that the prospect of eventual EU membership is indispensable to driving further political reform and pushing for democracy .
The fear is that if the prospect of EU membership is taken off the political agenda , the Balkans may slip back into instability .
in writing . - ( HU ) Mr President , in connection with the debate on enlargement strategy , I would like to draw attention to the substantial criteria relating to our immediate neighbours , the Western Balkans and Ukraine .
The prospect of accession , and especially the obligation to comply with the Copenhagen criteria , has been a huge motivation for the candidate countries to modernise and develop into constitutional states .
The Western Balkans and Ukraine need this motivating force .
If we take away the prospect of accession from our immediate neighbours , with whom we share European traditions and history , the motivating force that can make the constitutional statehood of these countries a reality ceases to exist .
Legislation such as the anti-minority education decrees will be appearing very shortly , and this , along with closures of schools that teach in the mother tongue , language death and assimilation , is generating huge anger in Ukraine .
When the bar is dropped or the goal becomes more distant , standards move further away from what we call a constitutional state .
So we have a great responsibility .
It is now important for us to ensure that the criteria are fulfilled not just on paper but in reality - consistency is needed from our neighbours in their preparations , and consistency is needed from the Union in its promises and calls to account .
Our consistent behaviour will create confidence among our voters and neighbours alike .
in writing . - ( PL ) As a representative of a country that joined the EU in 2004 , I fully support all the parts of Mr Elmar Brok 's report that emphasise the importance of continued enlargement and its positive contribution to the creation of a strong , cohesive , citizen-friendly and prosperous Europe .
I agree with the statement that the possibility of EU membership , once acknowledged , has a very positive influence on the internal policies of candidate countries , encouraging them to act faster to restructure their administration , to reform their education systems and institutions of higher learning , to pay more attention to human rights , including those of minorities , to combat corruption in public life , in a word , to adopt the values that have guided the European Union for many years .
I also think that the report should give much greater emphasis to the openness of the European Union and its readiness to accept the next new Member States .
This is especially important for my own country , Poland , particularly in the context of the expectations and European aspirations of our eastern neighbours , particularly Ukraine .
It would be very unfortunate if our neighbours saw our eastern frontier ( the Schengen border for the whole EU ) as some new wall that will permanently separate us from them .
The calls that we hear sometimes in this context , that further enlargement of the Union should depend on its so-called ' integration capacity ' - these I consider to be badly thought through and constitute a threat to the objectives that the EU has set itself .
in writing . - An important start for dealing with further enlargements is a clear understanding that the EU has greatly benefited from all past enlargements .
The latter have resulted in a win-win situation for all interested parties .
This provides us with a credible basis to believe that the EU will also benefit from coming enlargements .
One can well understand the concern relating to the EU integration capacity .
However , the most efficient potential for enhancing integration capacity is still not fully used .
This is making full use of the EU 's four fundamental freedoms - liberalising markets , unbundling big companies , providing for transparency .
To successfully address the global challenges we need to rely without further hesitations on the fundamental values and principles of the European Community , which has been and still is the biggest success story of European history .
One should welcome the emphasis put by the rapporteur on regional cooperation mechanisms .
The recent Polish-Swedish initiative to set up an Eastern Dimension to integrate all Eastern European states into a meaningful cooperation seems to be especially valuable .
However , regional cooperation agreements cannot be used as an excuse for excluding certain states in this area from prospects of future full membership .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , Parliament is considering its resolution on the EU 's enlargement strategy at a time when EU enlargement has gone out of fashion .
It has even become something of a bogeyman in the hands of Eurosceptics .
For this reason the statement , which is true , that ' previous enlargements have undoubtedly been a success ' , and have helped to strengthen stability , growth and prosperity in the whole of Europe , is very important .
However , this needs to be explained to the citizens of the Union , in order to increase social support for the next steps .
Unfortunately , information campaigns to date have not been a success .
As usual when debating enlargement , it is interesting to consider the geography of potential membership candidates .
Reading the draft resolution , one might think that the doors are open wide .
There is unequivocal support for the aspirations of Balkan nations .
There is an important declaration that eastern partners in the Neighbourhood Policy can also be described as European countries .
However , the key definition of the EU 's ' integration capacity ' ( paragraph 7 ) puts a damper on any hopes and , in addition , the reference to ' shared values ' is clearly addressed at Turkey .
The resolution in this form diverges somewhat from Poland 's views .
Poland , a country that itself was once knocking on the EU 's door , is now calling for the opportunity of membership to be offered to Ukraine and other countries that were formed after the collapse of the USSR .
For stability in the whole continent !
in writing . - ( RO ) First of all , I would like to congratulate the Rapporteur for the objectivity with which he expressed the position of the European Parliament regarding the Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper .
With each enlargement , the European Community has become stronger and the enlargement process itself represents a success that all Member States have enjoyed .
The European Union has recorded an amazing evolution by means of the institutions and policies it has developed both at internal and external level , but especially by promoting harmonization in fields such as the economic , social and legal field .
The Union is also dealing with a series of problems proving the need that each enlargement be followed by an adequate consolidation and revaluation of its policies , thus avoiding situations in which countries in the centre evolve towards a deeper integration , while others stay at the periphery .
I support the Rapporteur 's opinion regarding the encouragement of Eastern countries by creating an area based upon common policies , which would focus on economic , trade , energy , transport , environmental , rule of law , justice and security matters .
By encouraging this type of project , the Black Sea region could become a development and economic growth pole , which would favour not only the welfare of countries in the region , but also stability and peace at the European Union Eastern border .
in writing . - ( FR ) As the report emphasises , there is now a need for in-depth reform of the European Union 's enlargement strategy .
Firstly , it is important to provide candidate countries and potential candidate countries with pre-accession instruments appropriate to the challenges they will face : consolidation of the state , governance , socio-economic reforms , etc .
Secondly , the report stresses the need to review our approach to European Neighbourhood Policy , which must cease to be regarded by third countries as a substitute for accession or a stage on the way to accession .
For example , the constitution of free trade zones , on the model of the extended European Economic Area ( EEA + ) , represents an initial step towards developing closer relations with these countries .
This strategy will promote the strengthening of economic and trade relations with them , and it will also enable the European Union to promote its ideals as regards democracy , the rule of law and human rights there .
Here the recent relaunch of the Barcelona Process , which sets out to establish a Mediterranean Union , is an encouraging sign , and a promising move towards establishing special partnerships with our southern neighbours .
in writing . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , we must not close the door on accession to those countries which seek it , since our founding treaties state that any European State which wishes to accede to the European Union should be able to do so .
Early accessions have been very successful , and that is the direction in which things should continue to move .
We must not demotivate candidates for accession .
It is not for us to decide whether they want to become fully democratic countries , although the three Copenhagen criteria should be complied with 100 % .
As I am from the ' new Europe ' , I personally know how important it was for us to have the opportunity to join the European Union , how it inspired us to undertake reforms and redouble our efforts .
We should not deny the republics of the former Soviet Union the opportunity of becoming fully European States governed by the rule of law .
I refer here above all to our closest neighbours Ukraine and Moldova .
Europe 's credibility and those countries ' future are in the balance .
It is important to keep them on the path towards Europe .
The European Union should abide by its promises and continue its natural process of enlargement .
Momentum will be provided by accession , not by standing still .
All the talk of absorption capacity is mere hypocrisy to pull the wool over the eyes of the uninitiated .
in writing . - ( RO ) As a Member of the European Parliament from Romania , recently acceded to the European Union , as well as a former Rector of a prestigious university in my country , I would like to emphasize the importance of cultural-educational exchanges between the candidate countries and the Union Member States .
In Romania , numerous young people who benefited from one of the European Union mobility schemes ( either programmes such as Socrates-Erasmus , Marie Curie - for research or Leonardo - for practice ) , have returned to their country and played an active role in what we might call its " Europeanisation " .
Due to their learning and life experience , they have become active members in NGOs , got involved in information , volunteer activities or have used their knowledge in structures related to European integration .
These are the reasons why I would like to call attention to the importance of taking actions to increase the attractiveness and promote participation in the EU education and culture programmes , such as establishing a special system for student visas , increasing funds designed for mobility - in order to truly cover the cost of living in an EU country , increasing efforts to promote European programmes , especially among young people , as well as disseminating the positive results / experiences both in the European countries and in the candidate countries .
in writing - ( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Chairman of the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee , I feel that one of the most positive aspects of the report is the fact that it confirms the continuation of the accession negotiations that have already begun , and offers the Balkan countries the European perspective .
In the last three years of accession negotiations , Croatia has already proved its commitment , and Parliament gave favourable opinions in the country reports for both 2006 and 2007 .
I would have felt it was important for Croatia , as the only country holding advanced accession negotiations , to be mentioned explicitly in the document , which four and a half million Croatians are now reading with great expectation .
These positive messages would be particularly important following the Irish referendum .
The first statements by the French Presidency of the Council , which talk about the continuation of accession negotiations , give me confidence .
By producing fast , effective solutions , we can preserve the credibility of the EU ; we cannot afford another three years ' ' thinking time ' , since in 11 months ' time the whole of Europe will be giving its opinion on the EU in the European elections .
Thank you for your attention .
in writing - ( PL ) The prospect of EU membership works as a powerful engine for change in countries interested in accession .
It encourages implementation of necessary reforms , both political and economic , and compliance with the Copenhagen criteria .
For the prospect of membership to be sustained , progress in negotiations has to be dependent on the tempo and scale of reforms carried out in the candidate country , and the EU must have the capacity to accept these countries .
We need to have a strong , cohesive and , above all , a united Community .
It is very important for the citizens of our countries to appreciate the benefits of new members joining .
Enlargement brings benefits , it brings economic and social growth to both new and existing Member States .
Successive enlargements of the European Union have been a success , for the acceding and existing Member States , and for Europe as a whole .
I am very pleased that the report points out that the road is still open for eastern European countries to become members of the European Union .
This , together with the recently adopted Eastern Partnership Programme , should encourage these countries to make efforts to adopt European democratic , economic and administrative standards .
in writing . - ( PL ) Previous enlargements of the European Union have , without doubt , been beneficial both for the Union itself and for the countries that acceded to it .
These enlargements stimulated economic development and led to greater stability , growth and prosperity in Europe .
It is very important to create the conditions needed to ensure the success of future enlargements , and to improve the quality of these enlargements , based on experience gained from the past .
The EU must be open to new countries , but the Enlargement Strategy should fulfil the conditions of the EU Treaty and reflect the EU 's obligations towards all candidate countries as well as those countries that have been presented with the prospect of membership , while accepting that full and rigorous compliance with the Copenhagen criteria is an absolute condition .
At the same time we should carefully observe the progress of these countries as regards the creation of the rule of law , an independent judiciary and respect for fundamental rights .
The Union must take steps to increase its capacity to integrate new countries .
It is vital to undertake internal reforms aimed at improving efficiency , creating greater social cohesiveness and democratic responsibility .
The Lisbon Treaty provides the answer to these ideals and , without it , further enlargement of the Union becomes much more difficult .
At the same time , however , the EU will only be able to achieve success in its process of political integration if there is clear and lasting social backing for EU membership in each of the candidate countries as well as for the EU itself as a political and economic project .
in writing . - ( PL ) We like to say that the European Parliament is the only real forum for airing the views and opinions of EU citizens .
It is therefore a pity that it is only in this House that we are able to convince each other that successive enlargements of the European Union have been an enormous success .
We are all to blame for the fact that not all EU citizens share this opinion .
In turn , this creates misunderstandings about the need to reform the Union .
However , I cannot accept the argument that not having the Lisbon Treaty is the principal cause for slowing down enlargement .
In itself , the Treaty solves nothing .
What is needed is vision and strategy .
The European Union will not be a complete political and geographical creation until it includes all European countries .
It is not true to say that the citizens of countries that want to join the Union expect this to happen immediately or even very soon .
What they do need , however , is a clear signal that there is a place for them .
Without such a declaration , it is difficult to expect them to undertake all the difficult and comprehensive reforms , which involve many sacrifices and hard work .
In particular , we cannot forget about Europeans in the Balkan countries and in eastern Europe .
The European Neighbourhood Policy is a good instrument for regulating cooperation with neighbouring countries in our continent .
However , our EU European neighbours have a right to a clearer and more effective cooperation policy , a policy that does not result in successive hallways and waiting rooms .
If so much energy is being devoted to the creation of a Mediterranean Union , which is particularly being supported by France , then at least the same amount of energy should be directed to the creation of Euronest .
Palestinian prisoners in Israel ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Council on Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails - B6-0166 / 2008 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission on Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails - B6-0167 / 2008 ) ;
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we put a simple question to 47 Members from different political groups : what are the Council and the Commission intending to do about the violations of international conventions by the Israeli authorities as regards Palestinian prisoners ?
The vast majority of prisoners are detained in Israeli territory , violating Article 76 of the Geneva Convention : arbitrary arrests , house-to-house searches , administrative detention , torture and abuse during interrogations in detention centres .
Men , women , teenagers , students , MPs and mayors , some 10 000 people imprisoned out of a population of three and a half million ; there is a ban on visits for those aged between 16 and 35 , with the result that prisoners have not been able to see brothers , sisters , mothers and fathers for years .
All this has been documented by international organisations including Amnesty International , the United Nations and admirable Israeli organisations such as B 'Tselem and Hamoked , and by Palestinian organisations such as Addameer and Defence for Children International .
However , no pressure is being exerted on the Israeli authorities to respect the conventions and the rules that they are themselves ratifying and that we are also ratifying .
I should like to read an account , an appeal from a mother : ' I am the mother of the prisoner Said Al Atabeh , of Nablus .
My son has been in jail since 1977 , and I am 78 and suffer from high blood pressure and diabetes ; I am losing my sight and cannot really get around my own home any more .
Perhaps you will be surprised but my only desire in this life is to see my son and give him a loving embrace before I die .
All my children , sons and daughters , are now grown up , married and have left my home .
Said has lost everything and I cannot see him , not because I am old and ill , but because the Israeli authorities will not let me have a permit to visit him , on security grounds , they say .
I have only been able to visit Said once , when I was taken by an Israeli ambulance in cooperation with the Red Cross , and that was eight years ago after he had been in prison for 29 years .
That was the first and last time that I embraced my beloved son .
He took me in his arms and said " Mama , it is as though I am being born into this life again ” .
Those minutes were the most precious for me and for him , but the moment when we were separated from one another was the hardest and most painful ' .
This mother makes an appeal : ' I should like to see him once again ' .
Can we allow this ?
Can a man who has been in prison for 32 years be prevented from seeing his mother ?
Where are the international rules ?
Where is the humanity , I ask myself ?
I believe that as the Council , as the Commission , as Parliament , we have to stand our ground and say as forcefully as we can that the international rules have to be respected , that Palestinian prisoners , and as I have said there are 10 000 of them , must be freed to pave the way for peace between Palestinians and Israelis .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Madam Vice-President , Mrs Morgantini , ladies and gentlemen , you have raised the subjects of Israel 's imprisonment and administrative detention of Palestinians , including minors , and of their treatment in the occupied territories and in Israel .
The Council believes that penal policies and practices must , in all circumstances , respect the fundamental principles of human rights as enshrined in international law , in particular in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
All detention that could be described as arbitrary should be proscribed , particularly in view of the fact that the person detained has not been advised of the charges against him .
The principle of the right to a fair and public trial by an impartial and independent court is fundamental in a state governed by the rule of law , and we note that special courts may be put in place only in very limited and clearly defined cases .
It is also essential to respect the obligation to treat detained persons properly and , of course , torture and other cruel , inhuman and degrading treatment of prisoners must be strictly prohibited and prevented .
The Council recognises that the human rights situation in the Middle East is a matter of concern .
Nevertheless , the Council is very pleased that the dialogue between the European Union and Israel is addressing all these issues , including the situation in the Palestinian territories .
The human rights issue is a topic that continues to be discussed at all levels on an ongoing basis in political contacts between the EU and Israel .
Thus in its declaration of 16 June 2008 , published at the end of the EU-Israel Association Council , the European Union called for the informal group discussing the human rights issue to be transformed into a standing subcommittee .
The Council is aware of the facts set out by honourable Members in Parliament , especially the Vice-President , and raised in particular in the last report by Mr John Dugard , special United Nations rapporteur on the human rights situation in the Palestinian territories , and by various non-governmental organisations .
The Council has had the opportunity to register its concern , and has called several times for Palestinian prisoners to be released in greater numbers .
Moreover , it reaffirms its position that the political process begun in Annapolis in November 2007 , which must be accompanied by measures of trust on the ground , constitutes the only means of reaching a solution negotiated between the parties , based on the coexistence of two states , namely an independent Palestinian state that is democratic and viable , living peacefully alongside an Israel with secure , recognised borders .
In this context , and with a view to rebuilding trust between the parties and involving the civil populations in the current political process , the Council invites Israel to make significant gestures , in particular by releasing , as a priority , the Palestinian children , women and elected representatives who are in prison or in administrative detention .
( Applause )
With regard to invocation of the instruments of international law , as mentioned by Mrs Morgantini , the Council maintains its position , that international law is to be defended and developed , as stipulated in the European Security Strategy adopted by the Council in December 2003 .
I would emphasise that the Presidency , on behalf of the European Union , is very pleased about the signature of the exchange agreement between Israel and Hezbollah , which we learned of on Monday .
This agreement provides for the return of the bodies of Hezbollah fighters and the release of Palestinian prisoners in exchange for the return of the bodies of the Israeli soldiers Ehud Goldwasser and Eldad Regev , captured in 2006 .
We hope that this exchange will be effected as agreed , but this issue also reveals , for the future , just how complex the ' prisoners ' issue in the Middle East is , and how important it is to resolve it .
The Council points out that the political process , as defined in the road map , represents the only means of reaching a solution negotiated between the parties , and , as I have indicated and on the terms that I have indicated , the coexistence of two states .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all to Mrs Morgantini I would like to say that I am very sensitive to the question that you have put to us today .
Last February I , too , met with the Palestinian Minister for Prisoners ' Affairs in the company of Mrs Fadwa Barghouti , the wife of Marwan Barghouti , who is in prison .
I listened very attentively to them .
Their account of the situation of prisoners corresponds to those of the reports the honourable Members , and you personally , quote in their question .
I would like to stress therefore that I am very concerned about human rights violations and I have great sympathy for the suffering of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails .
The Commission is very mindful of Israel 's responsibility as an occupying power , and of conflicts with international law these conditions illustrate .
We therefore regularly raise , for example , the issue of administrative detentions with our Israeli counterparts , both in informal and in formal settings .
The single case that you mentioned today touches me very much and if I could have the documentation I will personally try to do what I can .
Maybe there is a chance of getting this mother to see her son again .
The European Union has also called many times for the immediate release of Palestinian legislators detained by Israel .
The Commission is also aware of the Palestinian children who are held in Israeli prisons and detention centres .
This contravenes the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child that sets the minimum age to 18 years for minors , as well as the Fourth Geneva Convention that requires prisoners to be held within the Occupied Territory .
These detained children are particularly vulnerable .
We know that .
Their treatment must be brought into compliance with international law .
We need to give increased attention to the situation of children affected by this conflict situation .
This is why the European Union has added Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territory to the list of the priority countries for the implementation of the EU Guidelines on Children and Armed conflict .
In line with these guidelines , the European Union also integrates all aspects of the rights and well-being of children affected by the conflict into the political dialogue with Israel .
In addition , the European Union also cooperates closely with UN agencies , as well as Israeli and Palestinian NGOs , actively involved in monitoring , reporting and advocating the rights of the child .
The respect for human rights and compliance with international law is one of the fundamental values of the European Union .
It is an essential element of our foreign policy .
Consequently , protecting human rights is of great importance in our relations with Israel .
Our human rights dialogue with the Israeli authorities at different levels bears witness to this .
The Commission , in its meetings with the Israeli authorities , and I personally in my meetings with Israeli decision-makers , will certainly continue to urge Israel to comply fully with international law and conventions .
The European Union stated at the last Association Council with Israel very recently its desire to set up a formal subcommittee on human rights .
This would then be an important step forward to further formalise a dialogue on these issues .
Article 2 of the EU-Israel Association Agreement will continue to remind both the European Union and Israel that respect for human rights and democratic principles are the basis of our bilateral relations .
We believe that dialogue is the most promising means to exert a positive influence on Israel .
We do not shy away from raising difficult issues , such as the one the honourable Members have inquired about .
I completely agree with the Presidency when it says that all this has to be seen in the context of the Middle East conflict , and therefore I think a solution to this conflict would in the end also mitigate or even solve the problem of the prisoners .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , yet again the anti-Israel forces in this Parliament are seeking any opportunity to attack the Jewish State and yet again those of us who seek a balanced debate and a genuine peace in the Middle East are compelled to come to Israel 's defence .
After all , Israel is a democratic country , which faces an existential threat from Jihadi terrorists and their cheerleaders , who are the very individuals currently held under administrative detention by Israel .
Concerning the issue of children , sadly children have been dragged into and recruited into the Intifada and even as potential suicide bombers by the terrorists .
I particularly question the need for this motion for a resolution at a time of a truce with Hamas , which has just stopped firing its rockets from Gaza at civilians , and also a prisoner exchange taking place between Israel and Hizbollah , whereby five terrorist prisoners were returned to their homes and families , whereas two Israeli soldiers will be returned in body bags .
One of these terrorists - Samir Kuntar - murdered a young Israeli man by drowning him and then took the man 's daughter , smashing her on rocks and beating her skull with a rifle butt .
He also killed a policeman .
The Palestinian terrorists who hijacked the Achille Lauro - during which time they murdered an elderly Jewish man , throwing his body overboard - demanded Kuntar 's release .
Doing deals with terrorists brings with it a heavy price to pay for any democracy , but this is doubly so in Israel 's case .
Samir Kuntar has vowed to resume Jihad against Israel now that he is set free .
I therefore applaud Israel 's courageous decision .
I hope that it will ultimately bring positive results , but I fear not , because it is quite apparent that those who wish to destroy Israel as a state are gaining strength from politicians like Mrs Morgantini who table resolutions like this one at this moment in time .
While she is on the topic , she might also wish to examine an allegation in the British press of the torture routinely carried out in Palestinian jails against their own people both by Hamas in Gaza and , perhaps more surprisingly , by the Palestinian Authority itself .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I recently attended the Berlin Conference , where the key issue was that of restoring the rule of law in the occupied territories .
What applies to Palestine , a constantly evolving state , is all the more applicable to Israel .
And on this point , the fate of the Palestinian prisoners is a genuine paradigm , for what this is about is the fate of more than 8 500 Palestinian prisoners , and the reasons for and conditions of their detention .
I would point out that 48 elected members of the Palestinian Legislative Council are currently in prison .
This is unacceptable .
That the overwhelming majority of the detainees have been transported to Israeli prisons , contrary to the Geneva Convention , which prohibits the transfer of detainees from occupied territories to the occupier ; this is unacceptable . That the penal code applied in the occupied territories applies only to Palestinians , and not to the colonists .
To put it plainly , what is criminal for one group is no longer criminal for the other group .
This is unacceptable .
That around 100 women have been imprisoned , and that those women who are pregnant or breastfeeding are not receiving the care their condition requires ; this is unacceptable .
That 310 minors are being detained under the same conditions as the adults , although Israel is a signatory of the Convention on the Rights of the Child .
And let nobody try to tell me what I have already heard , namely that at the age of 15 , these little Arabs are already adults , and capable of anything .
What is to blame for this , Mr Tannock , if not the occupation that has deprived them of their childhood ?
And the list continues : torture , mistreatment , non-existent rights of defence , lack of a judgment , and so on .
I would remind you that these facts have been documented by both Israeli and international sources .
Of course the European Parliament cannot wave a magic wand and bring this conflict to an end , but I assure you that it will put human rights at the heart of the review of Israel 's status , which will be debated throughout this year .
Article 2 of this Agreement puts it clearly : ' Relations between the Parties , as well as all the provisions of the Agreement itself , shall be based on respect for human rights and democratic principles , which guides their internal and international policy and constitutes an essential element of this Agreement . '
Naturally the exchange needs to be made .
The exchange and release of prisoners , for example , such as Gilad Shalit on the one hand and Salah Hamouri on the other , must be negotiated .
And I am certainly very pleased that the exchange agreement has been signed with Hezbollah .
However , I should like to remind our Israeli partners that for the European Parliament , human rights are non-negotiable .
And therefore , I am delighted , and I congratulate you , Minister , as a representative of the Council , and you , Commissioner , for the firmness of your words , which reassure us that we three institutions do indeed make up one European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am speaking on a personal basis on this issue .
Successive governments in Israel are pursuing a policy of trying to suppress the Palestinian people 's wish to live freely on their land by using the iron fist and the bullet and by arbitrarily arresting , imprisoning , torturing and murdering civilians , including women and children .
This they do most unwisely , not realising that the genuine problems of security that Israel is admittedly facing cannot be solved by this type of inhuman response .
On the contrary , such brutality can only bring about more violence and can only slowly erode away any international support they might have enjoyed in the past .
The time is long overdue for the EU leadership to boldly warn the governing Jewish politicians that , if they continue to act as Nazi-style military commanders and if they continue to think that the support of the US leadership and those they influence in Europe - not excluding MEPs - will be there for ever , they will sadly but inevitably and with mathematical precision lead their state into non-existence .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Obeida Assida is a Palestinian student .
He was arrested in 2003 , at the age of 17 , and is being held in administrative detention in Israel , without charges and without a trial .
Saed Yassine is a Palestinian champion of human rights . He is 34 .
He has been held in administrative detention in Israel since 2006 .
He has not been charged and nothing is known against him , and his wife and children have only been able to visit him three times .
Noura al Hashlamoun is a 36-year-old housewife and the mother of six children .
She has been held in administrative detention in Israel since September 2006 , without charges and without a trial .
Marwan Barghouti , the instigator and writer of the prisoners ' document , has been held in Israel since April 2002 .
Moreover , I would draw my fellow MEPs ' attention to the fact that an appeal for his release is still circulating , and you are welcome to sign it at any time .
Everybody knows that if I were to go through the long list of thousands of Palestinian prisoners currently held in Israeli prisons , in total violation of international and human rights law , I should need a great deal of speaking time .
Yet each of them , each of their families deserves a lengthy speech .
For they have been spared nothing - brutal interrogation that may last up to 188 days and is known to include torture , confessions and judgments to be signed in Hebrew , detention without foundation in Israel , outside their own territory , arbitrarily renewable every six months , submission to an ad hoc and discriminatory military jurisdiction that has absolutely no legal justification , no access to a lawyer for the first 90 days of their detention , and virtually non-existent visiting rights .
Mrs De Keyser is right to say that it is precisely this that the EU cannot accept .
This is all totally unacceptable .
And you tell us that you are going to use this new dialogue .
Why should we believe that tomorrow the European Union , you , the Commission and the Council , will be more capable of imposing respect for the clauses already included in the agreement that we have , tomorrow , with the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , during our previous plenary session on 16 June in Strasbourg , you made a statement regarding the situation in Palestine .
This statement reflected the disappointing findings of the ad hoc committee that , on your initiative , visited the Palestinian territories in early June and observed the Palestinians ' squalid living conditions imposed by the Israeli occupation .
It is now time for the Council and the Commission to give answers regarding the actions they intend to take to ensure that the occupying forces , the State of Israel , observes international law with regard to the state of Palestinian detainees in Israeli prisons .
Today , we , the Members of the European Parliament , demand that the Council and the Commission provide an explanation for the fact that on 16 June they upgraded relations between the European Union and Israel , at a time when 11 000 detainees , including 376 children , 118 women and 44 members of the Palestinian Legislative Council , as well as 800 administrative detainees , are being held in Israeli prisons , in breach of international law .
We will be revisiting Palestine in two months ' time .
In the meantime , we would ask that you demand , on behalf of the entire Parliament , that the Israeli authorities immediately release all the children held in Israel 's prisons , as well as those in the case of whom normal legal procedures were not observed ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I believe that this House , together with the Commission and the Council and every politician in Europe , is convinced that the protection of an individual 's human rights is much more a fundamental duty in times of war and terrorism than it is in times of peace and security .
I believe we share this understanding .
This is the understanding that is also shared by the Israeli Supreme Court .
In a number of decisions the Israeli Supreme Court has upheld the rights of both Palestinian prisoners and petitioners against the actions of the Israeli defence forces or Government .
Let me remind you that in 1991 , as Israel was expecting an attack with chemical and biological weapons , its Supreme Court upheld a petition that literally said that the power of society to stand up against its enemies is based on its recognition that it is fighting for values that deserve protection .
The best partner in defending the rights of Palestinian prisoners in Israel is the Israeli Supreme Court .
I believe that this legal system in a democratic country like Israel should be addressed with all concerns that Members here have .
But I ask the Members of this House : Which convention protects the rights of those who have been kidnapped or terrorised or killed in the last number of years ?
Under what court was Alan Johnson allowed to appeal his kidnapping ?
What visitation rights were given to Gilad Shalit ?
What rights did Ophir Rakhum , aged 16 , have ?
What legal protection was he granted ?
I urge the Members of this House , I urge them in all honesty and with all my heart , to stand up and support the Commission and the Council in their balanced approach towards this conflict and towards protecting the rights of those whose rights have been infringed .
We should not take a side which will undermine the ability of the European Union to stand up and support the peace process in the Middle East as it is now doing .
Mr President , I wish to begin by saying to the President-in-Office that Amnesty International has stated that 8 500 Palestinians from the Occupied Palestinian Territories being detained in Israeli prisons are being held contrary to Article 76 of the Geneva Convention , and for many of these prisoners family visits are impossible due to the restricted travel permits .
For those visits that are allowed , even though under international human rights standards Israel is responsible for ensuring that the Palestinian detainees receive these visits , it is the international community , via the International Committee of the Red Cross , which has being shouldering the cost .
That is why it is right for us in the European Parliament to ask the European Council to act .
Like Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , I have met Mrs Barghouti and I thank the Commissioner too for her specific reference to our parliamentary colleagues from the Palestinian Legislative Council who are amongst the imprisoned .


Although I agree with Mr Mladenov and Mr Tannock that the abduction and failure to allow family visits of Israeli nationals is an equal breach of international law , I regret that Mr Tannock sought to portray my co-author , Mrs Morgantini , as someone who is committed to the destruction of Israel , when she and I support human rights and upholding international humanitarian law .
( FR ) Mr President , it is the extremely difficult question of maintaining our democratic values in the struggle against terrorism that is the actual thrust of our debate today .
Unfortunately I do not have time to address the points raised in the texts submitted by our fellow Members , even those raised in writing , and I shall not repeat the comments made by my colleague , Mr Mladenov , on the Israeli Supreme Court .
Nevertheless , I shall address the issue of minors .
Yes , there are minors in prison , for the most part adolescents , whom Hamas manipulates and sends to their deaths , armed with grenades or belts filled with explosives .
You and my fellow Members have mentioned international law .
This also condemns the recruitment of child soldiers .
Every young person in prison constitutes a failure for any society .
Israel is duty-bound to confront this challenge in compliance with international law , but the real tragedy is the loss to peace of an entire generation in Palestine .
Just a word about Gilad Shalit .
I think I am right in saying that he is a prisoner who is both an Israeli and a French citizen .
He deserves more than the culpable neglect to which he is condemned by the inconsistent indignation of some of my fellow Members .
Not to mention the global political context cited by the Secretary of State and the Commissioner .
Mr President , I will end with the very fragile , but real , truces that are taking hold on several fronts .
I just wanted to say that , more generally , what I would criticise is that some people here are obsessed with talking at every sitting about how a democratic state should be organised .
Mr President , I am losing count of the number of times we stand up in this Chamber to condemn the Israeli authorities for their systematic abuse of the human rights of the Palestinian people .
The occupation , the separation wall , the siege of Gaza - the list goes on .
Today we focus on the terrible situation of Palestinian prisoners , including 44 members of the Legislative Council .
These are our counterparts , our partners , who still languish in prison without charge and without trial .
My question is this : When is the European Council going to act ?
How many more violations of international law does it take ?
How many more Palestinians have to be arrested , imprisoned and tortured before the EU stops just talking about human rights and starts taking action to defend them ?
To consider upgrading EU-Israel relations at a time like this demonstrates the most breathtaking disregard for our responsibility to the Palestinian people .
To fail to invoke Article 2 of the Association Agreement demonstrates the most deplorable political cowardice .
Our argument is not with the Israeli people , many of whom join us in our condemnation of the Israeli authorities .
My argument is right now not even with Israel .
It is with the European Council and its grotesque failure of political leadership .
Mr President , I agree completely with Caroline Lucas .
It is ironic that our next debate is on Zimbabwe .
Mugabe did not like the result of an election and has since fixed it ; he now arrests parliamentarians to try and achieve a new balance , and does worse .
We are going to condemn him utterly .
The comparisons are of course far apart , but two and a half years ago we paid for elections in Palestine .
Israel did not like the result , so we refused to recognise the new government .
Since then , Israel has arrested more than 40 parliamentarians , people who belong to the wrong party , people who had not used a bullet but who had resorted to the ballot box .
We are not going to apply sanctions .
Instead we are seeking closer partnership with Israel .
So , Commissioner and Minister , the contradictions are surely evident .
You say you have a balanced approach - but where is the evidence that our approach is achieving anything ?
Mr President , I do not let Israel off the hook but it is extremely unhelpful for the European Parliament to single out one party - Israel - in a complex conflict where human rights abuses demand a balanced approach .
A debate only on Israeli actions is also very bad timing .
Are we forgetting that our overriding aim is to encourage the parties to achieve a peaceful two-state solution ?
Only if our criticism is accurate and constructive and non-partisan will we be heard by both parties and have a brighter prospect of influence .
I think Human Rights Watch and the UN 's Martin Scheinin achieved such a standard .
The latter points out the significance of decisions of the Israeli Supreme Court - entirely absent from the oral questions .
Even John Dugard 's report said he was deeply concerned and condemned violations of human rights by Palestinians upon Palestinians and by Palestinians upon Israelis .
No mention of that .
I regret that Israel still relies on emergency regulations of 1945 inherited from the British colonial power but it is worth noting that they have been applied to Jewish terrorists in Hebron as well as to Palestinian people .
Mr President , this is not a question of terrorists arrested , tried , convicted and imprisoned ; it is simply a question of individuals seized and held .
And it is a question , in particular , of children , not child soldiers - some children have thrown stones and so on , it is true , but children .
Imagine this Chamber full of children .
Take half of them , put sacks over their heads , tie their hands behind their backs , take them away without telling their parents where you are taking them , put them into jails , put them into 1.5 m2 rooms with no windows , put on the light , keep them away from medical attention , keep them away from any outside visits and so forth , do not allow them to have changes of clothes .
That is what we are talking about .
That is what the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child should be about .
My plea to Israel is : For goodness ' sake , you are not winning friends by doing this .
Please , Israel , my cry to you is : Set the children free !
Mr President , it is precisely because some of us believe that Israel is a democracy - a democratic state - and because the European Union treats it as such , that we hold it accountable to the rule of law .
If it was not a democratic state , we would not be trying to hold it accountable to the rule of law .
There is no supreme court for those who are out of the whole judicial system .
We know what the Supreme Court says , but that applies only to those who can reach the Supreme Court .
When you are under administrative detention and you have no access to court whatsoever , there is no Supreme Court ruling which will protect you .
The conflict cannot be used as an argument for such violations .
It is not a balanced approach to remain neutral and to treat these individuals as if they did not exist .
These individuals are under arrest without any guarantee whatsoever , without any procedure ; their families are beside themselves , and their houses and families in many cases are being destroyed and punished for what they have done or what they are accused of , and that deserves a reaction from the European Union .

( NL ) I would remind Mr Tannock that this question was tabled not by Mrs Morgantini alone , but also by two EPP-ED Group vice-presidents of Parliament , Mr McMillan-Scott and Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , and by Mr Bowis , Mr Kasoulides and myself .
Just to clarify that to start with .
As a member of Parliament 's Delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council I have experienced first-hand on several occasions what it means to be unable to meet your democratically elected colleagues because they are in gaol .
What indeed can one say of the many women and children scattered amongst various prisons outside the Palestinian Territories , something that makes it well-nigh impossible for their lawyers and families to visit them ?
Everyone has talked about the everyday living conditions and the lack of medical care .
How long are the international community and the European Union going to go on tolerating this ?
I urge the Commission and Council to get this unacceptable situation brought under control .
( FR ) Mr President , I would just like to make two comments .
The first is that in this Parliament , certain problems are apprehended in rather curious fashion ; it is always the same people who are condemned , and it is always the same people who are discussed .
Try to have Cuba condemned here for the presence of political prisoners in its jails , and you will talk to me about the way in which human rights are dealt with in the European Parliament .
My second point is that there is a solution to ensure that Israel finally releases those who must be released - stop the attacks , stop bombarding Israeli villages , stop killing children , stop the attacks with mechanical diggers , and stop sending in children with pockets full of dynamite .
Then Israel will release its prisoners !
( ES ) Mr President , Mrs Morgantini 's words are very moving and we cannot help but show our solidarity with these duly documented cases of alleged violation of the human rights of Palestinian prisoners .
I say duly documented advisedly , because some fellow Members of the Left have directed very serious and intolerable accusations at the State of Israel .
Have they ever been accused of murdering women and children or of acting like Nazis ?
Is this the way to further the peace process ?
Mrs Morgantini , I know that your initiative is based on a specific and moving case and that your intentions are worthy .
However , some of your Leftist colleagues have used this opportunity once again to try to crush and humiliate the people of Israel .
We clearly still need to stamp out the Soviet anti-Semitism which still marks the mentality of some of your colleagues here in Parliament .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be brief , since I made the essential points in my opening speech .
However , the debate we have had has been very moving in some respects , and I wanted to assure you that the Council is aware of the facts mentioned , and that it will continue to register its concern and to invoke the instruments of international law .
The Presidency will continue to raise this issue in the political contacts that take place between the European Union and Israel during our term .
We note also that the political process under way can develop only if measures of confidence on the ground increase .
The pursuit of the colonisation process , the persistence of terrorism and violence , and the fate of Palestinian detainees are obstacles to efforts to bring about peace , as is the situation of Israeli hostages held by terrorist groups ; I am thinking of Gilad Shalit in particular .
To end on a hopeful note , what I wanted to point out to Parliament is that the European Union has a key part to play in this process , owing to its position as a member of the Quartet , its status as the main source of funding and its actions in support of the Palestinian Authority , and also in its position as a major partner of Israel . The European Union has always recognised that Israel has the right to feel secure within recognised borders , coexisting with Palestine , as I said in my introduction .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the next sitting in September 2008 .
Situation in Zimbabwe ( debate )
The next item is the statements from the Council and the Commission on the situation in Zimbabwe .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the presidential election recently held in Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe was re-elected to his country 's presidency for another five years .
The second round of voting took place following the withdrawal of the only other candidate , Mr Morgan Tsvangirai , which enabled Mr Mugabe to win 85 % of the votes cast .
The election was described as a mockery of democracy by many heads of state , including Africans , and by the United Nations Secretary-General , who regarded it as unlawful .
Immediately after being sworn in , Mr Mugabe travelled to Sharm el-Sheikh for the African Union Summit on 30 June and 1 July this year .
In the course of the Summit , Nigeria launched an animated discussion of the elections .
A resolution was adopted , expressing the intense concern generated by the situation in Zimbabwe , and emphasising the critical reports drawn up by electoral observers from the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) , the African Union and the Pan-African Parliament , and the violence and loss of life .

The resolution also urges Mr Mugabe and Mr Tsvangirai to start a dialogue in the interests of the people of Zimbabwe , to put in place a government of national unity , and to support the mediation mission undertaken by the SADC .
In the face of these developments , the international community is mobilising .
The United States has presented a resolution to the UN Security Council calling for the application of sanctions against Zimbabwe - an arms embargo , freezing of assets and a travel ban - and including an annex listing 14 individuals to be sanctioned , including Mr Mugabe and other politicians , the majority of whom are already included in the European list of sanctions adopted in 2002 .
Canada has also intensified the measures it had taken , and the European Council of 20 June declared itself ready to take further action , which will , incidentally , be examined with Commissioner Michel on 22 July .
The Presidency of the European Union strongly condemned the second round of voting as a denial of democracy immediately after it had taken place , that is to say on 29 June , and the Presidency stressed , in a fresh statement made on 4 July on behalf of the European Union , that it would not accept the fait accompli ensuing from the distorted ballot of 27 June , and that the only possible solution was a transition formula based on the results of the first round of voting .
It is also important that Africa should have expressed its concern in the face of a crisis on a regional scale , and the efforts made by the African Union in particular and by the SADC must be supported .
It must be ensured that the principles laid down in the African Union Charter on Human and People 's Rights in particular are complied with .
It would be good for the African Union and the UN to be involved in this approach , with a view to supplementing the regional perspective of the SADC with an African and international perspective .
In its resolution , the African Union also urged the states and parties concerned to refrain from taking action likely to prejudice the climate of dialogue .
This is a signal that was sent to the European Union in particular .
Nevertheless , the EU will not refrain from preparing to extend the list of persons responsible for violence who are the subject of targeted sanctions by refusal of a visa or freezing of assets .
The EU must also ensure that it obtains a restriction on the planned exemptions from visa bans and the establishment of new sanctions , economic sanctions in particular , and , of course , this whole range of retaliatory measures will be dependent on the progress made in the negotiations .
The negotiations between the two parties should begin as soon as possible .
I think that the Commissioner will confirm this , even if their outcome is uncertain .
In our view , they must in any case be based on the results of the first ballot on 29 March , which constitutes the truest expression of the will of the people of Zimbabwe , while the second ballot was a denial of democracy .
Any form of coalition can constitute an interim measure with a view to fresh elections that are free , democratic and transparent , as stated by the candidate opposing Mr Mugabe .
Finally , I should like to mention that at their latest meeting , which has just ended , the members of the G8 envisaged supplementary financial measures targeting those responsible for violence at the time of the last elections .
So there we are , and we must maintain this pressure without fail , in order to put an end to this unacceptable breach of the law .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I am very happy to be able to share with you today , in this exchange of views , future prospects and thoughts on the part we could play in supporting all the efforts to find a solution to the crisis which will be accepted by all the main political stakeholders , and above all a solution that has a prospect of lasting and which can open up a new era of prosperity for a country and a people who need it so much .
Shortly before this sitting began , I was able to talk to Mr Ping , the President of the Commission of the African Union , and about half an hour ago I had quite a lengthy discussion with the opposition leader Mr Tsvangirai .
So I have some fresh news , which obviously has not yet been definitely confirmed , but at last I can , perhaps , give you more detailed and more up-to-date information .
Firstly , of course , I should like to share with you my profound concern about the situation .
I was extremely sorry , as I said publicly both before and after the event , that the second round of presidential elections did , as the Minister said , take place despite the many appeals from the international community , including , incidentally , appeals from Zimbabwe 's African partners , for it to be postponed .
Naturally , the environment of extreme political violence and systematic intimidation tainted this election and deprived it of all legitimacy and credibility .
I have repeatedly said publicly , as has the Presidency of the European Union , that , in view of the conditions under which this second round took place , it is completely out of the question for any legitimacy to be accorded to the President who emerged from this ballot .
It must be repeated again and again that it is a victory that was wrongfully won , and is very far from the spirit of democratic renaissance that animates Africa today .
The African Union Summit that was held in Egypt and was attended by President Mugabe witnessed a very tense and passionate debate between African leaders , a debate that has been described by many as unprecedented .
The African Union resolution is critical of President Mugabe , and calls on him to seek a political agreement with Morgan Tsvangirai , the leader of the Movement for Democratic Change ( MDC ) , with a view to forming a government of national unity .
Moreover , the African Union called on the SADC to continue its facilitation task , with a view to reaching political agreement .
We could certainly regard this resolution as inadequate .
In particular , we might criticise the fact that the African Union refrained from expressing a clear opinion on the legitimacy or otherwise of President Mugabe , but it has to be acknowledged that in the current circumstances , this resolution constitutes a substantial result .
Of course , that is not the end of the matter .
It is important for the African Union and the SADC to provide concrete evidence of their commitment to finding a political situation .
From this point of view , the European Union and other international players have made it clear what they expect to see .
This political agreement can be concluded only on the basis of the results of the first round of voting , which reflected the opinion of the Zimbabwean people , freely and democratically expressed .
The results of the second round of voting cannot be taken as the starting point for mediation , for negotiation .
In other words , in our view the political solution will involve a coalition government led by Mr Tsvangirai as Prime Minister , endowed with the most extensive powers and , moreover , relying on the majority that he holds in Parliament .
As far as the European Union is concerned , all the options are still on the table .
Firstly , we are prepared to support the efforts of the SADC and the African Union , and we expect to see tangible progress in the next two weeks .
If a constructive political agreement is reached reflecting the results of the first round of voting , we are , of course , prepared , as we have said , gradually to re-engage with Zimbabwe .
Moreover , we are prepared to start immediately .
I would remind you that when the programme for the tenth European Development Fund was being drawn up , I ensured that the work was done as if democracy had been restored in Zimbabwe , in order to avoid penalising the Zimbabwean people for the tragic situation in which they find themselves .
Now to the two conversations that I have just had this afternoon , with a view to the meeting I was to have with Parliament .

First , the conversation with Mr Ping .
What is the problem ?
The problem today is that everybody in the African Union agrees that they should support negotiation between Mr Mugabe and Mr Tsvangirai , and that the basic principles should , of course , be that the government should be led by the leader of the opposition , Mr Tsvangirai , that this government is potentially to be based on a coalition , in which Mr Tsvangirai 's party , which is in the majority in Parliament , will of course have the dominant position , and that this government must have the fullest and most extensive powers as regards executive decisions .
For the moment , then , I think you know that this approach appears to be disputed .
It is all the more complicated in that Mr Tsvangirai has expressed certain doubts as to whether the mediation is well balanced , and obviously wants to give this mediation a framework , a setting , support , let us say , which makes it possible to guarantee a balance .
I am not making a value judgement in saying this , I am simply stating the situation .
For the moment , Mr Ping has assured me that the work - I will not say the work of mediation , but the work - aimed at preparing minds for this development is under way , and that , all being well , it should be possible for a genuine prospect to open up in the next few days .
I then had quite a long talk with Mr Tsvangirai .
He confirmed that he supported the idea of a government including members of the Zimbabwe African National Union Patriotic Front , but within which , of course , he would have the last word in appointing the people who would be part of it .
Basically , although this is not how he put it , it is rather like the Kenyan scenario , even if ( and I agree with this view ) the two situations cannot be compared .
They are not at all alike .
People take advantage of the opportunity to behave as if they were identical , but , looked at completely objectively , and men and women are different , the situation is quite different . So this is the first point .
Secondly , he would like to see a ' permanent negotiation team ' , that is to say a team to lead the mediation , which should , of course , assure him of balance .
Naturally he would like this team to be put under the aegis of the African Union and the United Nations , as the Minister stated .
He seems to me to be reasonably optimistic - he believes that things are moving .
Obviously he sees the issue of sanctions as relevant , and he emphasised something on which I think we are all agreed , namely that if there are sanctions , they must apply to individuals and must not , of course , affect the population either directly or indirectly .
I have the feeling that the African Union has completely got the measure of its responsibility , that it is actively involved , that is seeking a solution through mediation which at all events takes account , as the Minister emphasised , of this need to translate the result of the first round of voting into executive power , since this is the only result that bestows legitimacy on those who benefit from it .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the situation in Zimbabwe has reached an absolute low in political , economic and humanitarian terms .
The people there are hostages to a regime that does not want to surrender power because the clique around the President , the military command and the secret service , wants to continue enriching itself at the expense of the country 's resources .
To that end they fund militias and misuse the police and the military , who are terrorising the population across the country .
By SADC standards , even the parliamentary elections of 29 March were neither free nor fair .
The country-wide campaign of intimidation that has followed , with dozens killed and thousands injured and persecuted , made it impossible for the winner of the first round , Morgan Tsvangirai , to send his electors out to vote when they feared they would be punished for doing so .
The leader of the Pan-African Parliament 's Election Observer Mission , Marwick Khumalo , and the SADC mission assess the events of 27 June as follows :
' The atmosphere prevailing in the country did not give rise to the conduct of free , fair and credible elections .
The elections did not represent the will of the people of Zimbabwe . '
What is important now is to develop a transition scenario that will lead to a situation in which a legitimate government and a legitimate president come into office .
The AU and the SADC have a crucial role to play here .
Unfortunately , President Mbeki has achieved nothing with his years of quiet diplomacy .
Nor has he gained the trust of both sides in the conflict and he himself knows best why .
I would urge the political parties in South Africa to take the initiative themselves .
I call on colleagues from South Africa to decide in their parliament to freeze the accounts and assets of the profiteers of the Mugabe regime in South Africa .
They should refuse to allow Grace Mugabe and others to go shopping in Cape Town or Sandton while the people are starving .
I ask them to show solidarity with the three million Zimbabweans in their country , who will return home when Mugabe 's rule comes to an end and thereby also make room for millions of unemployed South Africans .
We succeeded in pressurising European companies to withdraw from Zimbabwe because their activities helped stabilise the regime .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , President Mugabe has employed unbelievable violence and demonstrated a scandalous contempt for the most basic human rights in seizing power and taking an already battered population hostage .
The Socialists condemn this violence and do not recognise the power in place as having any legitimacy .
First of all , however , it is the Zimbabwean population that European socialists are thinking of .
In particular , the Food and Agriculture Organization ( FAO ) estimates that five million Zimbabweans are at risk of suffering severe famine by the beginning of 2009 .
Furthermore , we know that a third of the population of Zimbabwe are already surviving only thanks to international aid .
Consequently , it is absolutely essential for the European Commission , the Council , every Member State and the whole of the international community to exert maximum pressure on the Zimbabwean authorities to allow completely free access by international humanitarian aid to the most vulnerable populations .
We cannot emphasise this enough , for Mugabe 's current position is quite simply criminal .
In the same spirit , if we are asking the European Union and the international community to adopt strong sanctions in respect of Zimbabwe , a prospect which you raised , Minister , we would also emphasise that they must not harm the population but must target members of the regime responsible for the attacks on human rights and the current reign of terror in that country .
Of course , we must also urge the European Union and regional structures such as the SADC to take the lead with Zimbabwe 's elected Parliament and civil society in resolving the current crisis rapidly and democratically .
Mr President , I should like to make one last quick point about the 200 000 displaced Zimbabweans .
We would ask their South African neighbours , and President Mbeki in particular , to act responsibly by not sending back Zimbabwean refugees who have taken refuge in South Africa .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the people of Zimbabwe have suffered horrendously .
After years of intimidation , brutality and economic meltdown , the election came as the final twist of the screw .
Since the election , the violence has continued unabated .
At least 90 people have been killed since the first round of polling on 29 March and just this Monday residents were attacked and abducted from an IDP camp east of Harare .
We may feel tempted to just wring our hands in despair but I believe there are things that the EU can do towards a solution to the crisis .
Firstly , the EU can offer diplomatic support to those seeking to find a way forward via an interim transitional government involving all parties in civil society and respecting the results of the first round .
A transitional coalition is an African approach that has over the years worked in a number of other countries such as Togo and the Democratic Republic of Congo .
However , the motion for a resolution notes the failure to date of President Mbeki 's quiet diplomacy and it may be the case that a different African neighbour respected by all sides would be better placed to broker such negotiations .
And , if there is an international accompaniment , that would also be helpful in the negotiations .
Secondly , we must step up the pressure against Mugabe in the international community .
Russia 's adherence to the G8 summit call for sanctions was very encouraging and I welcome the Council 's comments on the strengthening of sanctions by a number of countries .
Thirdly we must start planning ahead now for the day when Zimbabwe has a legitimate government and will need a broad package of international support .
Finally , we must not forget that ordinary Zimbabweans are in desperate straits and need basic aid now just to keep going .
( NL ) The European Union has had sanctions in place against the socialist dictator Mugabe for some time , but those sanctions are not always consistently and clearly enforced .
For example , the Portuguese Presidency obviously had no problem at all in inviting Mugabe to the EU-Africa summit .
The European Union should also have protested forcefully against the grotesque fact of Mugabe 's attendance at the FAO summit in Rome not all that long ago .
The travel ban on Mugabe and all senior members of his regime must be made watertight and expanded further .
We should in any case think about extending the sanctions against Mugabe 's regime generally .
These sanctions must be vigorous and unequivocal , and we must also put pressure on the Government of South Africa which , by its ' silent diplomacy ' , has in fact simply bought more time for Mugabe 's regime .

Mr President , the crisis in Zimbabwe did not burst suddenly on an unsuspecting world : this is the 16th time in eight years that we have debated a motion for a resolution on Mugabe as he has systematically and deliberately plundered his country , ruined the economy and oppressed the Zimbabwean people .
The response of the international community until very recently has been pathetic .
At least the European Union imposed targeted sanctions - but it could not even properly uphold these .
The Africans - with a very small number of honourable exceptions - have merely applauded Mugabe .
They should be ashamed .
What is to be done ?
Firstly , it should be made clearer in the Council that no EU state will recognise the illegitimate regime of Mugabe .
I am heartened that the EU is extending its sanctions .
Secondly , the European Union and its Member States should be persuading African countries , especially the SADC , to join these sanctions against the Mugabe regime if negotiations fail .
Thirdly , the members of the Joint Operations Committee - the military gang that is behind Mugabe - should be put on notice that they will be held responsible for the systematic atrocities against the people of Zimbabwe .
It is not too late for some senior members of the armed forces and police - and senior ZANU-PF functionaries for that matter - to abandon Mugabe and to come over to the democratic forces .
Fourthly , France should call for an emergency session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva to address the situation in Zimbabwe and , fifthly , more robust action is required by the United Nations .
Above all , we must actively encourage the African Union to become even more positively and actively engaged in pushing for this government of national unity .
This , of course , should be based on the outcome of the elections of 29 March rather than the farce of 27 June , as both the President-in-Office and the Commission have indicated .
We have heard from the MDC spokesman , Nelson Chamisa , that there are currently no negotiations between ZANU-PF and the MDC .
Instead there is continuing violence .
The African Union must insist on an end to violence and the appointment of a mediator , backed by observers , who will have the confidence of the MDC .
Mugabe yet again is playing for time .
There must be a deadline for negotiations to be successfully completed and someone meanwhile should offer Mugabe a retirement home .
Mr President , I , like others , will have to comment on the fact that the Parliament which was duly elected on 29 March in Zimbabwe has never met and its elected members continue to be harassed and intimidated and suffer from violence .
Our resolution calls for a strengthening of sanctions , and of course we will also have to join the calls made at the UN for an international arms embargo and for worldwide travel bans and the freezing of assets .
We know who the additional ringleaders that need to be targeted are , we know who the henchmen are , who the bag carriers are .
You have Chihuri , the police chief ; Shiri , the Air Force head ; Gono , the governor of the central bank ; Chinamasa , the Justice Minister ; Bonyongwe , the chief of Central Intelligence : these are the people that can and must be targeted .
Our resolution clearly reflects the pre-conditions laid down by the MDC .
All talks must be based on the outcome of the 29 March election which the MDC won and not on the sham run-off in June .
It must be a transitional arrangement designed to lead to a new constitution - nobody has mentioned that , and that is what Morgan Tsvangirai is calling for - followed by fresh elections .
He says very clearly , and I quote him , ' I want no power deals and no power sharing ' .
As Geoffrey van Orden has said , there are no negotiations going on so we should not take heart from the current situation .
There has to be an additional mediator .
Clearly Mr Mbeki is unable to do it alone and we call for an African Union nominee to be put in place .
That nominee must be of equal standing with Mr Mbeki and people like Mr Chissano and Mr Kufuor come to mind at this stage .

Finally the unchecked state-sponsored brutality and violence and savagery have to stop , and that is why the international community must act , and act urgently , in the interests of the suffering people of Zimbabwe .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , once a beacon of hope , an example of African self-empowerment and a leader among African states , Zimbabwe is now the epicentre of African despair and hopelessness .
The people of Zimbabwe deserve better , and they must get it .
But it is going to take an ending of the regime of Robert Mugabe , a murdering thug , for this to become a reality .
We in the international community must toughen our resolve against this tyrannical Mugabe regime .
I welcome the fact that the UN Security Council is considering an imposition of further sanctions against the leadership of Zimbabwe , including the implementation of an arms embargo .
How is it that a country where there are five million people dependent on food aid , where inflation has reached over ten billion per cent , and where a loaf of bread now costs over ZWD 1 billion , still has one of the best equipped armies in the African continent and is totally awash with weapons ?
That is an extraordinary admission .
The recent presidential campaign was not a legitimate election .
The brutality of the Mugabe regime was such that 90 people were killed , 3 500 were injured and a further 200 000 people were displaced during the campaign .
These are hardly the ingredients of a free , fair and transparent democratic contest .
South Africa and other African countries must intensify the pressure against Robert Mugabe .
Nelson Mandela was right when he said that there was a tragic failure of leadership in Zimbabwe .
South Africa exercises strong political influence over the Mugabe Government , and South Africa must show strong and decisive leadership on this issue for the people of Zimbabwe and also for the people of Africa , who are having to watch this leader lead his country down into the swamp .
( ES ) Mr President , so as not to repeat what my fellow Members have said , I will concentrate on the opening of the parliament .
The March elections were elections in which the opposition won a majority , and up to 17 July the parliament of that country had still to be formed .
We , as parliamentarians , should focus our efforts on exerting European Union pressure to ensure that the promise of democracy in a parliament with an opposition majority can operate .
The process needs a kick-start .
We really must do everything possible to ensure that , following the sham of the presidential elections , the legislative elections , which gave the opposition an acknowledged majority , enable the parliament to function .
The second point regards the mediator .
It is quite clear that South Africa has reached the limit of its mediation capability , to say the least .
It is essential for another mediator to support , if not replace , the South African president .
Otherwise , the mediation will also give the appearance of a corrupt mechanism , under the thumb of the Zimbabwean government .
Mr President , it is no longer just Mugabe and his regime that are under scrutiny .
Mugabe , because of his terrible deeds and this whole tragic farce , has already been condemned by international public opinion .
It is the international community that is under scrutiny now .
It is Thabo Mbeki , it is the SADC and the AU , it is China , it is us in the EU , it is the United Nations .
The Zimbabwean people , Tsvangirai and the MDC deserve all our support and solidarity in these difficult times .
We could invite Morgan Tsvangirai to come to a meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Development in July or September .
We all continue to receive terrible news from Zimbabwe about the violence there .
We must not fail .
Morgan Tsvangirai and the MDC majority deserve not just words of comfort or any sort of consolation position but rather to be invested in office according to the results of the 29 March elections .
The international community , if it fails in the transition - if we fail - will be covered with shame .
I hope it will not happen like that .
Mr President , Mr Mugabe 's regime is responsible not only for election fraud but also for arbitrary arrests and the torture and murder of hundreds of citizens in Zimbabwe for a number of years now .
So far , resolutions and sanctions appear to have been ineffective .
I suggest that the time has come to initiate action to bring Mr Mugabe before an international court of law , charged with crimes against humanity .
I know Zimbabwe has not signed the convention relating to the International Court in The Hague , but I am sure some other procedure having an international law basis could be found , and perhaps Commissioner Michel or the President-in-Office could enlighten us on this .
I believe that only if such drastic action is taken will this African dictator and his accomplices be forced to start thinking and listening to reason and which will eventually rid their country and the international community of their criminal presence .

( PL ) Mr President , I would urge the Commission to consider and prepare a proposal for measures that would be effective against Mr Mugabe , who continues to use violence and who has completely disregarded the results of the March elections .
At this time we are , practically speaking , powerless and the only tool left to us is that of words .
I would strongly urge that consideration be given to what steps could be taken to bring him to trial , so that there could be peace in Zimbabwe and so that its people could have a real possibility of enjoying the citizens ' rights to which they are entitled .
( PL ) Mr President , Zimbabwe needs international aid and our support , but it also needs to make reforms itself .
The European Union , the African Union and the Republic of South Africa should encourage a dialogue between the ruling party and the opposition .
Zimbabwe must finally start along the path to democracy and appoint a government of national unity . [ ... ]
UN initiative , according to which an embargo on arms supplies to Zimbabwe would be imposed and the assets of persons closest to Mugabe would be frozen .
Steps must be taken immediately to make it possible for humanitarian organisations to function .
One solution could be for aid to be supplied to the regions most in need by non-governmental organisations .
Mr President , Mugabe is not listening and that is the tragedy because if he were he would do the right thing and go back to the elections of March and live with that result .
I thought one of the most shameful things that happened was that Mugabe attended the World Food Summit where he was allowed to parade , when in fact he is the cause of some of the major global food insecurity problems in his own country and on his own continent .
I spoke to a farmer from Zimbabwe just last week at a conference in Brussels and the harm that has been done to the food production base of that country is quite horrific .
Somebody else said it is horrendous that a country can be armed to the teeth and that its people can be suffering hunger , violence , intimidation and torture .
South Africa needs to do more .
The continent itself needs to be strong in its condemnation and we need to push them and urge them and convince them that this is the right thing to do , because our people are looking to us to take definitive action in a situation which is quite appalling .
( PT ) What is currently happening in Zimbabwe is a challenge to our conscience and capacity to act .
On one side is a government that uses violence against its own people , that causes misery and that has benefited from the connivance of other African dictatorships and autocracies .
On the other side are the forces that are striving peacefully for democracy and human rights : the people of Zimbabwe , the international community and , of course , the European Union .
As has already been said here , the European Union could use its diplomatic power , impose sanctions , refuse visas , pressurise regional powers and support the defenders of democracy and human rights .
What can we do in the European Parliament ?
We can support our resolution tomorrow and recommend that the Commission and the Council take these initiatives , but we can do more .
We can also prove that our actions are consistent with our words and offer the Sakharov Prize to the leader of the opposition , Morgan Tsvangirai .
We put this challenge to our fellow Members .
In this way , we will have the opportunity to reward a struggle and , simultaneously , contribute towards a democratic and peaceful victory .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Michel , ladies and gentlemen , the debate has been perfectly clear , and so are the conclusions that we must draw from it .
People have spoken in strong terms , and that is as it should be , because the European Union can accept only one solution , and that is that the will of the people of Zimbabwe , as expressed in the first round of elections , should be respected , and it is the result of those elections which should serve as the basis for any settlement .
Together with the Commission , we shall be examining the situation in Zimbabwe at the next Council meeting on 22 July .
We shall take into account the views which have been expressed and the suggestions which have been made - not to France , Mr Van Orden , but to the Presidency of the Council of the European Union , since France itself has no power as France , but merely holds the mandate which has been given to it in this context by the European Union - including your proposal that the Council should call for an extraordinary session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva , providing , of course , that it is possible to do so .

We shall follow Mr Michel 's recommendations , which are always sensible and based on experience , regarding the continuation of our mediation efforts .
I believe that as far those efforts are concerned we cannot demand more than Mr Tsvangirai himself recommended to Mr Michel at their meeting , and I think that this is the position we should adopt .
The European Union , the Council and the Commission must stay in contact with those involved , the SADC , the African Union , and also South Africa - and once again I should like to welcome the South African delegation here with us today - and of course we shall also have to take into account the resolution which Parliament will be voting on tomorrow , in the work which the Council will be doing .
I have nothing else to add , and without wishing to waste his time , I shall hand over to the experience and eloquence of Mr Michel on this subject .
Member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I shall be very brief .
Mr Jouyet and the other speakers have said it all .
Obviously I can only endorse wholeheartedly the views expressed , particularly by Mr Van Orden and Mrs Kinnock , but at the same time I have to add that the Commission 's power is , of course , essentially the power of diplomacy , but perhaps it is also the power to prepare for what action we could take if - and this is obviously what we wish for with all our hearts and will press for with all the means at our disposal - the mediation process were to succeed in bringing about the emergence of a government led by Mr Tsvangirai .

I therefore completely agree with the views expressed by Mr Van Orden , Mrs Kinnock and all the others who spoke , Mrs Hall , Mr Hutchinson and Mr Gahler - I hope I have not left anyone out .
There is just one point on which I disagree .
You know that I am in the habit of speaking frankly .
I do not agree that we should condemn the Portuguese Presidency for having organised , in Lisbon , a summit which had been awaited for years and which the Zimbabwean question was preventing from being held .
This summit between the European Union and Africa was long overdue , and it was time to take action .
We are perfectly well aware that Mr Mugabe 's presence was guaranteed by the African Union 's desire not to be restricted by the other party , i.e. the European party , in its choice of whom to invite .
I therefore believe that this criticism is unfair .
Moreover , I should also like to emphasise the particularly difficult situation in which South Africa finds itself .
In South Africa 's position , it is no easier for it to move than it is for President Thabo Mbeki to the play the role of mediator .
Everyone knows perfectly well , in this case , that at the present time the first country to feel the effects of the crisis in Zimbabwe - or rather the failure to resolve that crisis - is South Africa .
I would therefore ask you to try and look at the situation from the point of view of South Africa 's difficulties .
I also believe that South Africa is conducting the mediation process as conscientiously as it should .
Obviously I share the view , expressed by all those who have spoken , that the mediation process should be expanded , not only to ease South Africa 's position , but also to give the various parties involved in solving this crisis a more balanced perception of the situation .

Finally , to reply to one of the questions raised , for the time being we are preparing a real ' development and humanitarian ' package , so as to ensure , if Mr Tsvangirai comes to power , that he has immediate support , so as to give the people of Zimbabwe , immediately , reasons to believe in this change of government , and also perhaps so as to give rise locally to a certain amount of desire for regime change , with the support of local opinion and public opinion and , of course , with the support of the actively involved international community .
I would just like to make one last point about the African Union .
I would argue in favour of a little more understanding .
What is the African Union 's problem ?
As I have already said , the problem for the African Union is that it has to juggle two different opinions .
One opinion is extremely and openly critical of Zimbabwe and its virtual President , and another opinion takes the view that more flexibility is needed , that sanctions will be useless , and that there should not be any sanctions .
Unity , therefore , is not easy to obtain within the African Union .
We have to recognise this , and that is why we must also interpret the conclusions of African Union meetings from this perspective , from this viewpoint .
However , I have to say that the information I have been given just now inclines me to believe that , for the time being , unity is making headway and the African Union will be in a position to make useful and effective proposals on how to emerge from this crisis , which is obviously regrettable , and which is a real insult to all those who , in Africa , support democracy and ensure its progress .
I have received two draft resolutions submitted in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday 10 July 2008 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - The recent elections in Zimbabwe were a sham with Mugabe being the only eventual candidate , having intimated Tsvangirai and other members of the MDC to the point of withdrawal .
There should now be fresh presidential elections in this country precluding most vehemently state-sponsored violence , intimidation and murder .
I welcome yesterday 's decision of the G8 summit in Japan to adopt financial and other sanctions against members of the Zimbabwean government .
It is significant that there has been consensus at this level , even from Russia , on a strong condemnation of the Mugabe regime .
A UN Security Council resolution concluding that Zimbabwe is now a threat to international peace and security is looking likely .
I would urge China not to block this important action during this coming week .
I regret that the African Union is not doing enough to isolate Mugabe as I believe that this union , along with the Southern African Development Community and the Pan-African Parliament , are the key forums which should be charged with removing such a despot .
The human rights violations currently being perpetrated by the Zimbabwean government are bordering on crimes against humanity and I believe that the UN Security Council should also therefore consider referring members of this government to the International Criminal Court in the not too distant future .
in writing . - The recent elections in Zimbabwe were wholly illegitimate and undemocratic , sparking widespread criticism and condemnation from the international community .
Although the situation in Zimbabwe has prompted concern for a while now , the fallout of these elections and evidence of brutal state-sponsored violence against supporters of Tsvangirai 's opposition MDC party have brought the crisis to another level .
Zimbabwe now finds itself in an extremely grave situation .
In addition to this political crisis , years of mismanagement by Mugabe 's regime has left the country 's economy in tatters and its currency virtually worthless .
Life expectancy for both men and women is under forty and recent events have prompted many to leave the country and seek refuge in neighbouring African states , which is proving to put pressure on the stability of the entire region .
I welcome this resolution which stresses the EU 's unequivocal rejection of the recent election results in Zimbabwe due to their undemocratic and illegitimate nature .
The resolution also wholeheartedly denounces the use of political violence by the Mugabe regime and calls for sanctions to be used against those who support it , both inside and outside of Zimbabwe .
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0168 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Subject : Performance of the automobile industry as regards CO2 emissions
Is the Commission satisfied with the performance to date of the European automobile industry in reducing carbon dioxide emissions and fuel consumption ?
Does it consider that its initiative to revise the Directive on the availability of consumer information on fuel economy and CO2 emissions in respect of cars ( 1999 / 94 / EC ) amounts to an acknowledgement of the ineffectiveness of the existing Community regulatory framework for the car industry ?
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the G8 members propose a 50 % reduction in carbon dioxide emissions by 2050 .
However , the advanced , rapidly developing countries ( namely China , India , Brazil , Mexico and South Africa ) do not seem to be responding to this proposal .
Do you believe that this position will affect the negotiations on the post-Kyoto period ?
What are the prospects of the crucial negotiations on the post-Kyoto period following this G8 proposal ?

The question posed by Mr Papastamkos is , of course , completely unconnected with the first question we discussed regarding cars , but it is still very important and timely , considering the debate held and the decision taken at the G8 meetings yesterday and today .
It is a positive step that the G8 , comprising the eight largest economies in the world , has agreed to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 50 % by 2050 .
Of course , as I have said previously , this is only half a step , because there was no agreement on any mid-term objectives for 2020 , which would have been necessary for an international agreement that would effectively fight climate change .
I think that the matter of the other large countries , the developing large economies such as China and India , has also been dealt with and debated ; of course , an effective solution to climate change requires the participation of these countries , for instance through measures to reduce the rate of increase in carbon dioxide emissions , always in accordance with the United Nations principle of common but differentiated responsibilities .
I believe that agreements will be reached , both on the long-term objective , where there is general consensus , and on the mid-term objectives , given that these agreements are essential in order to achieve the desired outcome in 2009 in Copenhagen .
( DE ) Commissioner , I want to come back to automobiles .
At the time when this 120 g target was fixed , there were a number of questions about the extent to which these 120 g should be regarded as an average , in terms of the entire industry and in terms of similar measurements .
Have these questions all been resolved or can we expect them to be resolved in time for the industry really to be able to react if it needs to do so in the short spaces of time provided ?
( DE ) I would be interested to know whether it would not be worth offering incentives for taking old cars off the market , since they have the highest consumption and highest level of CO2 emissions .
Could you consider a system of incentives here ?
Member of the Commission . - The European Union has agreed on a 10 % target for renewable fuels within the transport sector , and this 10 % is by 2020 .
I think it is important that we say ' renewables ' because it is not only biofuels - it is not only ethanol or biodiesel .
It could be electric cars as well , so we have to make this distinction .
I think we have to say that such a long lead time makes it unlikely that this can have had an impact on the price level that we see today .
According to our calculations , by 2020 this could mean an increase in cereal prices of between 3 and 6 % , rapeseed by about 8-10 % and sunseed 15 % as compared to the 2006 prices , assuming a share of 30 % coming from the second generation of biofuels .
I think I can see that there is some hesitation among some Members of Parliament .
One of the honourable Members does not seem to agree , but I think you have to take into account that quite a lot of the present increases in food prices stem from the high oil prices .
We have seen lots of calculations and impact assessments from the OECD , and the latest one clearly says that estimating an oil price of EUR 130 per barrel means an increase in crop prices of between 9 and 13 % .
So this is related to the oil price increase and not to the discussion on renewable energies .
I think it is also clear that the impact will be limited through the growing use we are hopefully going to see of the second generation of biofuels , which is encouraged by our policies .
Second-generation biofuels are produced from feedstock other than food crops and can come not only from dedicated energy crops but also from sources such as recycled vegetable oil , animal fat , by-products from the forestry industry , forestry residues and solid waste such as grasses .
In the Commission proposal put on the table on 23 January this year for a directive on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources , the Commission proposed that it will monitor , amongst other things , the commodity price changes associated with the use of biomass for energy and any associated positive and negative impacts on food security .
In addition , the Commission proposes to report every two years on , among other things , the impact of our European biofuel policy on availability of foodstuffs in exporting countries , the ability of people in developing countries to afford these foodstuffs , and wider development issues .
The Commission has presented its view on the cause of the recent rise in food prices in the recent communication ' Tackling the challenge of rising food prices : directions for EU action ' .
So , given the volatility and the complexity of the current price trends , the Commission will closely monitor price developments within the European Union and internationally and will report by the end of the year on the evolution of the situation .
As stated in the communication , although demand for agricultural commodities is also influenced by the biofuel market , Commission analyses indicate that current European biofuel production has little impact on current global food prices .
( NL ) Thank you to the Commissioner for her answer .
A year and a half ago biofuels were still a miracle aid in the fight against global warming .
Now , they are starting to be vilified and I note that the Commission endorses last weekend 's U-turn by the energy ministers - though it will doubtless deny the fact .
My question - the Commissioner has bombarded us with figures here - is whether the Commission agrees with the World Bank study which claims that 75 % of biofuels are responsible for 75 % of the rises in food prices worldwide .
The FAO reaches similar conclusions and the UN 's special rapporteur , Mr Ziegler , describes the massive production of biofuels as a crime against humanity .
Does Mrs Fischer share the view of the World Bank , FAO and UN ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I think we can see that renewable energies and biofuels have recently been the scapegoat for increased prices within the agricultural commodities sector .
Clearly there are different reasons for these increases .
The adverse weather conditions that we have seen in parts of the world have had a high influence - almost four times as high as the influence of biofuels .
Secondly , we have seen a huge demand from Asia .
In China and India they are now starting to eat meat , which means that they need to import much more cereal than they used to do .
Thirdly , speculation : investors are moving their money out of stocks and shares and bricks into agricultural commodities , into gold and silver .
This is obvious .
Some countries have closed their borders for exports of agricultural commodities and this has also contributed .
Looking at the United States , the fact that the Americans have now introduced a very comprehensive use of corn for bioethanol has had an effect on the corn sector .
Of course this has an influence on the world market price for corn .
But in Europe we use less than 1 % of our production area for renewable energies and that cannot have an influence on the price level that we see .
What is important is that we produce these renewable energies in a sustainable way and that we apply certain criteria to the different types of renewable energies .
We have said clearly that a 35 % reduction of CO2 emission is the minimum and we would be prepared to go further .
For example , 50 % has been mentioned as a figure to be introduced by 2015 .
Regarding the honourable Member 's question on the World Bank study , I must say first of all that it has not yet been published .
A pirate copy has been leaked .
It is therefore difficult for the World Bank to comment on something that has not yet been published .
But I have to say that personally I would like to see a commitment and a confirmation from the World Bank that they are going to sign up to the 75 % .
I do not believe that 75 % is a figure that can be defended .
It is not even on cereal prices but on food prices .
When you know that sometimes on food - bread , for example - only up to a maximum 10 % of the value of the bread can be related to the wheat , I simply cannot imagine how this figure of 75 % can be right .
I would be very happy to come back to the European Parliament to discuss it when this report has been made public and we have a solid basis for discussion and not just rumours that appeared in one single newspaper when it was leaked .
Commissioner , I admire your tenacity in sticking to the line about the low impact of biofuels on food prices , but I do wonder how long you can sustain that .
As has been pointed out to you , you are very much out of line with other experts across the world .
You have heard about the FAO and , it seems , the World Bank .
You make the point repeatedly that we only put 1 % of our production into biofuels .
That may be , but we in Europe depend so much on imports for our feedstuffs from the Americas - and that is where the impact on food prices is coming from .
It is the requirement to face up to that and to move as speedily as we can to second-generation and even third-generation which the Commission should be focusing upon .
It seems to me that if the argument is regarding lead times , then oil prices are exempt from being a cause of rising commodity prices rather than biofuels ; but will the Commissioner urge the World Bank to publish the result ?
Will she write to them and indicate that we would like to see this report published , so that we can all debate its argumentation ?
On that basis , does the Commission not feel we should urge , in the interim , a moratorium on all new biofuel products that are not based entirely on non-edible by-products of food and food processing ?

Member of the Commission . - First of all , in answer to Mr Allister , when we talk about the dependency within the European Union on feedstuffs you are quite right , we are dependent , especially on soya bean imports .
That is why we have ongoing discussions as to whether it is possible to find a solution on the GMO issue in order to lower the price on imported soya beans .
This is by far the biggest and most important crop for our pork industry .
I had hoped to be able to convince the honourable Members that we are actually doing quite a lot to push , and to invest in , the second generation of biofuels ; because I agree with all of you that the first generation is not a long-term solution .
But we need the first generation as a stepping stone for the second generation .
If we now send a clear message that we will no longer stick to our target of 10 % , I can guarantee that all investments within the European Union are going to disappear and the investments will move to South America and we will be depending on importing all our biofuel from Brazil produced from sugar cane .
Then our independence - as we would like to see it - would be much more difficult to fulfil .
In relation to the not yet published World Bank report - I presume we are in agreement that it is not published , it is leaked - by coincidence , the morning we got the press release on the 75 % , the chief economist from the World Bank was sitting in my office and he could not confirm the 75 % .
Therefore , I am sure we will return to this issue and I would be very happy , as I said earlier , to discuss this on the solid basis of a published report .
Subject : Execution of the perpetrator of an attack on the United Nations

According to the eNewsletter Hands off Cain , No 107 of 6 June , Leandro Despouy , the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the independence of judges and lawyers , has reaffirmed the UN 's belief that the Iraqi authorities ' execution of Awraz Abdel Aziz Mahmoud Sa 'eed for carrying out the attack on the UN headquarters in Baghdad in August 2003 - which killed , amongst others , Sérgio Vieira de Mello , UN Special Representative for Iraq - prevented the international community from learning who the real perpetrators of the crime had been .
What steps did the Commission take to voice the EU 's blanket opposition to the death penalty ?
What measures is the Commission intending to take to clarify the reasons underlying the speed with which Awraz Abdel Aziz Mahmoud Sa 'eed was executed , despite the express requests made by the United Nations , which legitimately wanted to discover the underlying reason for the attack on the UN and identify the organisers thereof ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , together with the Member States the European Commission is the world 's foremost institutional player and donor in the fight against the death penalty .
Its activities in this regard are at the forefront of its external policies on human rights .
The general principles of the European Union 's policy towards third countries concerning the death penalty , adopted in 1998 and reviewed in 2008 , set out the criteria for issuing demarches and define the standards that should be used .
Abolition of the death penalty is one of the main thematic priorities when providing help within the framework of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
Since 1994 the Commission has financed worldwide approximately 30 projects , the total monetary value of which is roughly EUR 15 million .
Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner categorically expressed her opposition to the death penalty , whether actually used in practice or set out in legislation , in a public declaration on 10 October 2007 , on the occasion of the World Day Against The Death Penalty , and on other subsequent occasions .
The incident , which is the subject of the letter written by the Member of this House , is known to the Commission .
Iraq is one of the countries to which the European Commission often sends demarches on the use of the death penalty .
In this particular case , the demarche was sent in June 2007 .
Both the European Union and the Commission have repeatedly called on the Iraqi Government and the Supreme Court of Iraq to abolish the use of the death penalty and to mitigate all death sentences that have been passed but not yet carried out .
Furthermore , they have called on the Iraqi Government to introduce , without delay , a moratorium on all executions .
Needless to say , in the case of the bomb attack on the UN headquarters on 19 August 2003 , such a moratorium would have made it possible to carry out a detailed cross-examination of all persons who could have provided potential evidence needed to ensure that no perpetrator of this attack goes unpunished .
Indeed , the Commission is alarmed by the speed with which this case was dealt with .
Our main goal , however , is to advocate the abolition of the death penalty in general .
The Commission continues to cooperate closely with the Member States of the European Union in an effort to express our position and dissatisfaction with the Iraqi side .
( PT ) The issue raised here , however , is that the Iraqi government prevented an investigation of the assassination of Sérgio Vieira de Melo in the same way it did in other cases .
I have here in my hands a copy of a magazine recently published , in which Zenaib Ahmed appears .
I have invited this person to come to the European Parliament to speak about the mass executions in Iraqi hospitals carried out on purely ethnic grounds .
In the light of this situation , which is much worse than the situation in the Western Balkans , I want to know when the international community and the European Commission is going to demand an international tribunal to investigate and judge the killing of tens or hundreds of thousands of people in Iraq .
( CS ) Mr Casaca , of course the European Commission and the European Union explore , in general , all options available to us , so that we can strengthen our ability to gradually limit and eliminate the use of the death penalty , in particular in those areas where it is used most frequently , and that , of course , includes Iraq as well .
Subject : Anti-discrimination horizontal directive
The European Commission announced that this spring would see the launch of the new horizontal directive prohibiting discrimination .
What is the latest development regarding the scope of the directive ?
Will there be a far-reaching anti-discrimination directive including ALL of the remaining grounds of Article 13 of the Amsterdam Treaty - namely age , disability , religion or belief , and sexual orientation , as supported by a majority in the European Parliament ?
If not , could the European Commission give its reasons , and outline its detailed plan of action for the coming months ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last week the Commission adopted a proposal for a directive which provides for protection from discrimination on grounds of age , disability , sexual orientation and religion or belief beyond the workplace .
Discrimination on these grounds in employment and occupation is already covered by Directive 2000 / 78 / EC .
In this way we have fulfilled the commitment that we made , in front of you , at the beginning of our term of office .
We have answered your repeated calls for such a proposal , last expressed during the part-session in May .
This proposal for a directive is based on principles that Member States have already adopted in existing directives .
For example , it contains provisions ensuring protection for victims of discrimination and dealing with harassment and victimisation , as well as provisions concerning the establishment of equality authorities .
As I said earlier , the proposal for a directive provides for protection from discrimination on four basic discrimination grounds , but giving equal importance to all four of them does not mean that provisions concerning all these types of discrimination are equal .
The proposal for a directive therefore takes into account the specifics of each ground of discrimination so that the directive is as effective as possible .
Specifically , it makes it possible , depending on the context , to take into account the age , and to consider the issue of age and disability in the insurance and banking sector , if this is adequate and reasonable , and I stress the words adequate and reasonable .
This may never mean wilful exclusion of older or disabled persons from these sectors .
In cases of disability , the principle of equal treatment is a positive commitment providing for general accessibility for disabled persons and carrying out appropriate adjustments in individual cases .
Such measures do not represent a disproportionate burden .
The proposal for a directive clearly states that account shall be taken of the size , nature and resources of the organisation , the estimated cost , the life cycle of goods and services , and the possible benefits of access for persons with disabilities .
The proposal is an important step towards closing a huge loophole in non-discriminatory legislation .
Of course we realise that protection from discrimination on grounds of gender outside the workplace is not yet as strong as protection from discrimination on grounds of race .
This is because Directive 2004 / 113 / EC does not cover the area of education , as can be seen from the explanatory statement of this proposal .
We think that it would be too premature to propose changes to said Directive , since the period for its implementation ended only recently .
However , when we are preparing the implementation report in 2010 , we can propose changes to the Directive if necessary .
Commissioner , this is an example of a question tabled some weeks ago which , very happily , received its positive answer on 1 July with your announcement .
I think you should take personal credit for championing this within the Commission and for listening to the vote of the European Parliament .
Let me just ask you and the Commission to maintain your vigilance so that derogations and exemptions to the principle of equal treatment are not sought on just any grounds : they must be sought on necessary grounds and on genuine principles of subsidiarity , because we have seen transpositions of the Employment Directive and Race Equality Directive which were not complete and we must ensure that this good package becomes law in the Member States .
( CS ) It is obvious that such a directive which is far-reaching and which protects the fundamental values of the European Union is often viewed differently and is often exposed , for various reasons , to pressure for its effectiveness to be limited .
Being fully aware of this , the Commission prepared this complex proposal which we are of course ready to defend in further stages against any unjustified challenges .
Could I ask the Commissioner to comment on British newspaper reports ?
Apparently , as reported in the press , anti-discrimination legislation does not currently apply to workers over the age of retirement , and people of retirement age or older are being legally sacked .
Does the Commissioner have plans to tackle the British Government 's discrimination against older workers ?
( CS ) In general , the Directive protecting people who belong to the labour force also protects them from discrimination on grounds of age .
I cannot make specific comments on the British newspaper report since it is , as always , qualified by the specific circumstances of the particular case .
I can only say , with confidence , that in this regard there are no exceptions in this Directive , according to which protection no longer applies above a certain age .
Subject : Supplementary pensions and mobility across the EU
Today , changing job or country often means losing occupational pension benefits in some Member States .
The ' portability of pensions ' Directive , proposed in October 2005 and now amended , will bring more flexibility into the conditions regarding acquisition of pension rights and vesting ( such as different qualifying periods before which workers acquire rights ) and preservation of dormant pension rights ( such as pension rights losing value over time ) , as well as improving information for workers on how mobility may affect supplementary pension rights .
Can the Commission inform us when it envisages agreement on this directive and provide a timeline for its implementation , in the interests of EU citizens ' being able to move freely within the EU without having an additional worry regarding pensions ?
To start with , I am glad this important question has been asked and I am thankful for the European Parliament 's efforts to achieve progress .
Of course I am also thankful for the efforts of the Slovenian Presidency and other presidencies to reach an agreement .
In spite of this , the disappointing fact remains that agreement has not yet been reached .
This is because the question of removing the obstacles to the free movement of workers caused by supplementary pension schemes , which is at the heart of this problem , has not yet been answered .
In today 's constantly changing world , the possibility of changing jobs easily or employing the right person with the necessary qualifications is more important than ever .
Moreover , supporting the adaptability of the workforce , labour market flexibility and modernisation of social security systems are the basic elements of the Lisbon Strategy .
It is quite obvious that , if we expect people to be more flexible , we have to make sure that they are not punished for this by the loss of the social safety net .
The case of supplementary pension schemes is a typical example of the strategy of flexicurity advocated by the European Commission .
The Commission has tried especially hard to solve the issue of supplementary pensions but , try as it might , unfortunately a compromise has not yet been found .
That said , considering how important this issue is in regard to the social rights of workers in general , to the development of pension schemes and to giving the right response to the matter of demographic ageing , the Commission is ready to continue and will not relax until a compromise that can become the basis for the overall solution is found .
Although we are not there yet ( since this decision must be unanimous and the Council has not yet adopted a unanimous position ) , the Commission continues working towards the goal of improving the situation regarding supplementary pensions .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for his response .
Commissioner , you raised two points that I think are essential within this whole complex issue : first of all the flexicurity idea , and secondly the Lisbon Agenda about creating another freedom within the European Union single market - free movement of workers .
In many ways the lack of availability of mobility of pensions is denying many people the opportunity to take up what could be better paid jobs in other areas because they cannot carry over pension entitlements or even freeze pension entitlements in their home Member State .
So maybe you could suggest to us as part of the social package which you are now bringing forward - rightly welcomed by so many - where we can push the buttons to ensure we can get Member States - those that are blocking this - to come on board for the ideal .
( CS ) All I can do is to say that , in just a few words , Mr Crowley gave us an almost perfect analysis of the problem .
Yes , this is how it really is .
This is also the reason why we will remain active .
This is not an issue that the Commission would regard as closed .
( DE ) Commissioner , you were right to draw attention to the problem and to the fact that the main reason it cannot be resolved is that because of the unanimity principle Member States are not budging .
Sometimes rough customers need rough handling .
Is it not high time , with the debate on the internal markets as it stands now , to actually name and shame the Member States in question so as to ensure that at least some Member States reconsider the disastrous way they have sometimes behaved in the past and change their approach ?

( CS ) You are quite right : all fundamental political ideas are debated in the Council and these debates are not carried out behind closed doors .
All Member States have gradually managed to express their opinion , and only the Federal Republic of Germany did not express its consent .
This is the situation but , as I have already said , this does not mean that we have reached the end of the road .
We will be looking at other ways and options in order to achieve unanimity .
I want to stress that of course the systems are different in individual Member States , and of course the decisions concerning these systems are not just minor technical matters .
Therefore I fully understand that countries take this question seriously but , as I have already said , this is how the situation is at the moment .
Subject : Medical support across the EU
Can the Commission clarify exactly what entitlements to medical support EU citizens have when travelling to another Member State ?
Does the support provided by the European Health Insurance Card apply to all age-related illnesses ?
As the methods of financing health services vary from Member State to Member State , what procedures are in place to enable a fair and equitable system that provides proper support for all those in need ?
What arrangements are in place for those travelling to tax havens such as Andorra , the Channel Islands , Lichtenstein , etc . , which are surrounded by the EU but are not themselves deemed EU territory ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the holder of the European Health Insurance Card is regarded as insured under the legislation of the Member State in which he has arrived .
In accordance with Article 22 of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 this card is valid for a temporary stay , whatever its purpose : tourism , employment or study .
If the holder of this card is in need of health care during his stay , the card entitles him to receive this health care from medical staff .
The European Health Insurance Card covers its holders for ' essential health care ' .
This term , which depends on the patient 's state of health and on the anticipated length of stay , was defined by the Administrative Commission on Social Security for Migrant Workers in 2004 .
The health care in question is a treatment that must be given to a person who resides temporarily in another country 's territory , so that this person is not in danger of death and forced to return prematurely to his country of origin in order to receive the necessary health care .
Medical staff must apply these criteria on a case-by-case basis , taking into account the patient 's state of health and the length of his stay .
The Administrative Commission on Social Security for Migrant Workers also adopted instructions aimed at ensuring that all stakeholders ( health care providers , insured persons and health insurance companies ) interpret this term the same way .
These instructions are available from the Gateway to the European Union .
Both a pensioner spending three months with his children and a student making use of the Erasmus programme will therefore have access not just to the necessary health care but also to the care that would be offered , in the same situation , to persons residing in the given Member State .
The system of health care provision , as stipulated in Article 22 of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 , lays down the provision of health care and the payments for this in accordance with the legislation of the country in which the patient is temporarily residing .
This means that persons temporarily residing in the country enjoy access to health care under the same conditions as persons participating in the health insurance system of that country .
Article 22 of Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 also applies to the countries of the European Economic Area , including Liechtenstein and Switzerland .
Negotiations concerning Andorra have not yet been successfully concluded .

deputising for the author . - Mr President , unfortunately , Mr Evans has had to return to the United Kingdom .
On his behalf , I thank the Commissioner for his answer to the question .
With the sharply rising number of cross-border marriages - almost one in five couples now come from two Member States - and with the rising percentage of couples and individuals over retirement age travelling around the European Union , does the Commission not feel that , unless it takes urgent action on these matters , unequal treatment will lead to health refugees rather than the more widely speculated health tourists in the EU ?

( CS ) You asked several questions , each of which needs a complex answer .

Let me give a simplified answer to the first question : this morning we were debating Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 which will significantly amend Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 and which will definitely improve the situation of many people precisely in the area of cross-border contact .
Regarding your question about health tourism , I think that this is a very vague concept ; so vague that it is dangerous .
Since it may become a very significant phenomenon , we have to define , very carefully , what health tourism means .
However , I think that real health tourism is not particularly widespread because in most cases people suffering from really serious health problems try to stay in their own environment , and also because individual Member States ' systems do not substantially differ from each other at a basic level .
Clearly , Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 and the future Regulation ( EC ) No 883 / 2004 cover the vast majority of cases linked to tourism , but not health tourism .
Primarily , they concern people who have set out on a journey and then something has happened to them while away from home .
There are hundreds of thousands , perhaps up to one million cases each year .
The solutions are adequate and do not adversely affect the stability of the health systems .
Regarding the Commission 's intention to bring about improvements in this area , this intention is tangible , as shown for example by the amendments tabled by my colleague , Mrs Androulla Vassiliou .
I think that there will be an opportunity for a detailed debate on cross-border care and related issues but at this stage I want to distance myself once more from the concept of so-called health tourism .
I think that this is a rather vague concept , one that can provoke reactions not appropriate to the situation .
The time allocated for questions to Commissioner Špidla is over .
Answers to Questions 49 to 54 will be given in writing .
Subject : Reporting burden of small and medium enterprises
I welcome the recent initiative taken by the Commission to reduce the statistical reporting burden on businesses , especially small and medium enterprises .
However SMEs still face large reporting burdens , such as VAT reporting , that cost many man-hours and that put small businesses at a competitive disadvantage .
Does the Commission have any proposals in the pipeline that will reduce red tape and the reporting burden for SMEs ?

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Ryan , I am very grateful to you for this question because it addresses a problem with which the Commission has been deeply concerned for years : how to reduce unnecessary red tape for small and medium enterprises in Europe .
I am glad to be able to tell you that we have indeed made huge progress in this area and I am firmly convinced that we are about to see a real breakthrough .
Basically we have identified the costs of red tape for European enterprises as costs arising from reporting , documentation and information obligations .
We are currently engaged in actually measuring those costs , in the largest project of its kind in the whole of history .
That means we really are establishing what costs these rules actually create for enterprises so that we can then see where the costs come from and whether they can be reduced .
You can expect a large number of Commission proposals from about September this year , based on the results of the measurements and the screening of all the existing rules .
We expect that will enable us to put forward so many proposals by the end of 2009 that the cost of red tape for European enterprises will fall by 25 % in the year 2012 .
We are assuming that will trigger a 1.4 % to 1.5 % growth in the entire European GNP .
So you can see we really are talking significant orders of magnitude .
You then addressed a particular problem that is , however , quite distinct from the matter of normal bureaucratic costs .
It is the burden placed on small enterprises in particular to comply with the tax requirements - and you know that the European Union 's powers in this regard are extremely limited .
We know from all our inquiries that the enterprises themselves feel that the requirements of the financial authorities represent by far the most serious and heaviest burden , so this is an area where it really is up to the Member States to simplify matters .
After all , we only have competences in the area of turnover taxes and even there they are very limited .
The Commission has , however , made one very important proposal that would be a great help to small and medium enterprises : it is substantially to raise the threshold above which they need to declare turnover tax in advance , i.e. register for VAT .
The current threshold is EUR 20 000 , we want to raise it to EUR 100 000 , which would free nearly all very small enterprises and in particular newly established enterprises from this heavy burden .
Sadly I must tell you that so far the Member States have not been prepared to accept that proposal .
I hope that the Small Business Act that the Commission presented a few days ago and in which we addressed the question once again will put more pressure on those Member States that are creating difficulties here and I am extremely grateful to the European Parliament for its numerous signs of support in this regard .
I would like to thank the Commissioner and I look forward to the announcements in September .
I think that some of the administrative burdens , especially on small and medium enterprises , are absolutely huge , and they very often do not have the manpower or womanpower to deal with them .
But could you elaborate more on the EUR 100 000 threshold ?
Are you announcing that , or are you going to name and shame the countries that are resisting it ?
Could you give us some more details about that threshold ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr Ryan , as I said it is an official proposal , which the Commission agreed as early as 2004 .
Since then , the Council has still not adopted the proposal .
I pointed out that we have now put the proposal forward again , in the context of the Small Business Act ; basically that means we are presenting it again .
It is not an announcement ; it is something the Commission has already proposed .
It regards it as necessary .
A short time ago Mr Špidla referred , in the context of another answer , to the need for unanimity on certain issues .
Here too we need unanimity and unfortunately it was not achieved .
I am sure I need not tell you , who represents Ireland , that a whole number of Member States regard questions of tax in the European Union as a taboo subject .
( PL ) Commissioner , I have the following request .
If you are going to be doing all this research , can you look into the indirect costs of running a small or medium-sized enterprise ?
Could you please have a look at the World Bank report from around two years ago , which analysed these costs .
The report states that Poland , for example , has very low legal costs , but in practice this is not true .
I also have a related request , which is not really a question .
Instead of looking at what officials say , could you look properly at what the real costs are ? All the stamps that need to be paid for , all the documents that have to be submitted .
There are so many of these sorts of additional costs .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) The measurements we are conducting now and that are nearly concluded will give us exact information about which European rules give rise to which costs .
We will then be in a position to say which specific European rule gives rise to precisely which costs for enterprises .
Of course we already know quite a lot .
For instance , we already know that most of the costs go back to a very small number of rules .
The vast majority of rules come from no more than some 42 directives .
We also know which area gives rise to the highest costs , namely European company law , which is why we have now put forward the first proposals relating to that area .
We also know that the distribution of costs varies widely , depending on the size of the enterprise .
As a rule of thumb we can assume that the smaller the enterprise , the heavier the relative burden of administrative costs .
Those costs may easily be far higher than 5 % in the case of very small enterprises , while being considerably lower for very large ones .
We know all that anyway and it will be taken into account in the proposals .
Let me take this opportunity to make a request to Parliament .
Whether this whole project succeeds will , of course , depend very much on whether Parliament deals with the Commission 's proposals rapidly .
We do , after all , have a general political agreement on them .
I just wanted to point out that it certainly involves amending existing legislation , which requires the assent of both co-legislators .
Subject : Price of fertiliser
The price of fertiliser has gone up dramatically over the last 12 months .
Ammonia phosphate , for instance , has increased from EUR 181 per tonne to EUR 800 per tonne in wholesale markets .
Does the Commission plan to take any action to counteract this price hike ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr Burke , I share your concern about rising fertiliser prices .
They have indeed risen disproportionately .
Understandably , that creates major problems and great concern in European farming .
Fertiliser prices have risen because of the sharp rise in demand , which comes on top of higher transport and energy costs .
There are , therefore , three factors : higher demand because of the rapid growth in other parts of the world , higher energy prices and higher transport prices .
Demand has risen across the world , as you know , and this affects not just fertiliser but a whole range of other goods too , including cash crops and food .
It is important to remember that , for the fact is that although European farmers have to spend more money on fertiliser , as they are indeed doing , at the same time they are getting better prices for their harvests .
FAO statistics over a comparable period show that food prices have risen by 37 % over a 12-month period .
We saw the sharpest rise with milk products , at 80-200 % , and cereals , at 50-80 % .
The Commission believes it is vital to observe the rules of competition .
As long as that is the case , the Commission does not consider it appropriate to intervene in a market where the latest developments can be traced largely to factors over which the Commission has no influence whatsoever .
Let me repeat : we have no influence over the three deciding factors that led to the price rises .
As regards longer-term developments , the Commission would also draw your attention to the importance of promoting competition on the natural gas market .
I think there is a real chance here of easing the situation somewhat .
If the measures the Commission proposed under the third energy package are accepted , we should see an improvement in gas market prices .
That could also lead to lower prices for nitrogen fertiliser produced in the European Union .
As you know , however , it all depends on whether the energy package proposed by the Commission is accepted .
Thank you for your response on this matter .
It is of concern .
I know you referred to the price of milk products and other items going up , but unfortunately farmers are not getting the benefit of those rises : it is the parties in between who are getting the benefits .
My question really is about our reliance on supply from outside the EU .
It appears that we are relying on Russia and Ukraine for the raw materials for our fertilisers .
I am just wondering what action we are taking in order to make sure that we have adequate supply and are not over-reliant on one or two sources .
Can we not identify other sources and put mechanisms in place to encourage importation from those other sources ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) As regards Russia and Ukraine as major supply countries , I must point out that we are applying trade protection instruments to fertiliser exports from both countries .
To put it quite simply : both countries can of course offer fertiliser at low prices because they know that the energy required to produce fertiliser is particularly high and they apply different prices for exported energy and for energy used in their own country .
That price difference leads to dumping , which is why we have applied the appropriate measures in relation to Russia and the Ukraine .
On diversifying supplies , the Commission has little margin for influence here .
I can tell you , however , that as far as I know the large European producers and distributors are naturally seeking to diversify their raw materials basis .
I am quite prepared to look into this question again in more detail .
I would like to thank the Commissioner .
This probably flows over into other questions for Commissioner Fischer Boel .
You made a point about higher prices in the harvest , but it seems that the costs of producing food are now increasing faster than prices are rising and this is surely a problem that Europe needs to address .
Perhaps you would respond to that ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mrs Fischer Boel is here , which is why I will answer very carefully , because she is the one who really knows about the prices that European farmers can achieve .
On the basis of what she has told the Commission to date , I assume that producer prices are indeed rising for all important EU products .
I do not deny , however , that you may be right in saying that the higher harvest prices do not necessarily make up entirely for the rises in costs .
That is a point the Commission will certainly address .
Regarding developments in the food sector in general - and here we are not talking just about producer prices but are also concerned with what the consumer eventually has to pay - a few weeks ago we launched an initiative and set up a high-level group to consider the future of the European food industry , which , and not everybody knows this , is the biggest European industry .
Many people actually think the automobile sector is the biggest European industry , but that is not true .
The food industry is the biggest one of all in Europe .
In this high-level group we are looking very specifically at price trends and we will conclude our work by the end of the year , when we will make the appropriate recommendations .
Subject : Policy in favour of small enterprises
As part of an open single market which encourages small enterprises , will the Commission say Commission proposes to ensure that new technologies are used to benefit them and what practical benefit they derive from research programmes funded by the European Union in the 27 Member States ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , this is a very topical question and only a few days ago the Commission put forward a very broadly based initiative in this sector .
Let me start by saying that I am very pleased that the enormous importance of small and medium enterprises to our economy and to job creation has been widely recognised throughout the European Union in recent years .
I was particularly concerned to ensure that all the European institutions and the Member States pay due attention to the role of small and medium enterprises .
If we do not make full use of the SMEs ' growth potential , if we do not make full use of their workforce potential , we will not be able to master the consequences of globalisation in Europe .
Let me make this point quite clear : we will successfully master the consequences of globalisation if we manage to strengthen the SME sector in Europe .
To that end , the SMEs must be able to make even better use of the opportunities offered by the internal market and global competition .
A vital factor here - and I now come to your question - is access to knowledge , research and innovation .
It is not just large European enterprises but also small and medium ones , if they are at all active on the international markets , that must make the transition to the knowledge-based economy .
That is their only chance now .
They cannot compete in terms of price ; they can only compete by offering a better quality of product or service and that better quality comes from better technology and from innovation .
One of the main instruments available to them at Community level is , of course , the Seventh Framework Research Programme , which will provide funding of at least 15 % for small and medium enterprises , and it appears from the early results that we will certainly achieve that target .
The Small Business Act to which I referred earlier brings with it a whole range of other proposals designed to give small and medium enterprises easier access to innovation , knowledge , research and technology .
Let me give a few examples .
Firstly , there is the proposal to simplify the rules on state aid to promote research , development and innovation , in particular through the block exemption regulation .
The Commission decided that last week and it will free up great potential .
The second is incentives for establishing enterprises with a high growth potential by promoting research and innovation capacity , in particular by the closer coordination of national programmes and initiatives .
Then there are measures to promote greater participation by small and medium enterprises in the transfer of knowledge .
Here we will be setting up a new pilot project aimed to help finance the industrial use of intellectual property .
I could also mention that we are encouraging SMEs to play an active part in the activities of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology , to ensure that they can also benefit from the transfer of knowledge that Institute will promote .
As you can see , a lot is happening here .
Let me make it quite clear , though , that in the end it is of course up to the entrepreneurs and enterprises themselves whether they make use of the opportunities they are offered .
It is , therefore , very important to make market participants far more aware of the opportunities that already exist today .
That is a question of information and communication , both of which need to be greatly improved .
And that is why the Commission created the European e-Business Support Network early this year .
It is the largest network of its kind in the world and its aim is to put every European enterprise within reach of a contact point that can answer all the questions about innovation , access to EU programmes and access to research resources .

( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , please accept my sincere thanks for your answer , because it has indeed been comprehensive and you have also covered the supplementary question regarding the issue of communication with and information for businesses .
Would you mind giving me some more information ?
I come from a region located on the eastern borders of the European Union as it currently stands .
Information does not reach that region and small businesses are struggling , simply vegetating ; they are relying solely on price differences , as you said , and not on quality , and are heading for closure .
What is your advice on this ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , I am very grateful for your support .
Of course , I knew I would be able to rely on you entirely in this matter , just as you can rely on me entirely .
Regarding the density of the network , I must admit that we have not yet achieved the desired density throughout Europe .
When we complete the project , as we will do over the next five months , every region in Europe will have one of those facilities .
There will be contact points in every region , located near enough to the enterprises to ensure nobody will have any difficulty in accessing them .
The answer to Question 58 by Mr Heaton-Harris will be given in writing .
Subject : Proposed increase in modulation in the context of the CAP Health Check
In the context of the CAP Health Check , could the Commission envisage a situation in which the proposed increase in modulation would be on a voluntary basis ?
Subject : CAP payments
Farmers in receipt of less than EUR 5 000 in farm payments annually will not experience a reduction in their farm payment under the proposed Cap Health Check as outlined by Commissioner Fischer Boel .
Would the Commission consider increasing this threshold ?
Subject : ' Health check ' for the Common Agricultural Policy
Tobacco growing is the sole source of income for some 130 000 European farmers .
Despite this , Regulation ( EC ) No 1782 / 2003 provides that from 2010 50 % of Pillar I resources ( direct aid ) will be transferred to Pillar II ( rural development ) , thereby significantly reducing the income of these producers .
Furthermore , tobacco cultivation occurs in semi-arid regions where no alternative employment opportunities are available .
At the same time , the Common Agricultural Policy ( CAP ) is currently being given a ' health check ' , and many decisions taken during the CAP reform of 2003 are being reviewed .
In view of the above , will the Commission say whether it intends , as part of the CAP ' health check ' , to re-examine the tobacco aid regime and to preserve existing arrangements beyond 2009 until 2013 ?
Has it drawn up a study to establish which crops could replace tobacco in these regions so that European tobacco farmers are not affected financially or socially ?
Subject : Common Agricultural Policy : planning and application in favour of small producers
It should not be forgotten that agriculture is the basic form of employment for inhabitants in rural Greece , in particular in geographically disadvantaged regions , such as islands and mountainous regions .
The cutting of compensation and direct aid with the transfer of resources from the First to the Second Pillar promoted by the Common Agricultural Policy has particularly alarmed Greek producers , since it will affect their already low income and lead to economic stagnation among small producers .
How does the Commission intend to address , both in the short and long-term , the grave economic problems facing farmers ( increase in fuel prices , high production costs , differences between producer and consumer prices ) and to ensure the survival of small producers at European level ?
Member of the Commission . - I am quite happy to have this opportunity to answer all four questions , since we seem to be fairly late , according to the initial schedule .
Regarding the first three questions , I would say that the European Union 's agriculture is both at the contributing and the receiving end of today 's global environmental challenges .
We cannot stand by and fail to act .
EU action is needed and , through rural development , we can provide the most targeted and effective measures .
But , as you all know , our funds within the rural development policy are limited .
The fairest and most straightforward way to raise money is through an additional shift of funds from the first pillar - from direct payment - into rural development policy in Pillar 2 through what we call increased modulation , of course on a compulsory basis .
I am not prepared to consider the increase in modulation on a voluntary basis .
It is quite clear that the Commission took into account the fact that in February 2007 Parliament adopted a report rejecting the Commission 's proposal on voluntary modulation .
I have to say that I am quite happy that we have always been in agreement on this issue .
Concerning the threshold , the Commission 's proposal is to transfer EUR 5 billion from the first to the second pillar in the period from 2009 to 2012 .
This calculation is made on the basis of the present threshold of EUR 5 000 or the franchise , as we normally call it .
Raising this threshold would mean a substantial reduction in the funds .
The Commission believes that , with less budget available , the effectiveness of dealing with the challenges within climate change and water scarcity will be significantly weakened .
Within the health check package , small producers who receive direct payments of a value less than EUR 5 000 will continue to be exempted from modulation .
Therefore , small farms will not only continue to be protected from any possible negative effect of the shift from Pillar 1 to Pillar 2 , but could also profit from the money that is generated through the modulation by engaging in the appropriate rural development programmes .
With regard to modulation , farmers sometimes say to me , ' Well you take my money ' or ' you reduce the payment to the agricultural sector , to the farmers ' .
This is not in fact true because of the fact that , when you modulate money , you generate more money to the sector in general , because the modulated money needs to be co-financed by Member States .
It is clear that , with the new modulated money , we will be much more specific .
We will simply make a menu of possibilities explicitly targeting the new challenges .
This means that , to those who say that modulation or money in rural development policy can be used for whatever reason , I can promise you this is not going to happen with the money that we propose for modulation in the health check .
So , instead of saying that we take money , we actually generate more money to be transferred back to the agricultural sector .
I am not sure if Mr Arnaoutakis is here tonight so therefore I am not going to answer that question .
To Mr Gklavakis , asking about maintenance of the coupled payments for tobacco , I have to refer to the answer I gave in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 24 June .
I actually had the same opportunity to give the answer here in plenary on several occasions , namely that the Commission does not intend to re-examine the tobacco regime within the context of the health check .
I will just repeat that the tobacco reform was agreed by all tobacco-producing countries in 2004 , so therefore I see no reason to re-open this discussion .
I hope that we can all agree that the money that will be transferred into the rural development policy , specially earmarked for support in those areas where tobacco production is taking place or has taken place , will be very important .
We will also present to the Parliament a report on the consequences of the tobacco reform at the end of 2009 .
I am sure , Commissioner , that you - like all the other Members of the House here in this Parliament - are very frustrated at the manner in which Question Time is handled here .
We have referred to that on many occasions , but nothing seems to happen .
I want to thank the Commissioner for the reply , even though I am not happy with the response given .
If compulsory modulation is introduced , in my view it will create division and friction between the various farming groups , between big and small farmers and , in particular , between farmers engaged in different agricultural enterprises .
I would not like to see that happening .
For example , in my recent sheep report which was adopted with a very large majority in Parliament here last month , I proposed that modulation and Article 69 ( now 68 ) be introduced on a voluntary basis in Member States .
Would the Commission not accept the spirit of that decision , which was made here just last month by the elected Members of this Parliament ?
( GA ) Mr President , it is the small farmers under the EUR 5000 payment limit who are faced with the greatest amount of problems but yet receive the least amount of money .
Would the Commissioner accept that since this limit of EUR 5000 was set a number of years ago - 2002 I believe - inflation and large changes have come about ?
And would you not agree Commissioner , that it is a form of protection for small farmers to receive more now than when the policy was formulated and that the limit should be increased ?
( EL ) Mr President , I wish to thank the Commissioner even though her answer was negative , because I know that she is a diligent , scrupulous and fair person , and I would like to ask her the following question .
Tobacco is the only agricultural product subjected to this type of treatment , and that treatment is unfair .
However , I would like to add this : given that tobacco producers are poor , small-scale farmers , could you , in order to prevent them from vanishing , at least please carry out a study to help us see what these people could grow , now that tobacco is effectively eliminated under these measures ?
Member of the Commission . - If you look at the proposal on the Health Check , it actually contains a number of actions to the benefit of the sheep and goat sector .
First of all , we clearly state that it will be possible to maintain a coupled payment for the sheep sector because we are aware of the fact that it is a vulnerable sector .
It is desperately important that we maintain some production in those regions where , if sheep production disappears , probably nothing will be left , so a coupled payment could be a solution .
I have to say , regarding the new Article 68 , that it is a voluntary possibility for Member States to use and to top-slice up to 10 % of the direct payment , and then , according to the decisions by the Member States , to transfer some of that money into the sheep or goat sector .
The possibility of coupling the payment is valid both for suckler cows and for sheep and goats .
I am not sure if I understood the next question completely , but if you look at the budget - the overall budget for agriculture agreed by Heads of State in 2002 - this budget was fixed but adjusted with an inflation rate of just 1 % .
The honourable Member is right that we have an inflation rate higher than 1 % , especially these days when we have high oil prices and high food prices so , yes , you can say the value of the entitlements is not completely following the value of other products .
But this was a decision that was taken by the Heads of State , and therefore the present situation , especially in some sectors where we see an increase in prices diverging from what we have seen throughout the last 30 years , namely that prices are now starting to increase , is a sound signal for those that are going to make a living out of it .
I would say to Mr Gklavakis that we have had lots of discussions , and I always enjoy discussing this with him .
I think he can go back to his constituency saying that he is fighting like a lion to maintain the coupled payment .
Tobacco production is not sustainable in all areas , but I think that , with the earmarked rural development money for the tobacco sector , it can also mean that those that want to maintain or to stay in business can modernise their tobacco production and maybe at the end of the day have a tobacco production that can be economically viable , because the quality of the tobacco will increase .
I think that you have to face reality - the fact that this is not going to be re-opened - and then try to find the best possible solutions .
( PL ) Madam Commissioner , you are well known as someone who is always fighting to reduce production costs in agriculture .
I have a question that relates to this issue .
In our country , that is , in Poland , the government has recently imposed additional taxes on farmers who produce rapeseed oil for their own use and add it to fuel .
This is , in a way , related to the production of biodiesel .
As this is the same as paying a tax for drinking your own milk , or eating your own vegetables or potatoes , can you give these farmers assistance to continue their activities without the imposition of additional taxes as if they were buying this oil from outside ?
Member of the Commission . - Since entering into European policy I have always been very keen on maintaining subsidiarity .
This means that when we talk about taxation we are not discussing a common policy and therefore it is up to the Member States to decide on how they manage their taxation systems .
Therefore , for various reasons , I had better keep out of - I would not say national infighting - but national discussions on how taxation on rapeseed is being managed .
I understand your worries , but I would rather stay out of this discussion .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
( The sitting was suspended at 8.45 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Space and security ( debate )
The next item is the report by Karl von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on space and security ( INI / 2008 / 2030 ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the European Commission , ladies and gentlemen , operations under the Security and Defence Policy are becoming more dangerous .
That has been shown by the fact that for the first time a soldier has been killed during an operation under European command .
Gilles Polin was killed on the border between Chad and Darfur .
We must , therefore , consider whether some of those risks can be avoided .
They arise as a result of the wrong kind of command structures , but also when the necessary equipment is not available for specific operations .
When we consider this matter , we start with Javier Solana 's broad approach to security strategy , which covers the armed forces and also the European Union 's critical infrastructure , its external borders and humanitarian operations as well .
Here we keep finding weaknesses in the area of space , satellite-based reconnaissance , satellite-based telecommunications and satellite-based navigation .
If we cooperate more closely in this area , we will be able to spend our money more usefully and achieve greater efficiency .
I will start with reconnaissance .
We have the Helios reconnaissance satellites , the German SAR Lupe ones and the Italian Cosmo-Skymed .
It is vital to ensure that the imagery received from these reconnaissance satellites is actually available to our satellite centre in Torrejón .
Then there is the MUSIS project , planned for the future .
In the report I urge that this project eventually be brought within an appropriate European framework .
Then we have satellite navigation , the Galileo project .
The report states quite clearly that the Galileo project should also be available in future for military operations , because our military forces that plan and conduct such operations need Galileo to give them directions .
That brings me to telecommunications , which must also be satellite-based .
Closer cooperation can be of great benefit here .
I also regard software-defined radio as a joint project that offers great opportunities ; it sets a common standard for protected telecommunications that could lead to interoperability between armed forces on the one hand and the police on the other , and also with the forces that have to stand by for disaster aid .
We also need space surveillance to monitor our space infrastructure and protect our satellites .
Here we should develop a common European system .
We need an early warning system for ballistic missiles and for communications and electronic intelligence .
A word on financing . We note that we are already spending a sizeable amount of the European budget on security , firstly on security research , secondly on GMES , the satellite observation system , which also has security connotations , and now on Galileo .
We are in fact spending EUR 750 m of the budget on security aspects .
Perhaps we should consider whether European budget funds could not also be made available for the other planned projects I mentioned .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , space policy will play a very important role over the next six months , as it is one of the French Presidency 's priorities .
The Commission finds that most welcome .
All of us here know , of course , that space is a fascinating topic .
We see it today as we follow the scientific adventures of the Phoenix Mars probe , as we did a few months ago with the successful installation of the European Columbus Laboratory module in the International Space Station .
I must add that over and above its major achievements , space technology is offering a growing number of instruments we need in order to achieve our policy aims .
That applies to environmental policy , transport policy , agricultural policy , but also to major external policy areas such as development policy , humanitarian aid and international aid for disasters and , of course - and this brings me to the subject Mr von Wogau has successfully kept on the agenda for many years , for which the Commission is most grateful to him - space policy and European security .
The Commission described the importance of space applications for the European Security and Defence Policy in its communication on European space policy last year .
I agree with the rapporteur that the two are closely linked .
The Commission therefore welcomes this report on space and security with its proposals and details about specific initiatives and measures .
I would like to discuss a few points in more detail .
The report stresses that the European Union is allocating more than EUR 5 billion to financing space projects under the current financial perspective .
The lion 's share of that goes to applications of the GMES system - Global Monitoring for Environment and Security - which will soon be given its own and , in my view , very attractive brand name , like Galileo .
That will happen in September .
The potential applications of GMES are also most important to the European Security and Defence Policy .
I want to leave no room for doubt here , so that we do not repeat the mistakes of the past : GMES has a multi-use potential , we do not deny that , and this multi-use potential should and must also be used sensibly , to avoid duplication and unnecessary costs .
That is the only way we can ensure that our space industry is competitive and that we develop its technology .
My next point is most important to the Commission , in the context also of our experiences with Galileo .
If we want to make GMES services available for the long term , we need a permanent operational financial basis .
We do not have that at present .
We are still at the development stage and are funding GMES from research and development resources .
We will be entering the operational stage very soon , however , and then we will have to be prepared to draw the necessary conclusions from what we have jointly decided so far , not just specifically in relation to space policy but also on the basis of the European budget .
It would make little sense to spend billions on developing a technology and then not want to finance it once we are in a position to apply it .
If we want a long-term , operational financing basis - and I am speaking without any reservations here - then we must incorporate space projects that are relevant to security and defence .
That brings me to a second point .
We agree that there is a close link between space and security and defence policy .
We should , therefore , make optimum use of the synergies between space and civilian and military security , both in the field of technology and in the operational field .
I am , therefore , very glad that the report encourages strong inter-pillar cooperation , i.e. between the Commission , the Council , the European Defence Agency and the European Union Satellite Centre .
I would also stress that we must look at the whole spectrum of the question of space and its links to European security and defence policy , while respecting the provisions of the Treaties - the Commission would never touch them and has said quite clearly that we cannot finance any European defence measures or measures of a military nature out of the EU budget .
The Commission very much welcomes the fact that the report also addresses aspects of foreign and security policy in the stricter sense of the term , such as the development of a code of conduct for space activities or the potential of satellites to monitor international arms control agreements .
A central concern of our policy is the use of space for purely peaceful purposes .
The European Union - and here I can refer to various European Parliament resolutions - supports every initiative to prevent the weaponisation of space .
That is also why the Commission welcomes the European Space Agency 's intention to develop an instrument to that end , called space situational awareness , that can not only verify the observance of the relevant agreements but also monitor the security of our satellites .
We will be discussing how to coordinate that with the Community 's activities in a few days ' time at a meeting between the ministers responsible for space affairs , the French Presidency and the Commission to be held in Kourou , our European spaceport in French Guiana .
The report on space and security clarifies the security challenges that will face Europe in the coming years .
We should see this as an opportunity to make Europe more capable of action and more competitive .
An innovative European space policy and a common European security and defence policy can bring us some way towards achieving that .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - ( SL ) The European space policy is exceptionally important for two reasons : firstly , because it contributes to greater security , and secondly , because it contributes to the pursuance of development targets prescribed by the Lisbon Strategy for growth and jobs .
It was primarily this aspect that we in the Committee on Industry focused our attention on .
We are delighted that , in its chapter on research and technological development , the Lisbon Treaty provides a legal basis for the European space policy .
We will carefully examine the proposals for a European space programme which the Commission is to draw up , and we will then adopt a position on them .
We must also define relations with the European Space Agency accordingly .
I am also delighted that , on this very day , the relevant regulation has been signed guaranteeing a practical start-up of the EGNOS and Galileo programmes .
Our experience with these two programmes will enable us to agree on how to manage other programmes .
We must now prepare and establish in practice an environment in which it will be easier for us to make effective use of new systems and as wide a variety of applications as possible , without limiting ourselves too narrowly in advance .
Ladies and gentlemen , space is a natural shared asset and not just the property of one nation or community .
That is why , when we are developing future European legislation , we must also take into account the international framework .
Here I mean the existing United Nations treaties as well as the principles of space legislation .
Finally , I should also like to thank the rapporteur for his cooperation and for taking account of the Industry Committee 's views , and I am convinced that by working in this manner we can still achieve much more .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , thank you Mr von Wogau for a good , clear report .
Let me begin with something that at first sight does not seem to have much to do with space , namely the Balkan war .
We eventually realised that Europe made quite a lot of mistakes during the various conflicts in the Balkans during the 1990s .
Europe did not make those mistakes because of a bad common foreign and security policy , but because of the total absence of a common foreign and security policy .
There are still people who oppose both a common foreign and security policy and the areas the report deals with .
I share Mr von Wogau 's view that satellite surveillance systems should be financed from the European budget , not just because such systems can be used for security purposes , but also because they can be used for other purposes in which we have a common interest , for example the environment .
I would also emphasise that , in these important , but also sensitive , issues to which the space dimension of European security responds , it is good to have a system which is not dependent on the USA , which builds upon increased cooperation between the Member States and which makes better use of resources .
A system such as the one described in this report is also a guarantee that in the future we may better manage any conflicts , which we do not want in Europe but nevertheless may find ourselves having to deal with .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I congratulate our fellow member , Karl von Wogau , on this report and on the tireless way in which he has supported the deepening of the European project through the construction of a European defence policy .
The report strikes an appropriate balance between what should be the main objectives of a European policy in the field of space and security .
First , the capital importance of using all diplomatic and political channels to prevent the weaponisation of space , as emphasised by Commissioner Verheugen , so that space can continue to be used as a public asset for all humanity .
Second , to equip Europe with the policies , financial resources and equipment needed to ensure its strategic autonomy on the international stage .
With regard to the first objective , it is important to emphasise that we are not talking here about the use of space for military ends .
We know that , from the beginning of space exploration , satellites have been used to support the armed forces of various countries in the area of communications .
Some of our fellow Members persist in confusing this type of operation , which is compatible with international law , with recent attempts by some , especially the United States , to put arms into space and transform it into a fourth battlefield , in addition to land , sea and air .
It is such warlike strategies and other unacceptable initiatives , such as China 's anti-satellite test in January 2007 , that must be combated .
The report responds to these threats by seeking a pro-active diplomatic role for the European Union .
It is Europe 's task to lead a global strategy that seeks to equip the international community with an effective legal architecture that guarantees the total exclusion of arms from space , through the revision and strengthening of the Outer Space Treaty .
With regard to the second objective , the report warns against neglecting the crucial importance of space for Europe 's strategic autonomy .
As the Galileo project showed , an overwhelming majority of MEPs believe that sharing financial and technological resources and equipment among Europeans is the only way for Europe to avoid dependence on the United States , Russia and China for vital strategic activities , such as navigation .
The report also underlines the importance , frequently ignored or feared , of Galileo and other European national programmes for a serious common foreign and security policy .
Without the peaceful and effective use of space , our economies , transport systems and meteorology and our whole way of life would be impossible .
Europe must think strategically about this important area , in the same way as Washington , Beijing and Moscow do .
Think and act .
It is with this in mind that I very much regret that the Council Presidency is not here for this debate .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , paragraph 41 of the report reads : ' urges that under no circumstances should European space policy contribute to the militarisation and weaponisation of space ' .
So far so good .
Yet the entire report contradicts that statement .
It actually lists military measures .
Paragraph 5 , for instance , states that there is a need for telecommunications , information management , observation and navigation in the military area .
The report even underlines the necessity of the Galileo satellite project , which is quite clearly a civilian project , for autonomous ESDP operations .
I am grateful to Mr Verheugen for clarifying the budgetary aspects again .
The European Union 's current Treaty provides quite clearly that the EU budget cannot be used for military purposes .
That is why the GUE / NGL Group has tabled amendments to rectify the legal situation , to the effect that space may be used only for explicitly civilian purposes and that Galileo is an explicitly civilian project .
Looking at the other amendments tabled , it is interesting to see how contradictory some of them are .
My favourite was the amendment by the Greens , which begins by stressing that Galileo must remain a space project for civilian purposes and continues by nonetheless acknowledging its importance for autonomous ESDP operations .
That is clearly a contradiction in terms .
We should make it quite clear that the issue here is the militarisation of space by the European Union .
It is easy to keep pointing the finger at others who are ( also ) pursuing the militarisation of space .
Such military use is precisely what we do not want to see !
That is why the content of this report , taken as a whole , as it is worded , is wrong , because it calls for precisely that militarisation .
We reject that .
We want space to be used for civilian purposes and want Galileo to remain a purely civilian project .
We have now shifted the burden onto the taxpayer - EUR 3.4 billion - with this latest call for tender .
We keep saying we want a system that is independent of the USA , but now Boeing is clearly interested in this tender , so that does not seem quite true any more either .
We want the purely civilian use of space , no militarisation !
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , this report opens by saying ' the various political and security challenges which the European Union is increasingly facing make an autonomous European Space Policy a strategic necessity ' .
If you accept this opening proposition at face value then of course the report 's recommendations follow as a logical consequence : a common European space policy , the implementation of the European security and defence policy , the use of the Galileo satellite system for military purposes , and , of course , a budget to pay for it all .
But if we do not accept the proposition , the logic falls apart .
There are indeed political and security challenges facing the continent of Europe , but why should the European Union have an autonomous space and security and defence policy ?
As far as the overwhelming majority of its citizens are concerned , the European Union is not , and should not be , a political state .
And only states legitimately have security policies and military capabilities .
As the report says , the Lisbon Treaty includes a legal basis for the European space policy and the possibility for permanent structured cooperation on security and defence .
But of course , legally , the Lisbon Treaty is dead .
It was killed by the Irish ' no ' vote in the recent referendum , so the implementation of a space and security and defence policy should also be dead .
Space and security and defence policy would of course require a common communication system , and the report underlines the necessity for Galileo to be used for an autonomous European security and defence policy .
But until recently we were told that Galileo was for civilian purposes only .
Finally it has to be admitted that its real use is for EU military purposes .
The report also wants it both ways .
It wants an EU space programme linked to the security and defence policy but at the same time says that the space policy should not contribute to the militarisation and weaponisation of space .
Of course space will be militarised and weaponised .
That is inevitable .
It will be done by the USA , probably by Russia and in due course certainly by China .
The security interests of the West should be represented in space not by an illegitimate European Union but with our ally the USA , in partnership with the only legitimate security organisation that has the democratic backing of the people of Europe , NATO .
( LT ) My congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau , who has prepared a very important and topical report .
In my opinion , the report could be summarised as follows : more peace in space , better cooperation between the EU Member States and other countries , and more funding for common space projects .
I approve of the proposed amendments , which once again highlight Galileo 's importance as a strictly civilian project and reject any possibility of using space for military purposes .
More and more countries are becoming involved in space projects , with space having started to play an increasingly large role in our lives .
Military and civilian satellite systems intended for Earth observation as well as telecommunications , navigation , positioning and timing have become our eyes and ears .
Geopolitical classics stated long ago , that ' whoever dominates space dominates the world . '
The European Union does not aim to achieve superiority .
The multipolar world in which the rights of all nations are secured is much more attractive .
Having combined their power in space , the 27 EU Member States would increase their potential to carry out successful independent civil and preventive operations pursuing common foreign and security policy .
It could give the EU an important advantage in observing arms expansion and monitoring the implementation of international agreements .
The EU countries have created several space projects for the purpose of increasing their security .
To avoid wasteful duplication , it would be better to make full use of the potential offered by these systems and reduce the cost of Earth surveillance .
The telecommunications satellite sector should undergo more effective standardisation .
We need more intensive interaction between space projects developed by the EU .
The EU should allocate more substantial funds and have a common budget to prevent individual countries from wasting their efforts and resources .
Meanwhile , the forthcoming negotiations on the EU-Russia strategic partnership provide us with a good opportunity to organise even more productive cooperation in space , undoubtedly seeking to expand strategic cooperation in common space programmes with the United States and NATO in every possible way .
( FR ) Mr President , I asked to speak when I heard Mrs Ibrisagic describe the crisis which occurred in the Balkans , in which , as you probably remember , I was involved .
At the time , our former fellow Member Jean-François Deniau said , ' Europe died at Sarajevo ' , and I replied , ' Europe did not die at Sarajevo because Europe does not exist ' .
Europe still does not exist , and I congratulate our fellow Member Mr von Wogau for battling , as he has done since becoming Chairman of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , to ensure that Europe fulfils the expectations expressed not only outside Europe , in every corner of the world , but also within Europe , where , as you know , 70 % of our fellow citizens are calling on Europe to take its place on the international stage and prove worthy of its heritage .

( FR ) Mr President , since there are not very many of us here , I too will take advantage of the opportunity to add , in the same spirit as Mr Morillon , that people actually expect a great deal from Europe and even today - as Mr von Wogau knows - Georgia , a country which is covered by our neighbourhood policy , is almost on the brink of war .
Every day there are confrontations between Georgia and the separatist region of Abkhazia .
I would say that the situation is becoming worse with every hour that passes .
Moreover , this afternoon we have received an urgent appeal from the Georgian authorities , urging the European Union to become involved in resolving this conflict , and this just goes to show how much we need Europe .
When we introduce a neighbourhood policy , then we must also take it upon ourselves to put it into practice .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as was only to be expected , this debate has focussed very clearly on the really crucial issues .
We should talk about them openly because we are dealing here with reality and not wishful thinking .
The reality is quite simple .
The traditional patterns of conflict are no longer what they once were .
The traditional distinction between internal and external security is becoming increasingly blurred .
For instance , not everybody in this Chamber will agree with the American view that the fight against terrorism is a war .
Yet most Americans share that view .
The technology used to maintain internal security , especially to combat international crime and terrorism , is tending more and more to come from the same research centres and the same enterprises and also to be used for the same purpose , although with different fields of application .
We must clearly recognise that we need to draw the boundaries elsewhere , namely in the place where the political decisions on the use of instruments are taken .
At this point let me state quite clearly : the Treaty applies here .
General Morillon - if I may use Mr Morillon 's title here , given that he referred to his important role in the Balkans - has drawn our attention to that again .
There have been European operations to prevent conflict , resolve conflicts and avoid conflicts for a long time .
I do not need to call any senior officers as witnesses , since everybody here knows that those who are responsible for the safety of European soldiers sent on these missions rely heavily on having an exact and precise picture of the situation .
Under today 's conditions it is no longer possible to obtain that kind of picture without the use of space technology , because otherwise the other side would have it .
We would be putting our own forces in extreme danger and making them less effective if we said that for reasons of principle we Europeans could not allow such a thing .
I want to draw attention to these problems again to show that I am very much aware of them .
They relate both to our space policy and to the area of security research .
I can only urge Parliament to see its role as also ensuring that in this difficult situation in which we find ourselves , where things are not just black and white but there is also a large grey area , we still proceed in a manner that does not compromise our values and our principles .

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to take up what Mr Verheugen said and also answer Mr Pflüger and Mr Batten on the question of what the citizens of the European Union want .


Eurobarometer surveys show that 70 % to 80 % of EU citizens believe we need a common security and defence policy .
That became particularly clear with the terrible events in the Balkans .
The 27 European countries spend EUR 170 billion a year on defence , yet these countries were unable to put an end to the bloodshed in the Balkans because we simply do not yet have a common European organisation for such operations .
There were German , French , British , Italian , Luxembourgish and other forces , yet at the time it was only the Americans , not the Europeans , who had the capability to put an end to the bloodshed .
Mr Morillon saw that with his own eyes and experienced it very much in person .
It is also quite wrong to refer to weapons in space here .
What threat is there ?
If , for instance , we station Galileo or observation satellites in space to find out what is happening , it is done for the security of our citizens .
The real danger is that weapons are stationed in space and used to destroy our communications satellites , because then our entire social system could be disrupted by relatively minor means .
Just imagine what would happen if the telecommunications satellites for TV , for radio , for everything that makes up our society today , were destroyed .
That is why I believe we are on the right track , including with Galileo .
We will probably find at the vote tomorrow that there has been a change of mind in the European Parliament .
The first step was that we managed to get Galileo financed out of the European budget .
The Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Foreign Affairs urged this very strongly and managed to obtain it .
The second step is that Galileo is of course a civilian project , somewhat different in type from the American system , but that it is also necessary and that it is available for operations by EU forces in , for instance , Congo , Bosnia and Herzegovina or Chad .
I believe , therefore , that tomorrow will see a change in the majority view in the European Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 10 July 2008 .
EC / Mauritania Fisheries Partnership Agreement for the period 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2012 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Carmen Fraga Estévez , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the period 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2012 - C6-0199 / 2008 - .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to say that , once again , we have worked very hard in the Committee on Fisheries so that the Commission and the European Union can honour their commitments .
It was perhaps the Commission 's initial lack of interest in the negotiations that led to some of the criticisms in the report about the procedure that was followed , despite the fact that Mauritania continues to be one of the European Union 's major fishing partners and despite the fact that the financial contribution is still one of the largest and involves ever-greater commitments towards developing the Community fisheries sector .
It is therefore difficult to understand why the text that has been negotiated entails a big reduction in the permissible catch of between 25 % and 50 % for almost all categories of fish and why , in addition to the technical measures , conditions have been accepted which for us are difficult to understand .
As we have said on several occasions in this forum , and as Europêche said in a letter to you , Mr Borg , there is not much point in negotiating marvellous fishing opportunities - which is not the case in this Agreement - if we then accept technical conditions which prevent us being able to take proper advantage of those possibilities .
The minimum size set for octopus bears no relation to the size set for adjacent areas ; the additional two-month biological recovery period negotiated at the last minute , virtually unbeknown to the fisheries sector , was based on a poor quality scientific report and was introduced at the request of the Mauritanian party without the necessary prior consultation of the joint scientific committee ; it is based solely on cephalopods , despite the fact that the recovery period affects all categories .
All of this is a disturbing indication of how the European Commission sometimes negotiates .
It is for this reason , Mr President , Mr Borg , that we must renew our insistence on greater involvement for the European Parliament , at least as an observer at the joint committee meetings , as a minimum institutional transparency requirement , which should have been met some time ago .
It would not be a bad thing , given the new powers which we hope the European Parliament will acquire with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty - which was imminent and I am convinced must take place soon - for the Council and the Commission to prepare themselves for involving Parliament in a role which , sooner or later , it will be called upon to fulfil .
We also hinted in the report that we were disappointed that the Commission , and here I am afraid that I have to disagree with you , Mr Borg , had failed to respect the relative stability of the Agreement , by giving itself powers to relax a criterion which on other occasions it has regarded as virtually sacrosanct , an action which we will keep a very close watch on , as our remit demands .

I hope that in the case to which you referred , that of cephalopods , the allocation keys based on relative stability and on the historic fishing rights in this fishing ground will be respected .
We will be very keen to know the outcome of the meetings which have been scheduled in various fora and joint committees to resolve some of the technical questions to which I referred in the report and which can , as is still the case in Morocco , tie up a fleet which desperately needs access to the fishing opportunities for which it is paying large amounts of money .
Despite all this , with its duration increased to four years , as you said , this protocol continues , along with the Morocco protocol , to be the most important fisheries collaboration between the European Union and developing countries , and for this reason we obviously seek a vote against the two new amendments proposed and swift approval of the Commission proposal .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) The fisheries agreement with Mauritania , concluded as recently as 1 August 2006 , was due to be extended this year .
On 14 December last year the Commission suddenly suggested that it should be terminated since the fishing opportunities were not being fully used by the European fishing fleet , particularly those relating to small pelagic species .
This came as a great surprise to us .
Partly at the urging of Parliament itself talks were held to re-negotiate the fisheries protocol .
The new protocol now put to us by the Commission represents very rigorous cuts compared with the old one .
Not only are the fishing opportunities for species not fully taken up in previous years cut , but there are severe cuts for all fish species : 25 % for cephalopods , 10 to 50 % for demersal species and 43 % for pelagics , whilst the financial compensation paid to Mauritania remains unchanged or only slightly reduced in the years ahead .
We wonder if these cuts were really necessary and what was the rationale behind them , especially since the fishery sector is currently experiencing great difficulties due to the crisis over fuel prices and the cuts in fishing opportunities .
There would thus seem to be no obvious reason to limit fishing opportunities further , certainly when there was no biological or scientific need to do so .
The fishery sector must be able to use any fishing opportunity there is just at present .
One possibility , for example , might be to switch the Mediterranean tuna fishery to Mauritania .
The Dutch pelagic fishing fleet is also hit by the proposed restrictions , especially on pollock , herring and mackerel .
So much for Mauritania .
A brief word or two on the Commission 's proposals .
I am very happy with these , if not with the proposals on Mauritania .
I think there are many useful pointers for adapting the fleet in response to the fuel crisis and I hope that these new measures will be enough to prevent job losses in the sector .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , the noteworthy fact about this new protocol is that although its duration has been extended from two to four years , fishing opportunities have been reduced .
The allocation of licences under the protocol for category 5 ( cephalopods ) , which gives Spain 24 licences , will not please the Spanish administration because that number is not enough to satisfy the applications from the sector directly affected by this category .
The Council has the power to decide on a new allocation of licences , taking utilisation into account .
However , in this case it has not been based on averages but on the period between late 2007 and early 2008 , when the situation engendered by the disputes with Mauritania , due to the use of certain technical measures , led to a large part of the European fleet being reluctant to conclude this Agreement , due to the fear of boarding , as happened in the first quarter of 2008 .
Since the new protocol has solved the technical problems and opened up a more secure procedure for settling technical differences between the parties , that will surely lead to a greater number of vessels wanting to access this fishing ground , which is becoming safer by the day , and therefore offering more guarantees , than in the previous protocol .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when it comes to fisheries agreements , we Greens have an interpretation which is slightly different from those of the other groups .
We regard fisheries agreements as falling not only under the heading of purely and strictly commercial agreements , but also under the heading of European policies .
That is why I shall be referring to the opinion of the Committee on Development , which also emphasises our commitments on providing development aid and supporting democracy and good governance .
The question which we have already asked in the discussions within the Committee on Fisheries is why the Commission has threatened to terminate the fisheries agreements with Mauritania barely a year after they were signed .
As far as we are concerned , fisheries agreements are not merely agreements in which we are allowed to utilise a resource and pay for it , and when we utilise less we pay less .
No , we are cutting fishing opportunities because the European fishing fleet has utilised less in the areas concerned .
Yet is it Mauritania 's responsibility , is it Mauritania 's fault , if the European fleet has gone elsewhere for certain fishing categories ?
We have always asked that fisheries resources be respected in other fisheries agreements , and we have always said that too much was being utilised and that in any case there would come a time when resources would be reduced .
This is exactly what is happening at the moment .
We agree with the Commission that resources should be restored to the level at which fishing is viable , and that that is a good thing .
However , there is something else which we certainly do not agree with .
During the discussions which took place we asked what would happen when the compensation is reduced in line with the level of fishing , so that the compensation would be reduced from EUR 86 million to EUR 70 million , which would mean that Mauritania 's income would be reduced by EUR 40 million over a period of three years .
You told us , ' There is no problem .
We cannot switch from the fishing quota to something different , and decide to work on development instead ' .
We understand this too , and you undertook , on behalf of the Commission , to ensure that there would be compensation for those EUR 40 million as part of development policy .
Yet today , in this agreement , we cannot see any sign of this compensation except in a footnote which says that the possibility of compensation exists .
So we do not believe in this compensation , and I think that you have deceived Mauritania to some extent in this agreement , because no provision has been made for the agreed compensation .
If you will permit , I should just like to remind you that when I was head of the EU mission covering the elections in Mauritania , the European Union undertook to support this young democracy , yet our first political act is to threaten to terminate the fisheries agreements .
This is not , in my opinion , a policy of development aid , and I should really like to know what guarantee you can give us , as MEPs , regarding this compensation for the reduction decided on .
( FR ) Mr President , the fisheries agreement between Europe and Mauritania , about which our fellow Member and friend Mrs Fraga Estévez has written a report , covers one of the richest regions of the world in terms of fish stocks .
That is why , for example , in Dakhla , the former Spanish capital Villa Cisneros , in that part of Western Sahara now under Moroccan control , there is a 40 km sea inlet which is called the Rio de Oro , or Gold River , because of the reflection of sunlight on the scales of the shoals of fish .
In the past , this abundance of fish has actually caused us problems with Morocco .
Now we are having to tackle a similar problem , but one which concerns fishing in Mauritania from 2008 to 2012 .
This is an area where octopus and cephalopod stocks , for example , may decline , hence the biological recovery period , but where , conversely , it is essential to fish for sardines , since the sardine is a predator of the octopus .
In practical terms , this means first of all distributing the fishing quotas , the licences , between five European countries , including Spain , obviously , and Italy , but also Portugal , Mr President , and there are some other vessels , freezer trawlers , perhaps from the Baltic States .
After that , it is a matter of reducing catches from approximately 400 000 tons to 250 000 tonnes because , strangely enough , these quotas are not being used , and this also applies to Moroccan-controlled Western Sahara , which is something , General Morillon , that our Mediterranean tuna fishermen can only dream about .
In Mauritania , the average use of fishing opportunities ranges from 90 % for crustaceans to a mere 22 % for tuna .
As in all these agreements and protocols , there is obviously a financial contribution which is paid for the right to fish , and which is round EUR 300-305 million over four years , at the rate of EUR 70 or 80 million a year .
Mr Borg has told us how important this contribution is , since it represents approximately 15 % of Mauritania 's annual budget .
This operation is also advantageous for Mauritania because the contribution remains at more or less the same level whereas catches , by contrast , are declining .
Nevertheless , the Mauritanians are causing a serious problem by their harassment of our vessels , and by the boardings which they carry out simply in order to collect fines along the way , although it is true that the European Commission , as Mrs Isler Béguin reminded us just now , has not been particularly sympathetic here , and is now putting pressure on the Mauritanian Government .
Although fishing is obviously very important in these areas , on the Moroccan side , for example in Dakhla , the fish is exported to Brazil and provides a living for the entire town , hence the concern , on the part of the FAO and the ACP countries , to have a sustainable fishing industry and a code of good conduct .
Mr President , perhaps in spite of the conduct of the European Commission , which has not always been very ' good ' during these negotiations with the young democracy of Mauritania , we should nevertheless welcome this agreement , because it is perhaps one of the last that we shall obtain in this region , now that Morocco wants to preserve and resume control of its natural resources .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we had great hopes that renegotiation of the protocol to the Agreement with Mauritania might be able to make up for the previous poor negotiation ; we also thought that it would serve to rectify the unsatisfactory outcome to the negotiation of the Morocco Agreement for the commercially important cephalopod fleet , which has huge socioeconomic significance in Galicia and has therefore been suffering the effects of these two poorly negotiated agreements , in addition to the general crisis in the fisheries sector .
However , it was not to be , and so we cannot praise or congratulate the Commission on this outcome .
In general , there is a huge reduction in fishing opportunities and financial compensation is not tailored to that reduction .
Little heed has been paid to the sector affected , and the technical measures which have been agreed , besides being ambiguous , are prejudicial to the Community fleet .
In the case of cephalopods , the minimum size for octopus , as the report said , is the highest in the region , and there is no need for it , with the result that this cephalopod fleet has effectively been finished off and , as if that were not enough , the allocation of licences is damaging to relative stability , which is harmful to the Spanish fleet .
As you will understand , Mr Borg , although we very much regret the fact , all these considerations mean that we cannot congratulate you on the results achieved in this case , because I believe that they could and should have been much better .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all I would like to thank you for the interesting comments and the debate that we have had .
I would like to pick up on a couple of points that have been raised .
First of all you are correct to point out that there are fewer fishing opportunities under this revised protocol .
This was precisely the reason behind our decision to effect a renegotiation , because we needed to ensure maximum utilisation of the fishing opportunities , whereas under the previous situation there was significant under-utilisation of the fishing possibilities both with regard to small pelagics and with regard to cephalopods .
On the issue of technical requirements , for example with regard to dredges , we hope that we will find a solution quickly to this issue , and the Mauritanian authorities are very well disposed to finding a solution to the satisfaction of both sides .
Regarding rest periods , this request came originally from the industry since they maintain that , after such rest periods , catches become more profitable .
On the question of setting the minimum size for octopus at 500 g , I need to make the point that we are dealing with a third country , a sovereign nation , Mauritania , and its own regulation specifies that the minimum size for octopus is 500 g .
This was a line we could not cross during negotiations : one cannot ask a third country to change its legislation because it is interesting to our own fishermen to catch smaller-sized cephalopods .
However , we do recognise that there is not one harmonised regulation on the subject in the region .
There are other countries which allow catches of cephalopods of smaller size , and therefore a decision on this matter should be taken within the COPACE organisation .
On the issue of allocation keys , i.e. what is known as ' relative stability ' , as I said before the Commission is not bound to transfer relative stability from one agreement to another or from one protocol to another .
However , it is provided for in the agreement and in the protocol that , should Member States need more opportunities , and should such requests be based on science , on the state of the stock , then such requests could certainly be considered , and I would undertake to take them up with Mauritania in order to negotiate increases , as in the case for example of cephalopods , if there is a specific request to do so .
I need to make the point that with regard to cephalopods licences were utilised on 22 occasions and in the new protocol there is provision for 25 , so we are actually catering for creating a buffer , allowing for utilisation .
If the particular Member State involved maintains that they have requests in excess of 25 , as long as they give us the specific facts , we will take those up with Mauritania in order to bring about an increase , always as long as the state of the stock allows .
I need to underline the fact that with regard to cephalopods we do have problems concerning the sustainability and the health of the stock .
Again on the question of this whole issue of relative stability , I would also like to point out that one cannot have one 's cake and eat it .
On one hand , when it comes to the allocation of cephalopods , the allocation seems not to please one particular Member State .
But then when it comes to tuna where there is a significant increase of allocations for that same Member State , then that works out in the Member State 's favour and we have received no complaints in that regard .
Concerning the reason for the denunciation and the renegotiation of the protocol , namely that it was under-utilised , again I would like to make the point made by Mrs Isler Béguin that such agreements are not only about fisheries but also about development assistance .
In fact , whereas we have decreased the financial component for fishing opportunities , there is a clear undertaking on our part to increase the development component , and we are fully committed to respect this .
Therefore , in total , the financial allocation has been maintained over the four-year term .
The budgetary support to the 10th EDF will compensate for the remaining EUR 40 million for 2009 / 10-2012 at the rate of EUR 10 million per year and this means that Mauritania will be receiving a financial package which , when you take into account both what they are receiving by way of compensation for fishing opportunities - which have been reduced on the basis of what was actually being fished in Mauritanian waters - and the increase to the budgetary support through the 10th EDF ad hoc compensation within this protocol , we end up with a situation where the total package is equivalent to the fishing package that they had under the previous financial protocol .
Finally on the issue of boarding I would like to say that a meeting of the working group will be held this Sunday , this weekend , in order to discuss this specific issue and to agree on recommendations and guidelines that should solve the issue .
On the point made by Mrs Fraga at the very outset concerning participation of MEPs , the Commission considers that the same approach that is followed for the participation of MEPs in bilateral negotiations has to be followed as regards joint committees where the two parties are officially represented .
The Commission will , however , continue to cooperate with Parliament on the basis of the framework agreement that exists .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I will try to be systematic .
In the first place , with regard to the point made by Mrs Isler Béguin , I would point out that the funds for development cooperation increase over the four years that the protocol is in force .
It is the total financial contribution which is being reduced by 19 % , but amounts allocated to development cooperation are increasing to EUR 11 million , EUR 16 million , EUR 18 million and EUR 20 million , so as far as development cooperation is concerned you need have no worries , because those amounts are actually being increased .
Mr Borg , as regards the minimum size for octopus , and since the technical measures are important for take-up of fishing opportunities , I would say that this is not a problem which needs to be dealt with at this juncture .
You know very well that the matter is still pending .
I keep on saying this : the size is the highest in the whole region .
The Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic ( CECAF ) said at its meeting this year that a common minimum size should be set for the whole region and I think that here the Commission should make an effort to ensure that this matter ceases to be an issue .
The report drawn up by the Mauritanian scientific committee states that in November , for example , 50 % of the catch in the Mauritanian fishing ground can be octopus of between 300 and 500 grams , in other words there is a problem with minimum size in the Mauritanian fishing ground and elsewhere .
With regard to relative stability , I am not going to get into an argument with you , but this is a topic which we have discussed in Parliament , one which is in the basic regulation which we have been discussing along with the regulation of licences for third countries , but the initial allocation is another matter .
The initial allocation needs to respect historical rights and then if , under that allocation , fishing opportunities are not taken up , the Commission may , I agree , give them to whoever wants them and applies for them , but initially it is the historical rights which must be respected and , in the case of category five in Mauritania , this has not been the case , Mr Borg .
I will not elaborate any further .
I could answer more questions , but I think that , even though I cannot see very well without my glasses , I have run out of time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , 10 July 2008 .
Common consular instructions : biometric identifiers and visa applications ( debate )
The next item is the report by Sarah Ludford , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Common Consular Instructions on visas for diplomatic missions and consular posts in relation to the introduction of biometrics including provisions on the organisation of the reception and processing of visa applications - C6-0166 / 2006 - .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , in my opinion , the vote on this proposal is taking place at a stage in the discussions where perhaps not all the options for achieving agreement at first reading have been sufficiently explored .
Following the adoption of the draft report by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 29 November 2007 , the Slovenian Presidency tried to reach a consensus between Member States on the rewording of several aspects of the text , so as to take into account the concerns expressed by the European Parliament .
In spite of this , there was disagreement with the report adopted by the Committee on three major issues .
The first of these was the age limit for obtaining fingerprints , the second was the diplomatic and consular immunity granted to the premises of external service providers , and the third was the conditions for using such external service providers , together with the question of visa fees .
On these three issues , the Slovenian Presidency proposed new wording to take into account Parliament 's amendments .
At the tripartite ministerial talks on 17 June , the discussion essentially concentrated on the issue of diplomatic and consular immunity for external service providers , and its corollary , the transmission of data , without any agreement being reached .
The other subjects were not discussed .
Since then , there has been no new debate within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
On the extremely sensitive subject of the age limit for fingerprinting , the additional technical information provided to the rapporteur by the Commission confirms the technical reliability of taking fingerprints of children from the age of six .
Nevertheless , the Commission supports the Presidency 's proposal that fingerprints should be taken from children between the ages of six and twelve only for verification purposes and not for identification in the VIS ( Visa Information System ) .
In addition , the Commission has also undertaken to carry out the study requested by the European Parliament .
Moreover , I note that this solution seems to have been chosen for the proposal on passports , on which the European Parliament has to make a decision .
It seems to me , therefore , that it would be useful to continue discussions on this point , in order to find out whether this suggestion might meet with Parliament 's approval .
Another issue concerns the use of external service providers .
The conditions in which Member States may use such service providers , as a last resort , have been specified , and a list of requirements to be complied with has been drawn up , based on Parliament 's amendments .
Discussions on this subject should also continue .
I should like to remind you that the adoption of this amendment to the common consular instructions constitutes an essential prerequisite for the implementation of the VIS .
Even though the regulation and decision establishing the VIS were adopted at first reading following an agreement between Parliament and the Council , it is true to say that if the present proposal has to go to a second reading this will run the risk of compromising the launch of the VIS in May 2009 .
It is therefore essential to reach a rapid overall compromise on this proposal .
Well , I am here , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to confirm the Commission 's commitment to continuing the negotiations and discussions , particularly , of course , with your rapporteur Baroness Ludford , and also with the Council , in order to achieve a satisfactory compromise in the coming months .
Once again , it seems to me that this compromise is something that is achievable , provided that the work is carried out thoroughly and that there is a sustained dialogue between the Council and Parliament , a dialogue which the Commission will obviously do its best to assist and encourage .
rapporteur . - Mr President , this is the third element of the Visa Information System ( VIS ) package .
In modifying the existing Common Consular Instructions , it provides , firstly , for the obligation to give the biometrics to be stored in the VIS and the standards for doing so and , secondly , for the organisation of the reception of visa applications .
It would , indeed , allow the VIS to start operations .
Although a complete revision of the visa rules is foreseen with the Visa Code on which my colleague , Henrik Lax , is rapporteur , the rationale for making a specific proposal separately is that the adoption of the Visa Code is likely to take even longer .
But it is important to ensure coherence between the two proposals .
I have been discussing and negotiating with the Council for a considerable period .
The Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs adopted my report last November and I am sorry I am not able to present a first-reading agreement today , but I believe that is partly because the Council has been rather slow , but also because it does not appear willing to respond with a real movement towards the points that we are making .
So I am asking my colleagues to endorse the report , as adopted in committee , and hopefully the new presidency will be able to persuade Member States to take our opinion more carefully into account .
I would cover the same ground as the Commissioner but would put the issues into four groups rather than three .
The first concerns what I see as the Council 's willingness to go forward with fingerprinting young children , while ignoring both the issues of principle and the significant costs and inconvenience for the parents with the problems of frequent changes of child fingerprints and also the problem of false matches or rejections .
I do not believe I have had full information from the Commission .
Secondly , what I feel is a lack of willingness to work together on the part of the Member States in trying to deal with the new challenge of organising the collection of biometrics together .
Thirdly , insufficient regard for data protection and data security : despite a series of data loss scandals , Member States are not sufficiently sensitised to safeguarding personal data from loss , interception by a third state or technical faults .
Lastly , the question of the visa fee .
I do not think it is right that Member States should make visa applicants pay for their own administrative choices by allowing commercial companies with which they make contracts for collecting biometrics to charge an extra fee on top of the visa fee .
I believe that , despite repeated requests , the Commission and Council have failed to provide credible substantive evidence supporting the proposals to start fingerprinting children from the age of six .
I think there could be considerable extra costs if you have to take them every two years .
So what we are proposing is to exempt children under 12 , initially , from the obligation to provide fingerprints , but have a review after three years , following a detailed study on the technical feasibility , reliability and proportionality of the taking of fingerprints from young children .
I believe that would be a sensible way forward .
On outsourcing , I have no problems with the general concept , in so far as it improves services for visa applicants and as long as it takes place under conditions ensuring the integrity of the visa-issuing process , that it is a last resort and that the service provider operates in the building under diplomatic protection , ensuring consular officials are present to supervise the staff of the service provider .
This would guarantee that data protection is ensured and the material protected from seizure , but I am not getting any concession from the Council on this point .
Also I am finding that Member States are not even willing to explore co-location with another Member State or a common application centre .
I will just finish by saying that I went for an opinion to the Article 29 Working Party of national data protection supervisors .
They pointed out a paradox whereby , while there is reinforcement of the reliability and security of visas by introducing biometrics on the other hand , if you have means of collection which are not of the same level of security as can be ensured in a consulate or consular section of an Embassy , this weakens the reliability of the whole process .
I will deal with any other points , particularly on the visa fee , in my concluding remarks .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission proposal to amend the Common Consular Instructions is urgently necessary in an EU of open borders .
My group strongly supports Sarah Ludford 's report .
I thank the rapporteur for the good cooperation , thanks to which the European Parliament 's Groups managed largely to agree on a joint text .
The Common Consular Instructions need to be redefined and adapted to the situation today .
In future applicants for visas will be identified beyond any doubt by the collection of biometric data such as photographs and fingerprints .
It became clear in the past that some Member States , among them Germany , were interpreting and applying the existing rules differently and therefore not uniformly .
In 2000 , for example , German consulates and embassies were instructed to be less bureaucratic in issuing visas and when in doubt to decide to grant a visa .
As a result of the generosity with which the German Embassy in Kiev tended to grant visas , the number of visas issued to Ukrainian nationals rose from about 150 000 in 1999 to about 300 000 in 2001 , which led to a considerable rise in illegal immigrants in the Schengen area .
It is therefore urgently necessary to ensure that all Member States apply the rules on issuing Schengen visas in a uniform manner .
My Group is in favour of seeking a compromise between the Council and the European Parliament , as Commissioner Barrot just suggested .
Our Group endorses nearly every point in Baroness Ludford 's report .
The only points we cannot endorse concern the age limit for children and fingerprinting .
We support the Commission 's proposal to set the age limit for children at six years .
My Group considers it most important to keep to that age limit in order to prevent child trafficking in the European Union .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to thank Baroness Ludford for her proposed report , which my Group fully endorses .
The European Union 's visa policy is a reflection of how we welcome people .
That is why we want to find a solution that will enable us to guarantee the security of European visas while respecting the fundamental rights of third-country nationals who apply for them , particularly with regard to the protection of personal data .
With this in mind , I hope that the Council can understand the European Parliament 's requirements .
We must find a solution which is acceptable to everyone .
I share the rapporteur 's concern about the outsourcing of the collection and processing of the biometric data inserted into the visas .
We do not believe that it is enough simply to validate the practices of Member States .
If we are to have a real common visa policy , it is essential that Member States study the feasibility of the other options proposed before resorting to outsourcing .
It is also our priority to ensure that the privacy of people who provide biometric data is protected .
We believe it is essential to define very clearly the contracts of the external service providers who might be collecting these biometric data .
Moreover , in order to guarantee the security of these data it seems to me absolutely vital that they should be collected on premises which enjoy real protection .
Regarding the age limit for the collection of biometric data , I do not have any ideological opinion on the subject .
However , I think that our present level of experience does not enable us to guarantee that the fingerprints of children less than 12 years old are sufficiently reliable to enable them to be collected in order to be used .
I think that that would give a false impression of security .
That is why I should like us to adopt a precautionary principle by fixing a lower age limit of 12 years for the collection of fingerprints , and that limit can then be revised , once we have at our disposal the independent study which the Commissioner has promised us , which will supply all the necessary information about the reliability of children 's fingerprints .
As for the price of visas , fixed of course by the Council , this should be a maximum price .
We cannot expect visa applicants to bear the financial burden of the additional requirements of the European Union .
Finally , I should like to say , Commissioner , that I appreciate the work that you have put into these negotiations , because the European Parliament wants its voice to be heard , and at the moment the Council does not seem to be listening to our basic arguments .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , first of all , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group I would like to thank to thank Ms Ludford for the excellent cooperation she demonstrated , as usual .
Nevertheless , a number of principal points make us very anxious .
We fully agree with the European Data Protection Supervisor that using biometrics in information systems is never an insignificant choice , especially when the system in question concerns such a huge number of individuals .
Therefore , in our opinion the VIS regulation itself would be a more appropriate place to include provisions specifying both general rules and exceptions .
Also the age under which the children are exempted from the obligation to provide fingerprints raises many questions , as we have heard .
Here we thank the rapporteur and other colleagues for the sensible decision to change it from 6 to 12 .
However , the scientific literature does not present evidence that fingerprinting of children below the age of 14 can provide for reliable identification .
The second problem is the outsourcing of visa applications .
Here we need to provide for the necessary safeguards to ensure data protection compliance .
Also , in this respect the rapporteur has managed to achieve significant progress if we compare the initial text of the Commission with the text suggested now .
Nevertheless , our group strongly opposes the extensive introduction of biometrics .
We believe that it has crucial implications for data security and for fundamental rights without highlighting any significant gains .
Also , recent events in Italy clearly show how easily the use of fingerprinting can become the abuse of power .
To sum up , we really appreciate the rapporteur 's efforts and her courage in order to achieve the best results .
Nevertheless , the Verts / ALE Group is very reluctant to accept any use of biometrics in the EU until its necessity is proven beyond reasonable doubt .
Therefore we cannot vote in favour of the report .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I am in favour of introducing uniform conditions for issuing visas in order to prevent what is called visa shopping .
I am , however , opposed on principle to including biometric data in visas , especially in the case of small children .
I find that totally inappropriate .
Moreover , we cannot propose to fingerprint six-year olds without , for instance , first being able to produce a broadly-based independent study on the use of fingerprints of children of that age and without knowing how long such children 's fingerprints can be kept in the first place .
I do not think we can or should pass laws on that kind of basis .
I also see problems with implementing the proposed new regulation .
All applicants , including children , are now supposed to appear in person at the consulate in order to be fingerprinted .
That may be too much to expect of people living in remote areas in large countries .
It could mean that the less well-off , especially families , will find it almost impossible to apply for a visa to travel to the European Union .
Is that really the image the European Union wants to project abroad ?
The Council and the Commission are trying to counter that by looking to the private sector .
They propose giving external service providers the right to receive visa applications and biometric data and forward them to the appropriate consulates .
The costs involved are then actually to be passed on to the applicants .
And that is not all !
In my view that is not the way to ensure that all these extremely sensitive data are kept safe and confidential .
It is , therefore , essential to ensure that outsourcing , which should in any case only be allowed under the most stringent conditions , is permitted only on premises that enjoy diplomatic protection .
On this issue , I emphatically support the rapporteur .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it was our intention with this initiative to guarantee interoperability between all Member States , ensure the same level of protection for personal data and equal treatment for all asylum seekers .
I particularly support the efforts to facilitate procedures for issuing visas to applicants through the one-stop shop principle , and with the collection of biometric identifiers , that is , a facial image and ten fingerprints from the applicants , for storage in a centralised Visa Information System ( VIS ) .
We should emphasise that these data will be used for identification , as Vice-President Barrot has already pointed out .
This is very different to what happens with European passports , where it is only permitted to take two fingerprints so they cannot be used for anything other than verification , that is , ' one-to-one ' comparison .
From this point of view , I welcome the European Commission 's willingness , as revealed just now in plenary by Vice-President Barrot , to cooperate by conducting the study requested by Parliament on the feasibility of taking the fingerprints of children .
Mr President , given that we are going to carry out a complete review of the Community Code on Visas , separate discussion of this specific proposal would only have made sense if it would have speeded up the process .
However , this objective will not achieved .
We will be voting tomorrow on a proposal on which no agreement was reached at first reading and that represents only the first phase of a slow process .
I therefore have serious doubts about the need to continue discussing this proposal separately , when its timetable seems to be very similar to that of the review of the code itself .
Mr President , just a quick point .
The greatest civil liberty we all have is life itself .
There is always a debate and polarisation when we are discussing issues around extra security measures - issues which might be perceived to be limiting what we generally refer to as civil liberties .
I just want to be sure that the Commissioner is satisfied that the necessary checks and balances will go hand in hand with what is before us here now ; to be sure that we are not going one step beyond what is actually warranted ; to ensure that we are only putting in place the security measures , the identification measures that the world we are living in today actually warrants .
We have just been reminded by my colleague Mr Coelho that failure to reach agreement on this at the first reading carries a huge message .
This is a very sensitive area and more and more our citizens are questioning the ' liberty ' - to use the word generically - being removed from them .
I finish on this point : the greatest civil liberty is life .
We must do all that is genuinely warranted to protect life in terms of security and extra measures .
I would like assurances from you that the checks and balances are there nonetheless .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I have listened carefully to the various speakers .
First of all I should just like to remind you of the information which has already been added to this file .
On the subject of children 's fingerprints , it was said that figures showed that the quality and reliability of fingerprints on a data base containing details of 1.5 million visa applicants were of a high standard , and I was told that a technical document supporting this position had been sent to Baroness Ludford .
However , for my own part I should like to assure you , in any case , that I am perfectly ready to launch the study which you have quite rightly asked for , so that we can really see how reliable these biometric data are , and also whether they are advisable or not .
I think that that is a very good idea .
I did wonder , Baroness Ludford , whether perhaps we might reach a compromise by making a distinction between the fingerprints taken from children between the ages of six and twelve , which would be used solely for verification purposes , and the fingerprints of children older than twelve , which could actually be used for other purposes .
Anyway , I shall continue to do what I can to reach a compromise with the new Presidency of the EU , by trying to ensure that Parliament 's wishes are taken into consideration to a greater extent .
On the second point , i.e. outsourcing , we have certainly had some concerns about the annex , which lists the minimum requirements to be included in contracts signed by Member States with external service providers .
The Commission had also issued a document listing the various technical methods for making data secure .
However , I appreciate your concerns about this issue of data security , and it is true that there could be a risk , in a third country , that data held at the premises of an external service provider might be the subject of seizure or compulsory search .
It is essential to recognize that we should be on our guard against this risk .
I am cautiously optimistic that the dialogue on this question will continue .
Those are my thoughts .
It is true , as Mr Coelho has said , that we could try to ensure that this report and the visa code are processed side-by-side , as it were .
Having said that , I can only confirm , to Parliament and to the rapporteur , Baroness Ludford , whom I should like to thank for all her work , that I am nevertheless determined to reach a compromise fairly rapidly , by asking the Council to listen more to Parliament , and also by hoping that Parliament , for its part , bearing in mind the commitments which the Commission will be making , will show a certain amount of understanding .
This is the price we shall have to pay if we want to achieve a compromise .
I am emphasising this point slightly , because we want a visa information system which is effective and fair , and if we are to achieve such a system , then the problems which we have discussed will have to be resolved , Mr President , and I should like to thank those MEPs who have expressed their opinions this evening .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I would like to thank all colleagues and especially the shadows I have worked with .
We have had very constructive work together and I have welcomed their positive contributions .
They have all been very engaged and I have been very grateful .
I want the VIS to work and to get going as soon as possible .
In a sense it is my baby , as I was the rapporteur on the system itself .
But , as colleagues have stressed , we are talking about very sensitive personal data and maybe 70 million entries at any one time .
The VIS cannot afford to be treated as one vast experiment .
We must proceed on a precautionary basis .
I agree with those like Mrs Ždanoka and Mrs Roure that we do not have enough experience to be confident of avoiding problems , for instance with fingerprinting six-year-olds .
The Commissioner talked about whether we might not get going on the basis of having only verification between 6 and 12 .
Now that might meet some concerns , but not , I think , those of practicality and the cost of having to collect them every two years .
Frankly , I do not think the Council thought that one through at all .
As Mrs Roure pointed out we are supposed to be building - or already to have - a common visa policy .
That is why it is so disappointing that Member States basically have no willingness at all to cooperate on the same premises , and that they want to apply different visa fees by topping up the EUR 60 .
I would like the Commission to be rather proactive in trying to push the Member States to cooperate in different locations .
Mrs Klamt , whom I very much thank for her constructive criticism and willingness to work with us , has suggested that taking fingerprints of children from the age of six would be an effective tool against child trafficking .
I have to say I am not aware of any serious research suggesting it would achieve this aim .
Why choose the age of six ?
Why not five , or four , or three , or indeed zero ?
There might be a far bigger risk of baby-snatching than of six-year-olds being kidnapped .
Finally , Mr Coelho 's suggestion to merge this report with the visa code is an interesting one .
He has thrown what cricketers call a ' googly ' into this debate and I think we will have to take that back to the committee and see what they think about that .
In one sense I am open-minded but I think it is up to the committee .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 July 2008 .
European Union fishing fleet affected by the economic crisis ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the proposal for a Council Regulation instituting a temporary specific action aiming to promote the restructuring of the European Union fishing fleets affected by the economic crisis ( Committee on Fisheries ) - C6-0270 / 2008 - .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I am very grateful to the European Parliament for arranging this debate at such short notice .
As you are aware , yesterday the Commission adopted a proposal for a regulation containing key elements of the EU package of emergency measures to address the fuel crisis .
Today I am seeking your agreement to this proposal .
Unfortunately it was impossible for the Commission to adopt its proposal on 3 July as had initially been planned .
The reason for that is the depth of the analysis that had to go into the proposal , to guarantee that it is a really effective instrument to address the severe problems the sector is facing .
The Committee on Fisheries held a useful discussion this morning , for which I am thankful .
A number of questions could be clarified and debated and I hope to be able to take the important and useful suggestions into consideration during negotiations in the Council next week .
I am looking forward to more debate with you , now hoping that this can pave the way to your favourable opinion on our proposal in the vote tomorrow .
As I explained to you only three weeks ago , the fisheries sector is facing a crisis which is structural and long lasting .
For many years , the EU fleet has suffered from a vicious circle of overcapacity , overfishing and declining profitability .
At the same time , fishers have been unable to benefit from reduced supply and rising retail prices for fish products .
As a result , profits are decreasing , making the sector more vulnerable than others to a drastic rise in costs , such as we have seen with the price of oil .
The Commission understands the need for coordinated action at EU level to avert a severe crisis for the industry and to ensure that the problem is really tackled head on .
This means not only providing the possibility of emergency relief but committing to finally addressing the underlying issue of overcapacity , which is undermining all our attempts to get the industry back on a sustainable and profitable footing .
For these reasons , the Commission has proposed an emergency package of measures to tackle the immediate social and economic hardship triggered by the dramatic rise in the price of oil , while also tackling the underlying structural problems of the European fleet .
I believe that it is vital to focus aid on the fleets which are most dependent on fuel and thus most affected by the current overcapacity .
We therefore propose that Member States can immediately grant temporary cessation aid as a lead-in measure to restructuring and that they can then set up Fleet Adaptation Schemes under which limitations on access to permanent cessation - scrapping - premiums will be lifted .
Additional aid for temporary cessation , as well as modernisation and energy efficiency , would be available for vessels involved in such schemes . Partial decommissioning aid would be granted to operators who replace larger old vessels with smaller , more energy-efficient ones .
Based on further economic analyses , possible modifications to the de minimis regime for fisheries may also be considered .
We will , furthermore , propose provisions to allow for temporary reductions in employees ' contributions to social security payments .
A number of specific initiatives to promote the value of fish at the first point of sale are also envisaged .
The Commission is planning to assist ad hoc projects in this area , in addition to the funds available under the European Fisheries Fund .
Further measures are planned to encourage the shift to energy-saving technologies , cushion the socioeconomic impact of the crisis , and facilitate the reprogramming and the disbursement of EFF funds .
The above measures will consist of temporary derogations to the rules of the European Fisheries Fund so as to support faster adaptation of the EU fleet to the present situation and provide temporary relief during the transitional phase .
I believe that these measures will help give an essential thrust to the industry to structurally adapt , whilst easing the transition for fishermen , vessel owners and people employed in support services during the period of adaptation .
The Commission has engaged in very important and constructive discussion with the industry on this matter and the industry gives general support to our initiatives .
With regard to the official amendments that have been tabled by Parliament to the Commission proposal , we can accept the amendment referring to Recital 13 and , in fact , it should be applied to all vessels .
However , the Commission cannot support the amendment to Article 18 ( 2 ) as this would make the partial decommissioning measure virtually impossible to apply in practice .
Finally , and very importantly , let me express my belief that throughout this process we can give further impetus to the common fisheries policy , in particular in the context of resource sustainability .
I am aware of the very short deadline and that this leaves the European Parliament with little time to react .
However , given the exceptional situation being faced by the fisheries sector , I trust I can count on the support of Parliament to adopt the said measures as speedily as possible .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , firstly , I agree with Mr Borg that it is a pity that we have had to work in this way , on the basis of unofficial documents which have not yet been translated into all the languages , when for some considerable time this Parliament has been requesting measures and sounding the alert about the serious crisis threatening the fishing industry .
Obviously , Mr Borg , we too have accepted the urgency out of respect for our fisheries sector .
Likewise , I would like to stress that this proposal is , as Mr Borg indicated , just one element of a package of measures and that we do not have a timetable or the salient details which would enable us to make an overall assessment of the new de minimis measures , the amendments to State aid , the guidelines for the new common organisation of the market , or the new ad hoc financial instrument , to which the Commission proposal refers .
As regards the modification to the European Fisheries Fund proposed by the Commission , I appreciate the efforts at flexibility , although it would have been more practical to follow the European Parliament 's proposals at the time they were adopted , proposals which were more appropriate for times of crisis , such as changes to engines , and which might , perhaps , have been able to prevent this steep descent towards scrapping which now faces us .
I am also very grateful , and I really mean this , for Mr Borg 's willingness this morning to include various amendments suggested in the Fisheries Committee , including my own proposal , and for accepting that the period of reference for accessing benefits under the Fleet Adaptation Scheme should include turnover for the first six months of 2008 , which was the time of the highest fuel price rises , in addition to 2007 .
Lastly , we would like the Member States affected to make greater efforts to implement these measures , as well as the other measures .
The ball really lies in their court ; they need to act swiftly in order to ensure as far as possible that these measures , and those which are still pending , really help to alleviate the crisis in the fishing industry .
I would not like what happened with the Regulation on illegal , undocumented and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing , where the Council decided that it would not enter into force until 2009 , to happen here .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I spoke at the plenary in June and emphasised the need for Europeans to tackle this crisis together through an effective and impartial mechanism capable of allowing emergency measures to be adopted at Community level .
We European socialists are pleased that the problems in this sector have received a response at Community level and that the proposal includes measures which we Members of Parliament , who have debated them here on various occasions , and the governments of the Member States most affected have been demanding for so long .
We trust , Mr Borg , that the measures which you are proposing will help to highlight two problems which European fleets have been facing for a long time : excessive fuel dependency and the need to improve the marketing of fisheries products .
We agree , as you might expect , with the financing measures , and with some more than others , as for example the temporary cessation of fishing activities and changes to engines and fishing gear ; we are also very pleased that the aid is being extended for the first time to shore-based workers , something which socialists have called for on many occasions .
We also welcome your own announcement that other , wider-ranging proposals are in the pipeline such as those intended to improve marketing and also the price-setting mechanism , with a consequent increase in the de minimis regime , which , as you said , depends on the outcome of an economic impact study .
As you are well aware , we in the Party of European Socialists have foregone the opportunity to amend the proposal so that it can be approved unopposed at tomorrow 's meeting , as you requested , with a view to its adoption by the Fisheries Council in March next year .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , evidently we are now continuing the debate in which , after almost two hours this morning , we were able to make some progress on this subject .
I should just like to refer back , briefly , to three points which I believe are essential .
We fully understand your priorities when it comes to exceptional and temporary measures to be put in place to tackle the problems of our fishing fleets , which are major consumers of fuel oil .
However , I must emphasise that this should not be at the expense of those who have been able to reduce their energy dependence by using fishing methods and equipment which are better suited to current requirements .
This is an initial point which I believe , from a psychological viewpoint , needs to be emphasised .
Secondly , you have proposed measures which will , of course , have immediate effects , but which will also extend over the medium and long term .
These are measures for regulating the market , and they are very welcome , although unfortunately we cannot expect miracles in this area in the very short term .
My third and final point is that all this will not prevent us from continuing the debate that we have been having with you since you took up your present position , on a reform of the common fisheries policy which will enable our fishermen to have a better idea of their capacity , so as to avoid the disruptions which occur when TACs and quotas have to be changed suddenly without warning and which , in terms of profitability , are obviously very damaging to the activities of our fishing industry .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , the title of the Commission communication and of the Commission 's proposal for a Council regulation is enough to confirm , if there were any doubts , that the measures proposed do not aim to deal with the causes of the current exacerbation of the socioeconomic situation in the fisheries sector .
Despite sporadic measures to meet the justified demands of the overwhelming majority of the fisheries sector , we are once again faced with attempts to use the deteriorating financial situation in this sector to introduce measures that further encourage and accelerate the reduction in the number of vessels .
We would point out that no concrete proposals are being put forward to respond to the two main issues here : the increase in the price of fuel , diesel and petrol , and the formation and increase in the price of fish at the first point of sale without a corresponding increase for consumers .
There are no financial resources to coordinate and implement measures to help the sector deal with the increase in the cost of fuel , yet there are many hundreds of millions of euros available to promote a reduction in vessels , referred to as market measures .
No-one wants to grasp the nettle and promote a fair distribution of the added value in the chain .
Basically , the Commission is putting forward a series of proposals that are essentially inadequate because they do not respond to the needs of the overwhelming majority of the fisheries sector .
This shows that , at the end of the day , the only real objective is the destruction of much of this strategic economic sector .
Mr President , I continue to see much to welcome in this package , but I do have an abiding concern , and that relates to the all-important issue of delivery .
How , Commissioner , do we assure across the EU that these measures do not induce some distortion in competition ?
Not arising out of anything the Commission may do , but arising from the fact that it is a reality that some Member States are much more enthusiastic about public expenditure and reaching out to help sectors than other Member States , and where there is reticence in some and enthusiasm in others , will there not be an uneven application and drawdown of these measures , with a potential impact on competition ?
How will you monitor that ?
Indeed , will you monitor it , and what action will you take if distortion results ?
My second issue is also somewhat parochial and focuses particularly on the fleet adaptation scheme .
Within that , you anticipate special support measures , on condition that the scheme brings about a permanent reduction of 30 % in a fleet 's capacity .
Take the United Kingdom , Commissioner .
There we have three of the constituent countries : Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland , where fishing is a devolved issue , with devolved governments making the decisions .
It is entirely conceivable that any one of them could come up with a fleet adjustment scheme for their own region whereby fleet capacity would be reduced by 30 % .
But taken across the whole United Kingdom , because others have dragged their feet , that may not be the overall outcome .
Is that fair ?
Are there any steps that the Commission can take to alleviate that unfairness ?
In short , can the Commission look at any steps to deal with that potential inequity in countries where there are regional governments which might be pulling their weight and national governments which are not ?
( PT ) Mr President , I believe that the political direction taken by this proposal , as well as its timing , are absolutely right .
I think that these are appropriate measures for the situation we are experiencing in Europe 's seas .
I believe that this is the right way to go .
If we examine this proposal carefully , the major problem is whether it is workable or not .
As the Commissioner requested urgency , Parliament has acted urgently and foregone its right to analyse and present amendments to the regulation .
However , the problem is in knowing whether it is possible to implement such complex rules as these within the intended period .
One clause says that plans for reduction should begin before 30 November .
However , these plans to reduce the number of vessels must be formulated by Member States and some of these programmes have to be approved by the European Commission , because the financial resources for the programmes will come from the existing European Fisheries Fund .
Such programmes are extremely complex and involve compulsory percentages and some of the rules are almost impenetrable , as the Commissioner has seen today with Article 19 ( 4 ) .
This seems to me to be the major problem : will the detail of this proposal make its practical application unfeasible ?
If so , this would be extremely regrettable .
I therefore ask the Commission , the Commissioner and all the Directorate-General officials to think very carefully about the feasibility of what is being proposed here , because if it is not feasible within the proposed period , it is not worth the effort that we are being asked to make here .
Mr President , the ALDE Group welcomes the proposal for a regulation but shares the general feeling of regret that we have not had time to submit fully considered amendments to it .
It is good , therefore , to hear that the Commission will take full note of the concerns expressed both in committee this morning and in the course of tonight 's debate and that it will negotiate with the Council to make such adjustments as are appropriate .
Two such concerns relate to partial decommissioning , both in terms of whether it will detract too much from the targets for capacity reduction and about the uses to which any subsidies might be put .
It would be helpful to gain some reassurances from the Commission in these regards .
As to the two amendments , the first , we think , is effectively already covered by the text .
We sympathise a great deal with the second , as we believe it is intended to address the concerns just mentioned , but we feel that it might actually prove counter-productive to capacity reduction .
So , rather than vote in haste to promote its inclusion in a legislative text , we ask the Commission to consider the merits of the idea , and also that of developing other measures that place emphasis on the reduction of fuel consumption .
Finally , and on a more personal note , I would point to two sentences in the Commission communication . These read : ' It is essential that this package is applied in a way that safeguards a level playing field across the Union .
There should be no distortion of competition among EU fishermen resulting from the different ability of Member States to mobilise public or Community funding . '
I would endorse the point that has already been made that there should equally be no distortion of competition resulting from the different willingness of Member States to mobilise such funding .
I trust that all possible steps will be taken to ensure that each and every one of them with a fishing fleet takes advantage of the opportunities that the regulation offers .

( ES ) Mr President , Mr Borg , ladies and gentlemen , in this debate there are a number of things we need to recognise .
In the first place , if the fishing industry were not crying ' enough is enough ' , we would not be here today debating the urgent need to adopt measures .
That is the first thing .
Secondly , we need to recognise that the European institutions have taken up this cry of protest .
Parliament in particular has already adopted a resolution on the crisis at its last part-session .
Moreover , we have to acknowledge , as we told Mr Borg this morning , that the Commission has acted with uncustomary swiftness in presenting us with the package of measures which we are debating today .
We should all welcome this .
Is everything sorted out , then ?
No , far from it .
We are only just beginning .
The Commission has submitted what we might call an initial first-phase document to tackle the crisis , an aid plan focussing on fleet restructuring .
We now need the Commission to submit a plan for the second phase , with the same urgency , containing measures to increase fleet profitability and improve marketing as well as measures aimed at promoting the value of fish at the first point of sale , measures for which we have no precise timetable as yet .
Nonetheless , the Council and the governments of the Member States have to apply the measures , acting as swiftly as the Commission and Parliament have done , and in line with our requests they must increase controls on imported fish products and launch extensive consumer information campaigns in order to promote the interests of our fishermen .
If such a plan did not materialise , and if we were left with what we have on the table today , Mr Borg , all we would have is an ingenious and generous operation which takes advantage of the current crisis to reduce the fishing fleet rather than make it more profitable and rescue it from the serious crisis which it is facing today .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the fisheries sector is certainly the economic sector suffering the most from the current oil shock .
We all know this .
We therefore welcome the political signal given by the Commission with this package of measures .
It will not be the European Parliament that stands in the way of its rapid approval , as my fellow Members have said here .
We know there are no magic solutions , given the scale of the problem .
Nevertheless , having analysed the Commission 's proposals , I cannot hide my enormous disappointment .
All the measures point in one direction : a reduction in the number of vessels .
Even allegedly emergency measures , such as temporary cessation , are associated with compulsory reductions in the fleet .
I do not understand why the measures set out in Article 7 exclude the replacement of engines , and it is also difficult to understand why the Fleet Adaptation Schemes should cover vessels with energy costs equivalent to more than 30 % of the production costs .
What about the other vessels , Commissioner , which includes almost all of them except trawlers ?
And what about the coastal fleet , which is socially very important ?
Nor do I understand why the only vessels covered by the partial reduction programme are those that use one and the same fishing gear and represent 70 % of the fleet using that gear .
This requirement , coupled with the rule to reduce capacity by 60 % and to limit this capacity to 25 % in order to support new vessels , makes this measure completely unfeasible , as my colleague Mr Casaca said a short while ago .
Commissioner , I understand how difficult it is for you to find solutions for problems on this scale , but we cannot give the sector the illusion that we are trying to cure their ills when this only leads to reduction and abandonment .
It is better to call a spade a spade and say what you are doing .
I therefore ask you , despite the short period of time that we have before the Council on Monday , to make an effort to simplify and to be realistic , so that the positive political signal does not become an enormous disappointment to the sector , which is looking to us with great hope .
Mr President , we are all reacting here within hours of having received the text from the Commission , which contains a package of measures to support our fishing fleet in the present economic crisis .
The Commission is providing urgent measures of limited duration , and mainly of a social nature , which are welcome .
The social measures apply to self-employed fishermen as well as to employees .
In Ireland we have a particular situation following a court judgment some years ago , whereby virtually all our deckhands are self-employed or share-fishermen and have to date been precluded from social security assistance at home when out of work for either economic or weather-related reasons , so I welcome this aspect .
In terms of the temporary ' tie-up ' measures , I would like reassurances from the Commissioner that these will apply to all those who have to tie up for a short time for economic reasons , and that the restriction that they will only be available to those who are part of the restructuring scheme will be applied with the broadest interpretation .
An application to restructure in any sense should be enough to allow an application to tie up in this particular area .
I also welcome very much the partial decommissioning aid to allow fishermen to trade down to smaller , more climate-friendly and energy-efficient vessels .
I would also like to think that the reduced carbon dioxide emissions from such a new contribution to the fleet should be able to be banked by Member States to contribute to their effort-sharing under the climate package , which is rapidly coming down the track towards us , and we should connect the climate package with Member States ' efforts in relation to energy-efficient vessels , smaller vessels and trading down in this particular area .
I also think it is very important that we encourage the partial decommissioning proposed in the text because this will allow fishermen who really would love to continue fishing , who have the skills and the expertise of generations , to continue , albeit in a smaller way , while we get over the present economic crisis facing them .
So , thank you for the measures .
I sincerely hope that Member States roll them out even-handedly .
There is no extra money .
It is only from within the EFF .
It is rearranging the financial deckchairs , but let us hope that we do not have anti-competitive measures as a result of the Member States ' differing strength of resources to respond .
Mr President , I think that we are all well aware of the negative impacts of the current oil and fuel prices .
Only in June , Age Concern Scotland said that fuel price rises will leave more vulnerable people struggling to keep warm this winter .
A charity spokesman said , and I quote , ' Every time fuel prices increase by 1 % , this results in about a thousand people in Scotland living in fuel poverty ' .
Many of these are the poorest pensioners , who are on a very low fixed income and could already be living below the poverty line .
In this context , we might well ask why the Commission is dashing to the supposed rescue of one particular sector .
I say ' supposed ' rescue because I think we have to question whether the studied rewriting of the EFF guidelines , and potentially the de minimis guidelines , can ensure that we have a sustainable fishing industry .
I doubt that this package will satisfy the demands of some of the fishing sector , especially if fuel prices remain high and we still have excess capacity .
In a recent reply from the Commission on the extent of overcapacity in the EU fishing fleet , I was informed that the Commission estimates that we have , and I quote , ' significant overcapacity in some Community fisheries of , on average , at least 40 % ' .
The communication and accompanying Council regulation refer to the need to reduce overcapacity .
Let us make sure that is delivered upon .
Mr President , the hour is late so I will be brief .
I think it is important to let you know what the Federation of Irish Fishermen said in June when this package was first announced .
They were sceptical and said that it was essential that any such proposal be backed up by significant funding .
I think it has already been said that there is no additional funding , and what we are doing is rearranging the current pool of money that is available .
I think we need to be honest about that , because this emergency package will take from other measures that may have been needed if oil prices had not caused the problems that they have for the fishing sector and , indeed , for other sectors .
It is rather a shame that it took the industry to come out of the sea and go onto the streets for us to react in full .
Having said that , there are parts of this package which , if they are implemented - and I think that is the key - should be very positive .
I think it is important that fleets that had to get out , so to speak , prior to the announcement of this regulation will be assisted under these measures .
But there are lots of other issues for the fishing industry .
One that you mentioned , Commissioner , is the fact that prices for fish have gone down rather than up .
I would be interested ( but perhaps it is too late tonight ) to hear how you think that might be addressed , because that is where we will really make progress in the fishing sector .
Very often when people have a problem , whether they are farmers or fishermen , they say that Europe reacts too slowly .
In this case we have not reacted very quickly , but at least there has been some speed in how we have reached the position we are in .
However , as others have said , we have only got the paper .
It is complex and it is a bit like the Lisbon Treaty , and I hope it will be accepted - certainly in Ireland , where the Lisbon Treaty was not .
Mr President , I welcome the proposals from the Commission .
This time last year I visited my own constituency in Castletownbere .
At that time , in July 2007 , fishermen were in a fairly bad state as regards the whole industry .
Twelve months on , we are now facing up to the problems , and I welcome the proposals that are set out by the Commission here today .
However , there is also a need for a response from Member States in other areas in relation to the whole fishing industry .
The whole issue which you have raised in your own memorandum about quantity , quality and supply is a very important one and is about making sure that the people who produce and supply the fish get an adequate reward for the work that they do .
I think at the end of the day , while the consumer may be paying , it is people in-between who are making quite a large part of the profit from it .
I think one of the things that we need to change is the whole area of voluntary labelling .
We need to bring in that mechanism so that we can clearly identify the product that comes from outside the European Union and , in many cases , the product that is not caught in compliance with the regulations that are laid down .
I think there needs to be change in that area .
There is too much product coming into the EU which is not properly caught in accordance with regulations , and we are not doing enough in that area to make sure that we do have a level playing field for all the people within the EU .
I think that is a major area that we need to work on .
While I welcome these regulations and these proposals , I think we also need to implement the regulations that are there for the product that is coming in from outside the European Union .
Mr President , I would like to put a specific question that came up this morning in the Committee on Fisheries , raised by my colleague Carmen Fraga Estévez and myself .
Article 12 ( 3 ) states that ' A Fleet Adaptation Scheme shall concern only fleets where the energy costs represent on average at least 30 % of the production costs , based on the turnover in 2007 , of the fleet concerned by this scheme . '
Could you guarantee to us here and put on the record that the first six months of 2008 will be able to be taken into account in the compilation of those figures too , because they have been a critically bad six months in terms of the actual percentage increase in energy costs for the fleet , particularly the more vulnerable aspects of our fleets ?
Mr President , as we are allowed to ask another question , I would like to put this question to the Commissioner .
In the light of the partial decommissioning schemes and the proposal that we possibly reallocate 25 % of the fishing capacity permanently withdrawn to new vessels , would this effectively mean reintroducing harmful subsidies for vessel construction ?
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you very much for all those interventions and for the number of questions that have been placed .
I will try to respond to as many of them as I can given the fact that we did not have sufficient time as we usually have within the Fisheries Committee and in Plenary to discuss proposals given the urgent nature of this proposal .
On de minimis , as we said in the communication , we will be carrying out the necessary economic analyses in the coming weeks and months and we intend to come forward with a Commission proposal , if appropriate , if the economic analysis shows that we can move forward in this direction and if WTO rules allow , before the end of this year .
The subsequent , quite lengthy procedure involving consultation of the advisory committee of Member States and of stakeholders , and the final adoption by the Commission will normally take around six months .
So we are speaking of a time frame which is quite extensive , it is true .
However , I need to underline that the de minimis is not the solution to the restructuring of the fleet which is needed .
Whether we like it or not we have a situation of significant over-capacity , and unless we address it effectively we are never going to find a permanent solution .
It is no use , I have said it on a number of occasions , throwing money at the problem without trying to address the real cause of the problem , and this is what we are attempting to do .
We are willing to give assistance immediately and in the medium term to fishers but we are also stressing that there needs to be effective restructuring .
Otherwise we will need to come back here , year in year out , to discuss the same issue .
So I need to make this abundantly clear : the Commission is not prepared simply to throw money at the problem .
So any form of permanent operating gate to fishers is a non-starter .
This is why I need to make it abundantly clear that we need to really address the problem .
So that is my answer on de minimis , which we are looking into .
Concerning market measures , we will be providing more specifics and making the situation much clearer , because there are various fronts on which we intend to deliver on this .
First of all we will be making more financing available for POs and other industry associations in order to elaborate fishing plans , marketing plans , quality initiatives , labelling initiatives and inter-branch initiatives .
And , as shown in other countries , for example in Norway , we can see how POs can work efficiently to assist the catching sector .
As we indicated in our communication , these are not new tools or instruments .
They are outlined extensively in both the CMO and in the EFF .
The problem is that , so far , industry and Member States have not promoted them sufficiently .
With regard to the price monitoring system , again , together with the industry and the Member States we will use this additional knowledge to set up monitoring tools along the value chain to help the sector to anticipate price developments more effectively in the future .
The Commission has launched a study on this issue which will be completed in September .
There is political momentum on this issue on a wider level .
The recent European summit has supported wider initiatives of the Commission for monitoring food prices and price development mechanisms .
Again , additional funding for a price monitoring system on fish prices will be made available by the budgetary authorities by September .
We will start the work immediately , first through launching a pilot project on the scope and modalities of this exercise , and the full price monitoring system should then be defined and become operational before the end of 2009 .
Concerning more control with respect to certification , labelling requirements and mitigating IEU , here again , the Commission will give financial support to industry initiatives in the area of market monitoring , and in particular in relation to monitoring the sector 's compliance with legal requirements concerning certification , labelling etc .
We plan to launch calls for proposals by the end of 2008 whereby we would invite sectoral organisations to elaborate concrete proposals , and implementation of these projects will start during 2009 .
Then in 2009 we also have the full CMO review .
So I will try to give some indicative time-frames with regard to the various market measures that we are envisaging .
On the question of the reference period raised by both Mrs Fraga and Mrs Doyle , I can repeat again that the preliminary assessment of this suggestion indicates that we can take this on board .
We realise that the fuel situation has changed considerably since 2007 and it does seem logical that current realities should be reflected in the aim of this package .
We will nevertheless need to ensure that all economic data used for the reference period 2007 to 2008 are an accurate depiction of the economic situation for the fleet and vessels concerned .
The mandatory 30 % capacity reduction will still be maintained .
The possible impact of using the 2008 figures could indirectly lead to more extensive application of the package .
So I can confirm that we will be moving forward and taking on board this suggestion that came from the Fisheries Committee this morning .
Concerning the point as to whether the proposal attacks the causes of the problem , I would state my belief that in fact there are two primary objectives : tackling over-capacity , as I have just said , so that we can survive in a profitable way long into the future , and also trying to assist fishers to get a fair price for their catch .
I have just outlined the measures that we are proposing in this regard .
With regard to the question , raised by General Morillon , concerning measures which should not be implemented to the detriment of those who have already undergone restructuring , and with regard to the point raised by Mr Allister and Mrs Attwooll and others , these are very relevant .
I would like to say that in general terms , if there is further reduction of capacity by some Member States , this will benefit other Member States , because if there is a reduction of capacity with a consequent reduction of effort , there would be more resources and more market opportunities .
However , more specifically let me say that the proposed ad hoc instrument to which I will come to soon will be designed in such a way as to set criteria that are needs-based and do not follow the EFF so that , for example , the requirements of those who have already undertaken substantial restructurings are recognised and that those who have low EFF allocations are also recognised .
On the question of social aid , first of all we have to see how this measure will be defined in practice .
To the extent that the measure only provides benefits to workers and not to companies , it might be that aid elements are not even involved .
Therefore that would mean that the process of adoption of this would be faster .
If an amendment to the state aid guidelines is required , then we will prepare a Commission decision , which normally takes two to three months .
Concerning the Irish court ruling , we shall analyse how the definition of workers as self-employed potentially impacts on the application of this measure , and will seek a solution in order to address the specific problem concerning Ireland .
On the request that emergency temporary cessation should not be linked to restructuring ( which was also raised by Mrs Doyle ) , restructuring is relatively loosely defined in our package so there should be ample opportunity for vessels in trouble to adapt to new realities .
They can receive aid now , and then they have six months to adapt .
This link to restructuring has to be maintained for the emergency package , however , to have the desired result .
With regard to the question concerning the financial requirement which was raised by Mrs McGuinness , the financial requirement solely for the temporary and permanent cessation of fishing activities is estimated at around EUR 1.6 billion .
The total financial requirement is estimated to be in the region of EUR 2 billion .
The current programming of the EFF Axis 1 for these measures is estimated to cover around EUR 600 million with an estimated additional EUR 250 million coming from national co-financing .
The Commission further estimates that EUR 550 million will have to come from the programming of EFF operational programmes .
Therefore this would leave a shortfall of EUR 600 million .
So there is additionality as well .
We are not just making use of EFF funds .
There is an additionality of EUR 600 million .
A substantial part of this amount could be financed through the unallocated margin under heading 2 of the financial framework ceilings for the years 2009-2010 , with the bulk coming in 2009 .
It is this additionality which could form the ad hoc instrument I referred to before .
The ad hoc instrument should be needs-based , so it would not directly reflect the proportionate allocations under the EFF but should target those segments of the fleet that need to restructure but which would not find assistance under the EFF , either because the EFF allocation to the Member State concerned is very limited or because it relates to areas which are non-convergence and therefore which have very limited allocations of EFF , or because there is enormous demand and therefore the EFF falls short .
So that is my response with regard to the financial allocations .
I would also like to make the point , in regard to the question raised , that while in the short term we are not proposing any miracle solution , we are providing for immediate temporary cessation for three months effective from 1 July 2008 and , as I said , we will be taking a flexible view with regard to the definition of restructuring , whereas with regard to the further temporary cessation provisions , those have to be part and parcel of a fleet adaptation scheme .
But with regard to the first three months , as long as there is restructuring in a general way then the entitlement would apply .
On the point raised as to whether we can deliver within the time-frame because of conditionalities involved , my response is that most of the conditionalities relate to partial decommissioning which is a new instrument and which was very contentious even in reaching this stage .
Removing partial decommissioning would remove also most of the conditionalities attached to it .
I am sure , however , that this is not what you would want .
But I can assure you that the Commission will urge Member States and the industry to take up the fleet adaptation schemes and to ensure that these are properly monitored and properly implemented so that the time-frames envisaged and the conditionalities set will be adhered to and respected .
Again I would like to say that it is not true to say that all measures relate to decommissioning of vessels .
It is true that there is a continuation of total decommissioning but there is the introduction of partial decommissioning , and partial decommissioning means that we will be removing older vessels and introducing new smaller ones , and in this sense therefore there will be introduction of new vessels with lower capacity in absolute terms .
We will have a real effective reduction of capacity but at the same time we will also have properly addressed the fuel problems .
There are also measures with regard to engine substitution and with regard to gear and equipment change , and there are the measures that I have outlined concerning the market measures and social aid .
So I do not think it is correct to say that what we are proposing is simply a continuation of total decommissioning of vessels .
There are various other instruments and I hope that Member States will be able to pick from these the ones that would in the most appropriate way address the concerns and realities of the sector .
With regard to the point made by Mrs Stihler concerning the fact that these could be harmful subsidies for new construction , I need to underline the fact that we will not be paying one cent for decommissioning for vessels whose capacity is maintained .
What we will be paying is the scrapping aid for total decommissioning and we will be paying scrapping aid for the part that is decommissioned .
We are not paying any state assistance for the capacity that remains .
We are simply trying to find a solution whereby the necessary restructuring through reducing capacity , which we attempted by virtue of total decommissioning which has not proved too successful , might hopefully be more effectively addressed through this new instrument of partial decommissioning .
The combination of partial decommissioning , total decommissioning , retaining vessels in operation with the possibility of engine substitutions , with the possibility of modernisation on board etc . , all measures which already exist , and the whole package within a fleet adaptation scheme , could lead to a situation where we effectively bring about the needed reduction in capacity , which would translate to a reduction of effort to meet with the present state of affairs we have concerning the health of fish stocks .
I just want to conclude with regard to the original intervention by Mrs Stihler that I can only repeat the well-known maxim that you are damned if you do and damned if you don 't .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 10 July 2008 .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( IT ) I welcome the approval of the proposal for a regulation to address the crisis in the fisheries sector .
These provisions will undoubtedly not resolve all the problems of a sector which is uniquely complex , as the European Council recognised at the June summit , given the dual constraint of resources and the market which makes the sector less able to withstand economic pressures .
The measure approved today in the wake of the fuel crisis undoubtedly opens up new prospects and new scenarios .
It is important for our fishing operators to grasp all the opportunities that it offers .
It should be borne in mind that the increase in the price of fuel , which has more than doubled in the space of a few months , has not just cancelled out earnings , but is now causing fishing operators to operate at a loss .
The regulation makes provision for a special temporary measure with a deadline of 31 December 2010 whose objective is to support faster adaptation of the Community fleet to the present situation , cushioning social and economic consequences in the transitional period .
The package focuses chiefly on reducing fishing effort and overcapacity and modernising and converting fleets with a view to a resolving the problem of high fuel dependency .
Other measures are intended to improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions from fishing vessels , and to encourage a shift away from fishing techniques which are damaging for the environment , such as bottom trawling .
in writing - The emergency package that has been proposed by the Commission is a step towards putting a stop to the precarious situation faced by European fishermen .
Irish fishermen have some serious concerns that must be taken into account .
How will the 2 billion in aid be distributed ?
Will it be fleet by fleet or by quota allocation ?
Furthermore , what will be done about the bottom trawlers that make up the vast majority of the current European fleet and are at risk of being wiped out by the current emergency package which has been proposed ?
This greatly concerns the Irish fishermen as Ireland has experimented with alternatives to bottom trawlers and so far no success has been achieved .
If Ireland is to continue providing fish to the rest of the EU and still have the means to provide for their families this is not acceptable .
Ireland has the biggest coastal area in the European Community .
The common fisheries policy has not worked for Ireland .
Irish fishermen have faced hard times before but now they no longer have the control to work through their troubles .
It is time for a change .
It is time to reinstate Irish fisherman as stewards of Irish waters .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.45 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
- ( FR ) Madam President , I would like to check something with you .
Apparently it was decided , at the request of the French Presidency , to control photography during President Sarkozy 's speech .
I would like to know who took this decision , who requested it , and who is in charge of photography at the European Parliament .
Is it the European Parliament or the French Presidency ?
I would appreciate an answer before the start of the sitting .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , you will have an answer before the start of the sitting , but for now , if you do not mind , we will proceed with the voting .
- ( FR ) Madam President , as Quaestor of this Parliament , I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the route to the Parliament entrance is blocked on one side by riot police .
They are not allowing official cars to enter .
If some Members arrive late because they have to make another detour , they should not be penalised if they cannot take part in the voting .
Mrs Lulling , clearly this will be taken into account , because some Members are having difficulty in being admitted to Parliament .
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
1 .
Common consular instructions : biometric identifiers and visa applications (
2 .
EC / Mauritania Fisheries Partnership Agreement for the period 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2012 (
- Before the vote on Amendments 1 to 4 :
Madam President , I would appreciate support for the following minor change in the text where it reads : ' The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon will impose closer interinstitutional cooperation ' .
I would appreciate it if colleagues , for understandable reasons , agreed to change that to : ' The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon would , if ratified , impose closer interinstitutional cooperation ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
3 .
European Union fishing fleets affected by the economic crisis ( vote )
4 .
Census of the Roma on the basis of ethnicity in Italy ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on Monday night you had a debate following media reports that the Italian authorities would be fingerprinting the inhabitants of nomad camps .
I can of course confirm the Commission 's position on this , as outlined on Monday by Commissioner Špidla , who specifically referred to the letter that I sent to the Italian authorities on 3 July .
During this debate , Mr Schulz expressed the view that I should inform the European Parliament .
In addition - since Mr Deprez is here , I can say this before the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - I kept the Bureau and coordinators informed .
Yesterday , Madam President , if I have understood correctly , the Conference of Presidents wanted me to make a brief statement to update Parliament on the latest news .
I will briefly go over the measures taken by the Commission , which is of course extremely vigilant when it comes to these matters .
I met with Mr Ronchi on 26 May .
On 3 July I asked the Italian Government to explain the purpose and proportionality of the measures .
We had an initial meeting with Mr Maroni in Cannes , during the Informal Council .
Mr Maroni is the Italian Minister of the Interior .
During this meeting , Mr Maroni explained that the census would be used to check on entitlements to welfare benefits for the inhabitants of the nomad camps .
He explained that fingerprints would be taken only if it was impossible to establish identity by other means , and that children would be fingerprinted only with a court order .
( Uproar )
I am merely repeating what the Minister said .
I will tell you in a minute what I did .
He said that he had asked to abolish any census on the basis of religion or ethnicity , and that the Italian Government , in cooperation with Unicef , had launched an action plan for the education of minors .
Nevertheless , I have to say that the Italian Government has agreed to send us a status report on the situation by the end of July , which is extremely important .
After this informal meeting , I asked the Director-General for Justice , Freedom and Security , Jonathan Faull , to write to the Italian authorities to obtain written confirmation of this information and to ask for additional clarification ahead of the report expected at the end of July .
A letter was sent on 9 July .
Late yesterday evening my staff in Brussels received a preliminary response .
This document provides clarification on the identification of ethnicity and religion .
As for the other aspects , I am unable to say at this point whether these will fully answer the questions asked by the Commission .
It is our intention to obtain all the necessary information about the fingerprinting process .
What is the purpose of fingerprinting and how will fingerprints be processed ?
What is the legal basis authorising this kind of processing of personal data ?
Will this data be kept ?
How will it be kept ?
Can it be used for other purposes ?
Are the people who are fingerprinted given preliminary information in writing ?
As far as children are concerned , we requested confirmation of reports that under-14s would be fingerprinted only if this was authorised by a judge , for the purpose of establishing their identity .
We have also asked about the situation in the 17 regions of Italy that are not affected by the emergency decree .
Finally , we have asked for texts , measures , decisions and legislative , regulatory or administrative acts to be sent that will give us an idea of the situation .
It is up to you to decide whether we intend to follow up this issue with all the required vigilance and of course whether we enter into the necessary dialogue with the Italian authorities .
To conclude , Madam President , the Commission wants this matter to be handled transparently and with respect for fundamental rights and Community law .
Our role is to act as the guardian of the Treaties , verifying objectively , once we are in possession of all the relevant information , that Italy has correctly applied the Community law applicable in these cases .
Generally speaking , as Commissioner Špidla explained , I am convinced - and I said as much to the Italian Government - that it is necessary to find effective solutions tailored to the problems faced in particular by the Roma , especially Roma children , who are the primary victims of the situation of poverty and exclusion .
The Roma must be helped and not stigmatised ; this is why , in the report that it presented last week , the Commission emphasised that the European Union , the Member States and civil society must join forces to effectively coordinate their efforts to this end .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I refer to Rule 170 of our Rules of Procedure and wish to table a motion on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats regarding this vote .
There are issues and political views that divide us , but there are also things that unite us in this Parliament , and these include a commitment to human rights , the fight against all forms of racism , so we should not allow ourselves to become divided on those topics where we are in agreement because , otherwise , we shall weaken the very issue that unites us .
Our competent Commissioner Jacques Barrot has explained that there continue to be some unanswered questions when it comes to assessing the facts about the problems we may have in Italy .
At the moment we are referring mainly to articles in the press , and we are referring to a wide variety of forms that have been sent around Parliament over recent weeks .
Therefore we , the PPE-DE Group , move that today 's vote on the resolution be postponed until the September part-session because , by then , the facts will have been clarified and we shall know what we are voting on .
I should like to say to all the Members who disagree with this that , as long as you are not out to get a quick headline , but instead have the objectives of cooperating to achieve something for the minorities in Europe , and of all groups in this Parliament , both large and small , pulling together , then jointly we can achieve something for these people .
Those who just want a quick headline , just want to get publicity , should vote now .
We advocate postponing it until we know the facts of the matter .
I have to acknowledge that the debate we have had over the last few days has exerted enough pressure to get the matter moving .
I would ask those who want proper answers to support the motion for us to discuss this in September .
( Applause from the right )
Madam President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament asked on Monday evening and again yesterday for the Commission to give a report on its discussions with the Italian Government .
Commissioner Barrot has reported in a very factual but conclusive way that , for one thing , the Italian Government has passed on information that was very incomplete and , it seems to me , not particularly relevant .
You are all familiar with this form .
It is a form of the type normally used to record crimes , a form that clearly shows that the Italian Government is taking measures that would be suited to criminal investigations , at the most , but which most definitely do not serve the protection of children .
Judging by what Mr Barrot has just told us , it is more imperative than ever to adopt this resolution today , to send out a clear signal from the European Parliament .
( Applause from the centre and left )

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I speak in favour of Mr Weber 's proposal and I would like to thank Commissioner Barrot , not only for what he has said today in this House , but also for his commitment to resolving , in the best and most constructive way , a situation that in Italy should be recognised for what it is , namely an emergency involving thousands of people .
I assure you that thousands of minors are living in conditions of total neglect , with no right to medical treatment , vaccinations or schooling .
It seems to me that the Commission and the Italian Government are working together ... - Mr President , may I finish speaking ?
May I continue or must I stop speaking ?
Would you please remind the House that I have the right to speak ? - I was saying that the Commission and the Government are going in the right direction and in particular I believe that we should not vote on a resolution that is full of inaccuracies , actual errors from a legal point of view , i.e. full of legal falsehoods .
It is therefore an entirely political resolution , with no basis in fact .
Among other things , I would like to remind the House - and I am reaching my conclusion - that , while Commissioner Barrot has been extremely clear today , three days ago Commissioner Špidla said that he had yet to read the act , which I believe consists of no more than two pages .
Therefore if those on the left must at all costs make a premature judgment on a government 's methods , I believe it to be entirely illegitimate .
( Parliament rejected the request to postpone the vote )
Before the vote on Amendment 10 :
( IT ) Mr President , to add ' on a case-by-case basis ' in the second part of the amendment , where we ask for the use of ordinary , non-discriminatory identification procedures .
Therefore , in English ' to employ , on a case-by-case basis , ordinary , non-discriminatory ... ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
5 .
Situation in China after the earthquake and before the Olympic Games ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 7 :
Madam President , my oral amendment is to paragraph 8 , which urges the Chinese authorities to stop discrimination against various groups .
My proposal is to insert , after ' trade union activists ' , the words ' Falun Gong members ' . These are people who practise a particular kind of movement and breathing , but they are treated as dissidents and persecuted by the Communist authorities .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- After the vote :

( DE ) Madam President , we have quite a large number of important votes today .
With that in mind , it is really not necessary for Mr Cohn-Bendit to provide a non-stop flow of comments and conversation to accompany the voting ; it is distracting .
Madam President , I would like to draw attention to the fact that we have just rejected an amendment asking for the release of someone we nominated for the Sakharov Prize .
The next time we award the Sakharov Prize , in December , we had better give them a set of chains and they can go straight to jail !
( Loud applause )
6 .
The Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper (
7 .
Situation in Zimbabwe ( vote )
- Before the vote :
( DE ) Madam President , to keep everything up to date , I would ask that the following text be incorporated , which you will find on your voting list :
' Welcomes the G8 leaders ' statement on Zimbabwe of 8 July , in particular their refusal to accept the legitimacy of any government that does not reflect the will of the Zimbabwean people , their recommendation to appoint a Special Envoy of the UN Secretary-General to report on the political , humanitarian , human rights and security situation and to support regional efforts to take forward mediation between political parties while respecting the results of the 29 March 2008 election , and their intention to take further steps , inter alia introducing financial and other measures against those individuals responsible for violence ; ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
8 .
Space and security (
That concludes voting time .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the votes : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
The next item is the explanations of vote .
Madam President , it did not take very long for us to get back to business as usual .
In the run-up to the Irish referendum there were no end of reports saying ' please don 't publish this until after the Irish have voted ' .
As soon as the ballots were safely counted , we have gone back to our agenda of harmonising policy , particularly in the field of militarisation and justice and home affairs .
The last time we met in this Chamber as an Assembly , speaker after speaker spoke about respecting the Irish vote , ' but ... ' .
Now we understand what the ' but ' meant .
The ' but ' meant that we should disregard the outcome and push ahead with this process of harmonising criminal justice , civil law , immigration , asylum and the rest of the home affairs field .
No more are we even pretending to respect the verdict of the people .
We are back in our own little world where we pretend that the voters do not exist and we continue with what we were doing anyway .
( PL ) Madam President , because of the heavier security precautions in place in Strasbourg today , which is a highly exceptional situation that has never arisen before during a plenary session , I was unable to be present for the first part of the voting .
May I therefore register my excuse for being absent during the roll call voting .
The car that was supposed to bring me to the European Parliament was over half an hour late , and I would request that this excuse be placed on record .
Mr Rogalski , we covered this at the beginning : people who arrive during the proceedings will of course be excused .
Madam President , I am sure many people are interested in what I am going to say .
I really want to talk about the idea that we repeatedly go from one crisis to another crisis in the fisheries sector without really trying to tackle the fundamental problem .
And the fundamental problem with the fisheries sector is actually the common fisheries policy , a policy based on Soviet-style central planning where quotas are allocated to various Member States .
Surely the time has come to rip apart this piece of Communist central planning and to move to a situation where we have property rights-based solutions .
Let us look at some of the most successful solutions to preserving fishing stocks : in New Zealand , for example , and in Iceland , where they are based on property rights and transferable property rights .
It is time to stop the EU thinking in terms of central planning and becoming an ' EUSSR ' .
Let us move to a free market-based economy .
( NL ) The fact that this Parliament has come down like a ton of bricks on a perfectly reasonable decision by the Italian Government in the last few days is symptomatic of the suffocating atmosphere of left-wing political correctness in this institution .
I can assure you , however , that the thoughts of the vast majority of the population of European countries are absolutely the reverse of what the majority of MEPs are evidently voting for .
The launch of a fingerprinting system by the Italian Government as an impetus to tackling the enormous problems resulting from mass Roma immigration into the country definitely has the support of the vast majority of the people .
Besides , European interference in this dossier is unacceptable .
I am surprised that the European Union does not throw open its own luxurious buildings to the Roma and its private schools to Roma children .
The much-lauded ' human rights ' evidently stop at the borders of the privileged domains of the eurocracy .
Madam President , I am realising that the Civil Liberties Committee of this Parliament is almost the last place where one expects to find any defence of civil liberties .
We saw the beginning of a rather worrying streak of intolerance in that committee when Mr Buttiglione was opposed as a Commission nominee .
We then saw the most draconian legislation pushed through under the pretext of anti-terror rules .
I cannot forget the Liberal Democrat leader Graham Watson 's comment that Osama bin Laden had done more for the process of European integration than anyone since Jacques Delors !
And now in the vote we have just had , we see this quite bizarre refusal even to consider the facts of the case .
I do not know whether the Italian Government is right when it claims that there are inaccuracies in this report .
My own instincts are liberal on this .
I do not like the idea of databases , I do not like the idea of finger-printing .
But surely basic courtesy and basic fairness ought to have prompted us to allow the Government to invite a group from this Parliament to assess the facts of the case , before voting .
Pushing ahead with the vote before even listening to all the facts confirms that , just as the Employment Committee is the last place to defend employment , just as the Committee on Fisheries is the last place to defend fisheries ...
( The President cut off the speaker . )
( DE ) Madam President , on behalf of the Austrian People 's Party delegation , I should like to say that , naturally , we are all agreed that we should take every measure to improve the difficult situation of the Roma , not only in Italy but also elsewhere , and to deal with it wisely .
However , we believe that , in the current situation , in which we do not have all the facts to hand , we should not adopt a resolution , because to do so would be to anticipate the facts .
( SK ) I abstained from voting on the motion for a resolution on the situation in China after the earthquake and before the Olympic Games because the voting did not cover any amendments requiring the release of political prisoners , in particular the candidate for the Sakharov Prize .
I should also like to take this opportunity to once again draw attention to the importance of freedom of expression which is the main prerequisite for the start of the democratisation process in China .
Press freedom is very important since it is independent media that provide information on the human rights situation in China without censorship .
It is therefore essential for independent television stations such as NTDTV to be able to broadcast .
This satellite television station broadcasts 24 hours a day in Chinese and English via satellites over Asia , Europe , Australia and North America .
The French company Eutelsat , which facilitates NTDTV satellite broadcasts , suddenly discontinued these television broadcasts over Asia on 16 June 2008 , clearly under pressure from the Chinese Communist Party .
In order to be successful , we must supplement the words of the resolution with actions .
We call upon the leadership of the European Parliament to insist upon the resumption of these television broadcasts over Asia .
( DE ) Madam President , this House has a strong tradition of human rights , of which we can be proud .
This applies not least to our policies on China and Tibet .
That is why I find it all the more regrettable that our resolution today does not live up to these requirements in any way .
In an historic moment , it did not have the strength to raise what should have been raised in the run-up to the Olympic Games in China .
Therefore let me state categorically : our President , Mr Pöttering , has represented our human rights principles unequivocally over the last few months .
German Federal Chancellor Angela Merkel has done the same , clearly and impressively .
I should therefore like to call upon this House to return to the clear statements of its policy on China and Tibet in past years and decades and regard this resolution as a moment of weakness before the summer recess .
( LT ) I would like to say a few words about the document , about China .
I voted in favour of the document , but , much to my regret , many important amendments were rejected .
Today we have stated that the situation in Tibet is normal , which is not true .
We have refused to invite Tibet 's spiritual leader to the General Affairs Council , and that is a very wrong decision ; we were not even able to vote against those who practise Falun Gong .
I therefore regret this and I do believe that these issues should be approached again as soon as possible .
Madam President , I want to say only that I and many in my group have been confused by the voting list because , following its suggestions , we have voted for some absurd positions .
To invite the Dalai Lama - no , against .
The situation in Tibet is not normal - no , we have voted that it is normal .
Many of us have been confused .
Of course , I tried to correct the situation , but the information was falsified and our list was highly incorrect .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not believe that Mr Landsbergis has actually read the resolution that we have adopted with a two-thirds majority .
If he had , he would know that we mention the insupportable situation in Tibet four times and call on the Chinese Government to respect human rights and cultural rights in Tibet .
Mr Landsbergis , do not tell untruths .
The vast majority of us - that is , the majority of this Parliament - have spoken up for human rights and for the cultural autonomy of Tibet .
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to state my reasons for voting against this report .
I feel that this report is actually - and I say this with deep conviction - one of the most controversial documents adopted by Parliament in recent times .
I am convinced that the lack of any clear plan for how the EU will open up to the East , especially in the context of Ukraine 's possible future accession , is an entirely valid reason for voting against the report .
I shall pass over the fact that the preliminary draft of this report was totally muddled .
To conclude , a remark to you , Madam President : you have allowed two people to rise who were not down to speak .
Please keep to the procedure .
The President can give the floor to whoever he or she chooses .
I wanted to give the floor to Members who are effectively non-attached , but I am perfectly entitled to do so .
( NL ) One of the reasons why I voted against the Brok report , diluted as it is by amendments , is its recommendation for a ' communication policy ' that will in actual fact boil down to even more EU propaganda .
This is symptomatic of what is going fundamentally wrong in the European Union .
Instead of taking account of the views of the electorate , the EU is attempting to change these views via propaganda .
However , the referendum in Ireland has further demonstrated that this kind of social engineering produces the opposite effect .
Consequently , the EU would do better to stop this and show respect for the opinions and complaints of Europeans instead of doing exactly the opposite .
( DE ) Madam President , I voted in favour of the Brok report , as I believe that it is an important step in the right direction .
I also endorse the communication policy it calls for .
However , communication also involves truth and clarity .
It is time we finally stated clearly that Croatia can and should join the EU within the current decade .
The countries of South-East Europe have definite prospects of joining the EU in the next decade , but truth and clarity also require an acknowledgment that pushing ahead with the accession of Turkey would undermine the EU .
We should therefore be honest with our partner , Turkey , and say at last that we shall have to find other ways of cooperating .
Although the Brok report does not actually put it this way , this is the logical conclusion from its contents , which are as they should be .
( PL ) Madam President , I am one of the authors of this report .
May I say that the situation in Zimbabwe is like ' The Neverending Story ' .
The European Parliament is making its voice heard once again on this subject , and I am very pleased that we have managed to override political divisions and speak out so strongly and decisively on the scandalous situation that is taking place there .
This is why I voted in favour of this report , which , after all , I helped to draft .
Madam President , I am very happy to speak on this motion because I actually voted in favour of it , like many colleagues in this House .
However , my request to parliamentarians and politicians across Europe is : Let us ensure that this is not just warm words , just to appease our conscience .
Let us look at actions , not words .
I refer , of course , to the Lisbon Summit , where we invited Mugabe , despite the sanctions .
I look , of course , to the Rome Summit on the food crisis and food security : we invited Robert Mugabe and his henchmen to shop in some of the most luxurious shops of Europe while his people were starving .
The time for warm words is over .
It is all very well us feeling great about what we said , but we have got to put those words into action : we have got to impose these sanctions against the Mugabe regime .
Let us stop being hypocritical , especially my Portuguese and my Italian friends .

Madam President , I voted in favour of this resolution and , like Mr Kamall , I have received an increasing number of letters over the last few years about the situation in Zimbabwe .
The people I represent across the East Midlands of the United Kingdom simply cannot understand how we can always state such strong opinions about Zimbabwe in this place , but allow Mr Mugabe into the continent to break bread with our leaders .
There is something seriously wrong and seriously hypocritical about that ; it devalues this institution and many others .
So I hope that in the future we can sort this situation out , get rid of this awful man , and democracy can prosper in Zimbabwe .
Madam President , I wish to begin by apologising to all my colleagues in this House for holding up the next speaker .
I forget his name , but I also hope he will stand up when he speaks and show some respect for this House .
We were promised that Galileo would not be a white elephant , but that we were looking for a role for it .
If you look at all the other satellite systems - the Chinese and Russian satellite systems and the American GPS - people are asking why we need Galileo .
It is quite clear , if you look at this system - the white elephant in the sky - that we are looking for more and more uses for it .
Now we are looking for a military dimension .
Why do we need this military dimension ?
We clearly do not need it .
It is based purely on envy of the Americans and ' me too ' politics .
Let us scrap this complete nonsense and let us save the taxpayers money , return it to the taxpayers and rely on much better technology .
( DE ) Madam President , I am of the opinion that the way we are doing this is not consistent with the good reputation this House enjoys .
It is unacceptable for the whole Chamber to be chatting when speakers rise to speak .
I would exhort you , Madam President , to keep the Chamber quiet and to ensure that those who are not listening leave the room .
I completely agree with you , Mrs Klamt , but as you know , each time we ask the same thing , and each time we have the same problems .
in writing . - ( FR ) Based on the report by my British fellow Member Mrs Ludford , I voted in favour of the legislative resolution amending , at first reading of the codecision procedure , the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Common Consular Instructions on visas for diplomatic missions and consular posts in relation to the introduction of biometrics including provisions on the organisation of the reception and processing of visa applications .
This proposal is aimed at creating the legal basis necessary for the Member States to identify the mandatory biometric identifiers - facial images and 10 fingerprints - of visa applicants and establishing a legal framework for the organisation of Member State consulates in order to implement the Visa Information System ( VIS ) together with the establishment of Common Application Centres .
This would avoid all Member States having to supply their consulates with the equipment necessary to collect biometric data .
I support most of the amendments , particularly those on the representation of one Member State by another , security measures regarding external service providers and information campaigns .
The objectives of this proposal for a regulation are the organisation of the reception and processing of visa applications in relation to the introduction of biometrics in the Visa Information System ( VIS ) at EU level , providing , firstly , for the obligation to provide biometric data to be stored in the VIS and the standards for doing so and , secondly , the provisions on the organisation of the reception of visa applications .

This proposal , which is part of the communitarisation of border management ( Schengen Area ) , will put in place the collection of ' biometric identifiers ' ( photographs and fingerprints ) of visa applicants , a measure which is questionable to say the least , and one where a range of questions remain unanswered , namely regarding : its effectiveness , protection of this personal data , the objectives and criteria for collecting data , the standards governing the content of VIS files , access rights ( namely , in the framework of agreements between the EU and various countries on the exchange of information ) , and finally , safeguarding citizens ' rights , freedoms and guarantees .
We disagree with the communitarisation of justice and home affairs and the creation of surveillance and control structures and instruments at EU level , promoting securitarian policies .
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - ( RO ) I hope the vote I have given today will facilitate the negotiations with the United States on visa waiver and that , soon , all the Member States citizens will be able to travel freely and receive the same treatment .
It is imperative that one of the subjects negotiated by the French presidency refer to the criteria for granting United States visa to all the European Community citizens .
in writing . - The agreement on fishing between the EU and Mauritania is definitely important for both parties .
Through this agreement , fishermen from the Mediterranean are able to exercise their trade elsewhere , as the Mediterranean is being over-fished .
The recent tuna issue is just the beginning .
I am aware that two fishing companies from Malta have used this agreement to fish in the Atlantic .
This came to my knowledge when I was on an official EP delegation to Mauritania and the delegation was informed by the President that all endeavours to find a solution to that agreement had thus far failed .
It was at this point that I asked to speak to the President in private .
I asked if he had ever discussed the issue with the Commissioner Dr. Joe Borg , who is the Maltese Commissioner .
The President informed me that he had not talked to him but that I was free to do so myself if I wished .
I took it upon myself to immediately contact Dr. Borg who , after assessing the file , gave me a synopsis of the issues at stake .
I brought this to the attention of the President , also informing him of the desire of the Commissioner to restart the discussions .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European Union is once more usurping the right to be a separate state .
I think that the conclusion of international agreements is the domain of a state , not of a regional , international organisation like the European Union , so I have voted against this report .
The Dutch Labour Party delegation has voted in favour of the agreement with Mauritania , not because it is a good agreement , but because it represents a small improvement in the existing situation ( reduced catches ) .
On the whole , we oppose such agreements , as they deprive developing countries of their sources of food and income .
In the case of Mauritania , it is even more distressing that development funds are being used to support the interest of fisheries .
This is a disgrace !
in writing . - ( SV ) We abstained in the vote today on the partnership agreement on fishing between the EU and Mauritania .
We were faced with two undesirable alternatives , either a shorter agreement with higher fish quotas or a longer agreement with lower fish quotas .
Unfortunately there was no option to vote for a termination of the agreement .
We moderates are against fishing agreements with African states .
The report contained very minor improvements compared with the present agreement , but also retrograde elements such as an extension of the period of validity .
Faced with a choice between these undesirable alternatives , we abstained in the vote .
I welcome the continuation of the fisheries agreement with Mauritania , although it is appropriate to point out that the negotiation process was not always conducted in the most open and transparent fashion .
The Member States were not sufficiently consulted during the negotiation period , resulting in a protocol under which fishing opportunities have fallen considerably while financial compensation is held at virtually the same level . Key technical aspects affecting the main fleets have not been resolved ; on the contrary , new restrictions such as an additional biological recovery period have been imposed , without much scientific rigour .
Despite this , Portugal has taken a reasonable stance as far as its fishing opportunities in these fishing grounds are concerned , namely 886 GT annually for Category 1 ( Vessels fishing for crustaceans other than spiny lobster and crab ) , gaining a licence in Category 5 ( Cephalopods ) and retaining 300 GT for spiny lobster .
Based on this information , I believe this is a positive agreement for my country and I vote in favour .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the legislative resolution of the European Parliament of 10 July 2008 on the proposal for a Council Regulation instituting a temporary specific action aiming to promote the restructuring of the European Union fishing fleets affected by the economic crisis .
One of the main challenges facing the EU fisheries sector remains , in many cases , the structural imbalance between fleet capacity and the resources available .
The overcapacity of the EU fleet was estimated a few years ago at around 40 % .
This overcapacity , combined with the depletion of fishing stocks by decades of overfishing , means that the sector is struggling to withstand external economic pressures such as the sudden rise in fuel prices .
I wish that a Community instrument annualising the increase in oil prices had been envisaged so that the internal market had time to react to rising cost prices .
I welcome the actions of the French Agriculture and Fisheries Minister , Michel Barnier , who worked hard to achieve this result .
Thanks to him , immediate support measures were obtained .
in writing . - ( PT ) The fisheries sector has been one of the sectors that has suffered most from the current energy crisis .
The dizzying rise in fuel prices together with the reduction of the fishing effort introduced by the CFP and the stagnation of first sale fish prices have placed shipowners and fishermen in delicate positions .
This therefore justifies this proposal for an urgent Council Regulation seeking to ensure that the EU 's fleet adapts to the current economic situation dictated by the energy crisis .
As a matter of fact , this proposal follows a Commission Communication in which the problems and constraints facing the fisheries sector appear to be diagnosed correctly , as well as the necessary measures to alleviate the current crisis .
Although I consider the initiative behind the presentation of this Regulation positive , I believe that it is somewhat less than could have been expected after reading the aforementioned Communication .
The temporary cessation of fishing activities mentioned in Article 6 , with the obligation of inclusion in fleet restructuring plans , the non-inclusion of engines in Article 7 , all of Article 9 , and Article 12 ( 3 ) , which merely defends the interests of trawl fisheries , seem less successful points in this proposal .
Notwithstanding the above , and given the great difficulties the fisheries sector is experiencing at European level , this document deserves my vote in favour .
in writing . - ( PT ) As we explained in a speech during yesterday 's debate , the reasons for our vote against this proposal for a regulation are fundamental ones .
If there could be any doubts as to their justness , it would have been enough to follow the European Commission 's speeches to dispel them .
The problem for the European Commission is overcapacity and the target and solution is the ' restructuring of fleets ' .
What about the socio-economic crisis ?
What about the rising fuel prices ( diesel and especially petrol ) ?
What about the first sale fish price ?
For the Commission , it is quite simple : ' if there is further reduction of capacity by some Member States , this will benefit other Member States , because if there is a reduction of capacity with a consequent reduction of effort , there would be more resources and more market opportunities . '
Hence the suggestion of about EUR 1.6 billion ( ! ) just for vessel decommissioning .
' Simple ' - if the disease does not kill the fisheries sector , the ' cure ' will .
There is no funding to help the sector face increased production costs and to safeguard wages .
However , EUR 1.6 billion is being proposed for permanent , partial or ' temporary ' cessation of fishing activities .
The Portuguese Government is following this maxim and is , for the record , allocating about EUR 8.2 million for the decommissioning of 27 vessels in 2008 .
in writing . - The negative impact of the current oil and fuel prices affects all EU citizens .
This ' supposed rescue ' package will do little to ensure a sustainable fishing industry .
Although I support capacity reduction - currently some Community fisheries are at least 40 % over capacity - I do not think this proposal will achieve the changes required to achieve a sustainable EU fishing sector .
With 80 % of EU stocks at worrying levels we need real capacity reduction , not renewed boat building at the taxpayers ' expense .
in writing . - ( RO ) The situation of the Roma population is brought into discussion again at an extremely important moment , when specific events prove that there are still considerable deficiencies at the level of national and European policies in this field and that the need to monitor and consolidate them is obvious .
I think the result of the debate and resolution regarding the fingerprinting of Roma people in Italy should be based on two key conclusions .
First of all , it is essential that the national measures regarding the Roma people be oriented toward social integration and the creation of a framework of rights and responsibilities for these citizens .
Nevertheless , such rights and responsibilities should comply with the EU fundamental principles of non-discrimination , as well as respect for fundamental freedoms and human dignity .
The rights of minors , regardless of their ethnical membership , should be ensured with priority .
This approach has been used in Romania and should be expanded to the situation in the other Member States as well .
Secondly , taking into consideration the cultural particularities of the Roma people , the solution for its integration should be found at European level by drafting a coherent and comprehensive strategy .
In addition to guaranteeing the fundamental rights , this strategy should also promote access to education , especially to education for tolerance in the context of the 2008 Year of Intercultural Dialogue .
I voted against the resolution of the European Parliament asking Italy to stop the census of the Roma on the basis of ethnicity , because this seems premature and I regret the fact that Parliament did not vote in favour of the motion for postponement until September 2008 tabled by my political group , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Let us be clear on this : I am of course in favour of the ban on fingerprinting the Roma population , including minors , and using the fingerprints collected , since this would clearly constitute an act of direct discrimination based on race and ethnic origin , prohibited by Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , and would also represent an act of discrimination .
Nevertheless , I was swayed by the arguments of the Vice-President of the European Commission , my friend Jacques Barrot , since he clearly said that the Commission was closely watching the situation with complete transparency to ensure that Community law was enforced .
In all good conscience , I have decided that we should wait for the various responses expected from the Italian Government before taking political initiatives such as the resolution adopted , which could be open to misinterpretation by European citizens .
I am voting in favour of this resolution although I hope that it is not exploited for party-political purposes .
The Roma issue is neither a right-wing nor a left-wing issue but simply a serious and unsolved problem requiring urgent action , and that has been put off for too long .
We are for a culture of integration and we therefore need to invest in practical efforts and commitments .
The measure under discussion in our Government , despite Minister Maroni 's ambiguous reassurances , should be reduced to the bare essentials : the problem with this measure is not identification in itself , but the fact that it aims to use an ethnic criterion and a highly discriminatory practice ( fingerprinting ) , especially in relation to minors .
We are not alone in highlighting these abuses : there have been loud protests from large parts of the Catholic Church , and both lay and Catholic voluntary associations and organisations .
The national President of Unicef has also firmly rejected the substance of this decree .
I hope that this vote , which in practical terms condemns Italy , teaches the Government a lesson : that it must abandon the mistaken path that it has taken .
in writing . - British Conservative MEPs have voted against this resolution as the issue the text deals with is one which is wholly a matter for internal affairs of one Member State and thus has no bearing at an EU level .
in writing . - Just substitute ' Jew ' for ' Roma ' and we know where this proposal is coming from and where , unless it is vigorously opposed , it will go .
We view the increasing and unacceptable climate of racism and xenophobia in Europe with concern , in particular when this is spurred on by neoliberal policies that exacerbate rather than provide answers to the needs and problems that lead to increased insecurity and worse living conditions for workers and populations .
The measures that were recently adopted in Italy , where on 21 May a ' state of emergency in relation to the nomad settlements in the regions of Campania , Lazio and Lombardy ' was declared for a one-year period , are an example of these dangerous and unacceptable measures that promote discrimination , segregation and the ' criminalisation ' of citizens and populations , violating their rights , freedoms and guarantees - their most basic human rights .
This increases situations of poverty , exclusion and social disintegration and consequently gives rise to marginalisation and ghettoisation , illiteracy and incorporation into the informal economy , and encourages many citizens of Roma origin not to participate in society .
On the contrary , and as is pointed out , the best way to protect the rights of the Roma is to guarantee access to education , housing and healthcare , employment and social security in the framework of inclusion and integration policies .
in writing . - ( SV ) Discrimination against the Roma is a serious problem which must be countered in every Member State in Europe .
Every European citizen has the same rights irrespective of nationality , ethnic origin , religion or sex .
It is the foundation of the successes and development of the European Union and is a principle which we have a common duty to uphold .
This raises demands for access to education and healthcare as well as the right to respect for integrity and personal dignity .
The situation which characterises the treatment of the Roma in Italy today has to be seen within this perspective .
The EU has a responsibility to ensure that the fundamental rights of people are upheld in every country .
However , it also raises demands for people , regardless of origin , to be integrated into the society in which they live , with the requirements of equal treatment which that involves , formulated without discrimination , on equal terms for all citizens .
This is important in the fight against people trafficking , prostitution and social exclusion .
Neither adults nor children must be allowed to fall through the net of this responsibility .
It is against this background that we did not feel able to support any of the resolutions which Parliament has debated today .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of this resolution and I welcome the fact that the European Parliament makes a stand against this discriminatory and illegal action from the point of view of the European human rights legislation .
Nevertheless , I call attention to the fact that a mere resolution will not solve the basic problem , since this legislative act is of a non-binding nature .
For this reason , I think we should request the European Commission to take action against Italy in order to make it give up its discriminatory policy against the people of Roma origin .
The fingerprinting measure is not in compliance either with the European legislation or with any other instrument guaranteeing human rights in Europe .
At the European Community level , there is Directive 380 of 28 April 2008 , which provides for the obligation to fingerprint the citizens of third countries , as of the age of 6 years .
Nevertheless , I emphasize the fact that it refers to third countries , which do not belong to the European Union area .
Moreover , the Directive 2004 / 38 / EC guarantees the free movement of any Member State citizens , consequently ethnicity could not represent the basis for a legislative measure under any circumstance .
in writing . - Italy 's actions fly in the face of every call from the European Parliament for a coherent EU policy on Roma integration .
Roma are one of the main targets of racism and discrimination .
The Italian Government is trying to condone and institutionalise such racism and discrimination .
Italian authorities must refrain from fingerprinting Roma and I voted in favour of the resolution .
in writing . - I voted in favour of postponement of the vote on this sensitive report , believing that it would be more appropriate to wait until all of the information requested by the Commission from the Italian Government was available to us .
While the House voted to reject such a postponement , I abstained in the final vote , not wishing to support the resolution without all the facts being available to use and having some concerns about part of the text , while also wishing to acknowledge that any heavy-handed actions by the authorities targeting one specific group in society cannot be condoned .
in writing . - The treatment of Roma people in Italy should be a wake up call to the fact that minorities in Europe are being treated in an inhuman , discriminatory and degrading manner by a populist right-wing government .
Finger printing of children is plainly wrong .
This echoes a time past and should have no place in modern-day Europe .
I call on all governments to condemn the Italian Government and to act quickly to protect Roma children in Italy .
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe the Italian Government 's decision to fingerprint citizens of Roma origin and , in particular , children , seriously infringes the fundamental rights of the European citizens .
Fingerprinting a child at an early age could mark him / her for life .
The fingerprinting of children less than 14 years of age is done based on a form used in criminal investigations , which infringes the fundamental rights of the citizens .
I did not agree with postponing the vote on the resolution because the situation is urgent and the fingerprinting of children must stop .
One cannot start from the presumption of guilt of some children and the treatment of children of Roma origin , used today in Italy , is unacceptable .
We request the Italian Government to stop the fingerprinting actions for minors of Roma origin in Italy .
The Union should give an example as regards the respect for the fundamental rights and , for this reason , the Commission should investigate the situation in Italy and request the Italian Government to stop the fingerprinting of children of Roma origin immediately .
This is why I voted in favour of the European Parliament resolution to stop the fingerprinting of people of Roma origin and , especially , of the Roma children , in the larger framework of " Creating a database with the fingerprints of people of Roma origin in Italy ” .
As coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , I should like to give an explanation of vote on my own behalf and that of my group colleagues .
All groups are united in the fight against racism and against every form of ethnic discrimination , and in promoting human rights .
There is no question but that the PPE-DE Group shares the desire to see light shed on the events in Italy .
In the resolution , we refer mainly to press reports and to documents and testimonies from a range of organisations and individuals .
Most Members were unable to form an idea of the situation using their own resources .
The Italian authorities have invited representatives of Parliament to travel to Italy to find out more , and have also offered to provide further information .
The Commissioner responsible , Jacques Barrot , has promised to present an informative report by the end of July , and our group was keen to wait for this .
Our aim was , and still is , to clarify the facts properly first of all .
That is why we wanted to postpone voting on the resolution until the September part-session .
Unfortunately , our motion was rejected , along with a series of amendments that had been tabled , which is why we voted as we did .
The PPE-DE Group continues to hold the view that a thorough investigation would have been more worthwhile than this resolution , which was adopted in haste .
Our opponents were aiming only to hit the headlines and did the people concerned a disservice in the process .
in writing . - The decision on whether to attend the Olympic opening ceremony is one that I believe should be approached collectively .
It is not one that is necessarily shared by all my Socialist colleagues .
Nevertheless , on that basis I see no good reason to boycott the ceremony or the Games .
Even the Dalai Lama supports that position .
Equally the proposal to invite the Dalai Lama to the General Affairs Council is absurd to anyone who is not deliberately trying to undermine the EU-China relationship .
As for discrimination against groups in China , such as trade unionists , there is rightly cause for concern , but criticism coming from those who want to stigmatise Italy 's Roma community is a little rich .
' Remove the plank from your own eye before the mote from your neighbour 's . '
in writing . - ( FR ) I am delighted with the adoption of this joint resolution on the situation in China .
It is important to continue putting pressure on China before the Olympic Games take place in less than a month .
We cannot close our eyes to the serious human rights violations that exist , in contradiction with the pledges made by China itself .
The European Parliament has a responsibility to remind China of the public promises it made .
It is also important to mention minority rights , the rule of law and the still frequent use of the death penalty .
Finally , I wish that some of the more stringent amendments against China had been adopted ; I am thinking particularly of petitions to release dissidents and human rights campaigners such as Hu Jia and his wife Zeng Jinyan , reference to the situation in Tibet , which is far from being resolved , and the disproportionate and non-transparent sentences given to demonstrators following the demonstrations this spring .
in writing . - ( PL ) I abstained from the vote on the resolution on the situation in China after the earthquake and before the Olympic Games .
I did so because Parliament rejected the amendments that raised questions concerning the observance of human rights in China .
As a result the resolution has an overtone that differs from that intended by the initiators of this debate .
Why did Parliament not pass this resolution before the recent EURO 2008 European Football Championships ?
The reason is that there are no problems with human rights observance in Austria and Switzerland .
Pointing out the problems in this area to China is not an anti-Chinese action , just an expectation that the minimum standards engendered by our civilisation will be maintained .
in writing . - I voted in favour of amendment 19 because I strongly believe that inviting the Dalai Lama to a General Affairs Council meeting to present his assessment of the situation in Tibet , and explain to the 27 Foreign Affairs Ministers the middle-way approach and his concept of genuine autonomy that should be implemented for all Tibetans within China , is to be highly recommended .
in writing . - ( FI ) In the resolution on the situation in China I voted for the amendment proposed by the Greens because the degree of incompatibility between the situation in China now , in the run-up to the Olympics , and the promises and public commitments they gave at the time to improve both human rights and the situation in Tibet is just as is stated in Amendment 15 .
I attach special importance to the demand set out in Amendment 16 that tangible results must be achieved by negotiation between the Dalai-Lama and Chinese representatives before the Olympics commence .
The concern expressed in Amendments 11 and 12 about events in Lhasa also merit observation .
The call made in Amendment 20 for the Union and its Member States to take measures with regard to China is most well-founded .
I would not rule out a full boycott of the Olympics .
President Pöttering 's decision was sensible and humane .
We cannot allow China , once and for all , in the name of the Olympic ideal and our values , to continue to use conjuring tricks to build an Olympic stage .
in writing . - The way the Chinese dealt with the aftermath of the earthquake in Southwest China was an example of the progress the country has made in recent years .
Nevertheless , there is still a need for further progress on human rights in the country .
It is only through engaging both sides in constructive dialogue that tangible progress on this issue can be made .
The Olympics was hailed as a prime opportunity to add weight to this dialogue and encourage improvements in human rights and freedoms .
I would therefore stress that China must intensify its efforts to deliver on promises publicly made to the International Olympic Commission to improve human and democratic rights .
I voted in favour of the resolution .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish Social Democrats abstained in the vote on the Brok report .
We want to clarify our position on the future enlargement of the EU in this explanation of vote .
We think that the Copenhagen criteria are the only requirements which can be imposed on candidate countries negotiating for EU membership .
We are in favour of the continued enlargement of the EU and consider it to be one of the great issues for the future of the Union .
We also consider that the negotiations with Turkey must continue and that the country must be assessed against the same objective criteria as other candidate countries .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , Mr Brok 's report underscores the desire to improve our relationships with the East , and that is why I supported it .
I think , though , that this report is not very expressive , and that it lacks the clear plan for the opening up of the European Union to the East that we were hoping for .
We expected a better drafted document from the former Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
in writing . - ( RO ) Mr. President , appreciating the complexity and punctual usefulness of the Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper , we consider that , in the new context determined by the Irish people 's vote , at least the internal dimension of the enlargement strategy should become the subject of more applied debates again .
The Union 's capacity to accomplish the objectives of its policies and achieve a functional regional cooperation , especially in the countries of South-Eastern Europe , depends on the manner in which the intra-Community relations shall settle .
I would like to emphasize the fact that any negotiation formula introducing differentiated treatments for another Member State , no matter the reasons invoked , will initiate a " chain of weaknesses ” and I do not believe such an approach could bring benefits in the long term .
The success of our future actions depends on the manner in which we will know to explain to the public opinion the direct impact and long-term advantages of enlargement .
I could even say that we should look at the Irish vote from a constructive perspective : this vote is the proof of the fact that we have not always known to be open partners of the simple citizen , who is rather the subject of efficient political practices than the defender of ideas and visionary concepts .
I voted in favour of the Brok report on the strategy for future enlargements of the EU in order to reaffirm my belief that no further enlargement will be possible without a new treaty allowing the Union to work with 27 Member States or more , accompanied by an adequate financial framework .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I understand from Mr Brok 's report on enlargement that any new accession can succeed only if , and I quote , ' there is clear and long-lasting public support ' .
This sentence seems completely hypocritical , coming just days after the scornful reaction of the Eurocracy to the clear ' no ' of the Irish to the Lisbon Treaty , which simply echoes the French and Dutch ' no ' of 2005 . It also follows the replacement , in the French Constitution , of the compulsory referendum on EU accession by a pseudo-referendum based on ' popular initiative ' , which in actual fact depends on the goodwill of the French Assembly and Senate .
Admittedly , Mr Brok , in the knowledge that the vast majority of Europeans are opposed to Turkey joining the EU , does not even mention public consultation by referendum .
To win the support he describes , he simply proposes good old propaganda for a public considered ignorant or even simple-minded .
If Mr Brok and his European and national counterparts fear - or despise - the public so much , they should at least have the decency to stop seeking its approval .
European democracy would certainly be all the stronger for it .
in writing . - I welcome Mr Brok 's report on the Commission 's 2007 enlargement strategy paper .
The EU must continue to be seen to uphold promises it has previously made on enlargement .
Indeed , strict and fair conditionality must be applied to all candidates and potential candidates to whom we make these promises .
I believe the report adequately deals with these issues and I voted in favour of Mr Brok 's report .
in writing . - ( EL ) The resolution is an outrageous distortion of the reality experienced by the peoples of the old and the new countries of the Union , presenting the deepening and enlargement of the Union as being to their advantage , when the exact opposite is true .
The plans proposed for the new enlargement aim at greater exploitation and manipulation of the peoples of the accession countries , which are already in a dire situation , and a further escalation in the pillage of those countries by European capital .
In particular , the process of enlargement to the Western Balkans is accompanied by a huge operation of subjugating and humiliating the peoples of those countries .
A typical example is the insistence on full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia , the pseudo-court that was set up by the American and European imperialist bullies to try the victims of their wars and crimes in the area , and that was used to destroy the former President , Slobodan Milošević .
The peoples are also particularly at risk from the fact that the enlargement process continues to rely on a change of borders and the creation of protectorates for the imperialists , such as the protectorate of Kosovo , which will lead to a new cycle of imperialist antagonisms and clashes , with the peoples of the area as the victims .
We , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , are therefore voting against the resolution , reaffirming our position against the imperialist EU and its enlargement .
in writing . - British Conservatives have always been and remain strong supporters of EU enlargement , as it provides a larger single market and a looser and more flexible Europe of nation states .
However , this report includes elements we are unable to support .
We do not believe in Europe as a ' political integration project ' .
In addition , we disagree with the main aspects of Paragraph 19 , which calls for ' an area based on common policies ' in fields such as justice , security , migration and visa-free movement and education , which British Conservatives cannot support .
Also , we are unhappy with Paragraph 6 , which states : ' developing an area of freedom , security and justice , of fully maintaining and building on its acquis communautaire and of upholding fundamental rights and freedoms , as laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ' .
Our concerns about these and other parts of the report in no sense diminish our support for further enlargement of the EU , should applicant states meet the Copenhagen criteria .
For the reasons set out above , we have decided to abstain on this report .
Mr President , it is a good thing that Europe is making its voice heard in this part of Africa which is once again at risk of becoming a theatre for virulent conflict , after the farce of a presidential campaign we witnessed a few days ago .
The G8 has also taken a very clear stance , not through the introduction of sanctions , which would have damaged the civilian population in particular , but with ' financial measures ' that relate especially to companies , banks and personalities of the regime in power since 1980 .
The situation that has come about is unacceptable , with elections taking place in inappropriate conditions and amid systematic violence .
I also hope that our Community diplomacy will move to support the African Union 's proposal asking for a government of national unity to overcome this difficult crisis .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , I supported today 's resolution because I think that we must be tough on violence in Zimbabwe , increase sanctions and call for recognition of the Mugabe regime to be withdrawn .
The campaign of violence aimed at the political opposition and financed by the state has ruled out the possibility of holding a free second round in the presidential elections .
in writing . - ( FR ) Like people all over the world , Zimbabweans want peace , democracy and prosperity .
Under Robert Mugabe , they have none of this .
A former liberator of the country , he is now its torturer .
Today , Parliament is sending out a clear message : it no longer wants Mugabe and his regime .
The people of Zimbabwe have decided this .
The EU must bring all of its weight to bear in order to help Zimbabweans and Africans find a solution to the crisis .
The priority is to put an end to the violence .
Only a dialogue open to all members of Zimbabwean society will allow a transitional regime to be established , with a clear mandate for the organisation of free and transparent elections monitored by the international community .
However , Robert Mugabe will not come to the negotiating table unless forced to do so .
This is why we must strengthen our arsenal of sanctions against the regime .
Finally , we need to plan now for the reconstruction of a future Zimbabwe : I welcome the Commission 's proposal to release EUR 250 million in emergency funding as soon as Zimbabwe has a legitimate and credible government .
I voted in favour of the motion for a European Parliament resolution on the situation in Zimbabwe , condemning the Mugabe regime .
The government 's campaign of violence against the opposition , the successive violations of human rights and disregard for democratic principles are unacceptable .
The civilised world must condemn , without hesitation , what is going on in Zimbabwe .
The political persecution , gratuitous violence , hunger , suffering and the deaths of many citizens are Mugabe 's recent ' work ' , which need to go down in the annals of history .
The people of Zimbabwe deserve a better lot .
I believe that the action of the international community is crucial to resolving the current humanitarian crisis .
The European Union must set the example .
in writing . - ( PL ) I voted in favour of the resolution on Zimbabwe .
What Robert Mugabe is doing is unacceptable .
I do not call him President because what recently went on in Zimbabwe cannot be called an election .
I agree with one of the Namibian politicians who said that , besides the traditional diseases that Africa has to grapple with - like malaria , tuberculosis and AIDS - the most dangerous disease today , the one that needs to be tackled with the greatest urgency , is Mugabeism .
Mugabe has become an enemy of his own people .
It is very frustrating when time turns a man who fought for freedom and independence into a harmful despot .
I hope Africans will open their eyes and understand that people like Mugabe are bad for Africa as a whole .
in writing . - ( FI ) Madam President , I voted for the resolution on the situation in Zimbabwe because on 27 July President Mugabe 's reign of terror once again openly made a mockery of the views of the international community , justice and democracy .
There can be no dispute that the presidential elections in Zimbabwe were illegitimate , and the violence , murders , arrests and harassment of the opposition within the country are a particularly savage aspect of the absence of justice .
As the resolution states , Zimbabwe very much needs a mediation process which includes various parties from the international community and Africa .
The parties to the dialogue must achieve sustainable outcomes for Zimbabwe and this will be possible only if the whole international community and its extensive democratic powers take part .
The people of Zimbabwe have a deep-seated longing for democracy .
The situation in Zimbabwe is a matter for the whole of the international community and the community of African states and it is absolutely imperative that we recognise Mugabe 's tyranny .
China and Libya do not unfortunately share the view of the international community on this matter .
The EU must support and encourage those African states which are seeking to boycott Zimbabwe in relations with Africa .
By contrast , South Africa 's political and economic support for Mugabe 's rule and the expulsion of Zimbabwean refugees from South Africa are contrary to our shared values .
I also wished to lend my support to the idea set out in the resolution that this dispute may and should have negative consequences for relations between the EU and South Africa .
in writing . - I voted for the resolution today and hope that Council will follow it up with strong concerted action .
I also hope that the changing attitudes that we are seeing amongst African leaders will also mean that we do not have to suffer the humiliating sight of Mr. Mugabe attending international meetings on EU territory .
Mugabe 's current power has been gained through the blood and suffering of his people .
Our Government 's should not be compounding that by forcibly returning people to Zimbabwe .
Not only can they find themselves in physical danger there but they can also add to the instability of the situation and pressure on diminishing resources .
Giving these people a legal migration status and allowing them to work would be the one guaranteed positive measure our Governments can offer : it would also mean that , when return is possible , people are going back with active skills and potential financial resources which will help grass-roots development .
Indeed , Governments should be adopting such a policy towards those who cannot return to other countries which are in conflict .
The people of Zimbabwe need our support in every way possible .
in writing . - The situation in Zimbabwe is cause for concern .
I join my colleagues in condemning the Zanu-PF party 's behaviour throughout the elections and would also stress that the elections of 27 June cannot be regarded as legitimate .
Fresh elections should be organised that respect democratic norms .
The suggestion of reaching an agreement on a transitional administration in the country is worth investigating as a way of getting out of the current democratic impasse Zimbabwe currently finds itself in .
I voted in favour of the resolution .
in writing . - I deplore the situation in Zimbabwe and call on all MEPs , the Commission , Council and all national governments to condemn Mugabe and seek a way through this crisis .
I welcome the statement by the G8 where they refuse to accept the legitimacy of any government that does not reflect the will of the Zimbabwean people .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by my German colleague Mr von Wogau on space and security .
The time has come for a common approach to defend European interests in space .
It is becoming increasingly obvious each day that we need space assets in order that the political and diplomatic activities of the European Union may be based on independent , reliable and complete information in support of its policies for conflict prevention , crisis management operations and global security ( especially the monitoring of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their means of transportation ) , verification of respect for international treaties , monitoring of the transnational smuggling of light weapons and small arms , the protection of critical infrastructure and of the EU 's borders , and civil protection in the event of natural and man-made disasters and crises .
Galileo is , in this regard , a cornerstone of the EU 's role in space .
This approach should go hand in hand with European defence and with support for the European defence industry , particularly in the aerospace sector .
in writing . - The European Union must develop its own space capabilities .
We are against the weaponisation of space but do recognise that , while the US refuses to cooperate closely with the Union for the joint use of satellite facilities during times of peace and war , we have no alternative but to try to deploy our own system in Europe .
The development of Europe 's common foreign and security policy and Europe 's security and defence capabilities requires a space dimension .
Mr von Wogau - the Chairman of our Subcommittee on Security and Defence - has done Parliament and Europe a service with this report , which we should follow up subsequently .
It would be difficult to be any clearer .
In its own-initiative report on ' Space and security ' , the majority of the EP rejected our proposals that :
emphasised that the use of space must serve exclusively non-military purposes , rejecting any direct or indirect military use ;
and underlined that Galileo is an exclusively non-military project ;
At the same time , it approved , among other dangerous measures :
the necessity of Galileo for autonomous ESDP operations and for the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) ;
the development of a common concept for geospatial intelligence policy , creating conditions for involvement of the EUSC in the planning for each ESDP operation requiring space-based observation and space-based intelligence ;
that the EU explore the possibility of a financial contribution to the EUSC from the EU budget in order to provide sufficient funds to meet the increasing needs of ESDP operations ;
the possibility of funding future European satellite telecommunications systems supporting ESDP operation from the EU budget .
In other words , the militarisation of the Galileo project and the increasing use of the Community budget for military ends .
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - ( SV ) I voted against the report because I believe that space should only be used for peaceful purposes .
The report went much too far .
in writing . - I generally welcome Mr Von Wogau 's report on space security .
I support the rapporteur 's stipulation that space should not become weaponised .
The development of voluntary instruments which could enhance space security is a positive step in ensuring a responsible space policy .
The Community budgets from which the ESDP is funded are currently intergovernmental ; consequently I feel it would be inappropriate to prejudge such spending in the report .
These views are reflected in my vote .
in writing . - ( EL ) The use of space is essential to the effectiveness of the EU 's imperialist interventions .
This is the conclusion of the report adopted by the European Parliament on space and the security of the EU .
The report underlines the necessity of using space for ' EU Member States ' deployments under UN , NATO and other similar organisations .
It calls for rapid development of the EGNOS and Galileo programmes , full development of the EU Satellite Centre , and the coordination , through the European Space Agency , of the satellite communication systems of the EU Member States , for the purposes of espionage and surveillance , in order to provide ' independent , reliable and complete information in support of its policies for conflict prevention policies , crisis management operations ... '
The EU budget is already allocating an astronomical EUR 5.25 billion for these purposes , for the period 2007-2013 alone .
This fact , as well as the decision to speed up the Galileo programme , shows that the EU intends to integrate the use of space into the strategic resources and capabilities for promoting the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the European Security and Defence Policy - in other words , the mechanism for the EU 's imperialist interventions around the world .
In the light of all this , the report 's appeal for ' non-militarisation ' of space - typical proof of the outrageous duplicity of imperialist political mouthpieces - is the utmost hypocrisy .
in writing . - The European Parliamentary Labour Party welcomes this Parliamentary report , and in particular we support the development of an EU Code of Conduct for activities in space , along with the development of voluntary instruments which could enhance space security .
We are , however , concerned not to prejudge decisions about the future EU budget ; ESDP activities are funded from the community budgets , which are currently inter-governmental .
For this reason we voted against two amendments which suggested this in relation to space-related ESDP activities .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Presentation of the programme of the French Presidency ( debate )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great honour for me to address your Assembly at such a critical moment for Europe .
I am well aware that we all bear a heavy responsibility .
Of course , as President-in-Office of the Council , I have a great responsibility , but the responsibility of all pro-Europeans is the same .
How do we get Europe out of the crisis in which it finds itself ?
How do we prevent immobility ?
How do we overcome our disagreements and use them to serve the same European ideal ?
Here we stand at the heart of European democracy .
Each one of you , having the honour of sitting in this Parliament , has had to win the support of your compatriots .
There are men and women of the left , of the centre , of the right ; there are elected representatives from 27 countries .
However , today we must turn our differences into a strength for an ailing European Union .
We must make these differences an opportunity to reassure European citizens , who are worried .
We must keep democracy alive , which means that we must engage in debate and at the same time create an image of a Europe that rejects immobility .
Everyone must be on board in the European family , with its 27 Member States ; nobody must be left behind .
We are just a few months away from an important date for the European Parliament .
It is reasonable for everyone to be conscious of this .
At the same time , we must give the impression this morning of a Europe that is working for everyone .
I have seen easier situations than the one in which Europe now finds itself .
If I may speak freely , conscious that , as President-in-Office of the Council , I must speak on everyone 's behalf , I have to take account of everyone 's sensibilities and at the same time come up with the right answers .
First observation : we have an institutional problem .
Heads of State or Government have tried to find a compromise with the Lisbon Treaty .
No one said that the Lisbon Treaty was going to solve all of our problems , but it was and remains the expression of a compromise acceptable to everyone .
I myself , as President of the French Republic , had to face up to my responsibilities .
France voted ' no ' in 2005 and this caused a problem for France .
Ladies and gentlemen , the issues that we have to address are very difficult and complex ; let us try to give everyone the idea that we are working on this with no ulterior motives and no preconceptions .
That is what is expected of us .
( Applause )
Before the elections , I offered the French people parliamentary ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
Before the elections , I said that I would not hold a referendum in France .
I said this to the people of France in a democratic spirit ; it was a choice I made three days before I was elected , which could have been highly significant .
I do not regret that choice .
I truly believe that institutional issues , the way in which we do things in Europe , are something for members of parliament rather than for referendums .
It is a political choice that I am making ( applause ) and it is a political choice that I made in my own country before the elections .
Therefore , it is perfectly democratic .
We now have the problem of the Irish ' no ' vote .
It is certainly not for a Frenchman to pass judgment on this outcome considering the earlier Dutch and French ' no ' votes .
Therefore , on 21 July , for the first time as President-in-Office of the Council , I will go to Ireland to listen , engage in dialogue and try to find solutions .
The French Presidency will propose a method and , I hope , a solution in agreement with the Irish Government , either in October or December .
The problem is this : we must avoid both rushing our Irish friends and yet at the same time establish under what conditions and with what treaty we are going to organise the 2009 European elections .
We therefore have a bit of time , but not that much .
We owe it to our fellow citizens to know on what basis we are going to organise the European elections .
The basis will be either the Lisbon Treaty or the Nice Treaty .
There will not be a new institutional conference .
There will not be a new treaty .
It is either Lisbon or Nice .
May I add , just to be perfectly clear - it is my opinion , but that does not make it the truth - that I am one of those who have always supported European enlargement .
The 2004 enlargement was a success .
The family is back together ; we should not regret that .
However , I am one of those who have always wished that Europe had been wise enough to create new institutions before enlargement .
That was a mistake and we are paying for it today .
It would have been braver to establish institutions before enlargement .
I want to be perfectly clear on this . Of course I do not regret enlargement .
The family must stay together .
However , I am adamant , President Pöttering , that we must not make the same mistakes again .
If we stick with Nice , it is the Europe of 27 .
If we want enlargement - and personally I do - we need new institutions before enlarging .
Who would have thought that Europe , with its 27 Member States , would be incapable of establishing its own institutions and that it would have no other priority than to keep on enlarging ?
Things have to be clear : if we want enlargement - and we do want enlargement - then we need new institutions .
( Applause )
Let me add - and I am saying this to Mr Schulz - that I am in favour of bringing in the Balkans , that our Croatian friends , like our Serbian friends , are unquestionably European .
However , the most pro-enlargement countries cannot say , ' we do not want Lisbon ' , yet at the same time , ' we want enlargement ' .
It is Lisbon and enlargement .
It is not blackmail , because in Europe , we do not do blackmail .
It is a matter of consistency , honesty and logic .
When it comes to Croatia , therefore , we must continue the negotiations , but everyone must shoulder their responsibilities .
If Europe is to grow , and it must , then it must do so with new institutions .
Another point : here and there in European debates I come across people saying , ' well look , it does not matter if we have a multi-speed Europe . '
Perhaps one day we will unfortunately have to have a multi-speed Europe , but that can only be a last resort . Europe has paid dearly for being divided by a wall of shame .
Europe has paid dearly for the dictatorship imposed on 80 million Europeans .
Let us think hard before we leave anyone behind .
When we were negotiating the Lisbon Treaty in Brussels , France fought to ensure that Poland could take its place in the Lisbon Treaty .
How can we tell 38 million Poles that it is much easier to shake off the yoke of the dictatorship that they were under , and from which they freed themselves , thanks to high-calibre people such as Lech Walesa and Jean-Paul II , than to remain in a free Europe ?
There are 27 members in this family .
Nobody should be left behind .
We must bring everybody in the European family on board ; that , at least , is what the French Presidency will work towards .
( Applause )
Regarding other issues , and I believe that we can reach a consensus on them , nothing would be worse than for Europe to give the impression of being immobile because it is going through yet another an institutional drama .
That would be an awful trap for us to fall into .
We reject institutions that condemn us to immobility , but at the same time , Europeans are impatient because they think we are too immobile .
Notwithstanding the institutional problem , perhaps even because of the institutional problem , Europe has a duty to act , and to act now .
This is the message that the French Presidency would like us all to send to Europeans .
We are in the process of resolving the institutional problems , but we are not condemned to inaction .
What , then , are our priorities ?
The first is to show Europeans that Europe can protect them .
Now I would like to say something about this word ' protection ' .
Since ancient times , whenever people have elected a government , it was so that this government would protect them .
Mr President , Europe must offer protection without protectionism .
Protectionism gets us nowhere .
Seeing European citizens today think that Europe , which was designed to protect them , is a source of concern rather than protection , is a real step backwards .
Therefore , it is up to us to show how Europe is going to protect them on concrete issues .
The first is the energy and climate package .
If there is one area in which our nations can do nothing if they act alone , it is in maintaining the ecological balance of our planet .
When it comes to pollution , CO2 and the ozone layer , the borders between our countries are irrelevant .
The stakes are high : since the meeting of IPCC experts , we have realised that we are the last generation that can prevent disaster .
The last generation !
If we do not do anything now , future generations may be able to limit the damage , but they will not be able to stop it .
Every country in the world says : ' I am willing to do something provided that the others start first . '
With this type of reasoning , our grandchildren 's grandchildren will never see any decisions made .
If we Europeans wait for others to do something before we act , we could be waiting a long time .
We created Europe to take our model of civilization to the world and to defend our values .
Among those values is the certainty that the world is doomed if we do not take a decision right away .
Europe must set an example .
Europe must lead by example .
We have a goal : the 2009 conference .
This conference must manage and organise the post-Kyoto phase .
Europe must come to it united , having decided to adopt the energy and climate package .
If we do not , we will not have any leverage to get the Chinese , Indians , emerging countries and Americans to make the efforts that we have agreed on .
Therefore , it is essential that , under the French Presidency , we adopt the energy and climate package submitted by the Commission .
( Applause )
It is a demanding package , it is a difficult package , but I would like to appeal to everyone 's sense of responsibility .
If every country starts wanting to renegotiate its own particular bugbear , the things it has a problem with , then , ladies and gentlemen , we will never reach an agreement .
This is why the French Presidency is asking the European Parliament to rally behind it so that we can get the energy and climate package adopted within the next six months .
That is a priority .
It is not a right-wing or a left-wing priority , it is simply common sense .
If we go into negotiations Member State by Member State , we have no chance of succeeding .
Now , of course , there are points that need to be clarified or adapted .
I am thinking in particular of a very difficult matter : namely the problems for our firms , on which we are rightly going to impose rules to maintain the balance of the planet .
Should we , in Europe , impose essential rules on our firms and , at the same time , continue to import products from countries that do not abide by any of the rules that we impose on our businesses ?
That is not a matter of protectionism ; it is a matter of fairness , justice and refusing to be naive .
There is the problem of deciding on a border mechanism .
Should there be free quotas or adjustment mechanisms ?
I do not know , but , in any case , we have to discuss it .
( Applause )
Second question : I understand that , for some countries - I am thinking particularly of those that joined us in 2004 , which largely rely on fossil fuels for their energy - the efforts demanded of them are considerable .
These countries are telling us , ' we have had growth for 10 years ; please do not take that away from us . '
No doubt there is a way to get everyone on board and , with the President of the Commission , we have to work on it so that everyone realises that they will not be doomed to recession , misery , poverty and unemployment .
This energy and climate package is an absolute priority for us .
The world cannot wait ; Europe has to lead the way .
Second point : of the 27 countries , 24 are now in the Schengen Area ; in other words , 24 countries out of 27 .
23 , you say ?
OK , 23 then , but that is still not bad .
This does not include countries that are not members of the European Union but - and this is why we often have debates - are part of the Schengen Area .
So what does this mean ?
It means that we have decided on complete freedom of movement between the Schengen Area countries .
I would like to say to the leaders of the political groups and to members of parliament that we in France , with Bernard Kouchner and Jean-Pierre Jouyet , have taken a decision that was not easy to take .
Since 1 July , there have no longer been any barriers preventing access to the French labour market , because I have announced that I will abolish all of the restrictions negotiated by my predecessors .
Any worker from any EU country can come and work in France .
( Applause )
It was not that simple ; it was not that easy .
In any case , and French MEPs will correct me if I am wrong , I was told that it would be a disaster if I announced this decision .
As usual , we made the decision , and no disaster materialised .
I was not happy about the dispute over the infamous ' Polish plumber ' , which did not give my country or indeed Europe a very good name .
That is not why we all built the European Union .
( Applause )
Nevertheless , now that we no longer have any borders between us , is it fair , is it reasonable for each of us to go on deciding our own immigration policy , taking no notice of the others ' constraints ?
The European Pact on Immigration and Asylum is an essential document for the French Presidency , for two reasons .
The first of these - and may I turn to the left of the Chamber first - is that if all of us , if all European countries have a European immigration policy , we remove immigration from national debates where extremists use poverty and fear to serve values that are not ours .
The only way to have a responsible debate on immigration is to make it a European policy .
No more partisan ulterior motives compelling countries with different sensitivities to work together .
What Brice Hortefeux suggested , which was approved by all ministers and should be discussed by the Permanent Representatives Committee and by the European Council , seems to me a priority .
It will show that Europe does not want to be a fortress , that Europe is not refusing to take people in , that Europe needs migrant workers , but that Europe cannot take in everyone who would like to come to Europe .
Let me add that , when it comes to political asylum , it is not logical for one individual to be able to submit 27 applications to 27 democratic countries and not get the same answers every time to the same problem .
Let me add that , for development with Africa , we will be stronger if we work together ; this is the second priority of the French Presidency .
Third priority : we want to further a concept often talked about in Europe , but which is making slow progress , and that is European defence .
I am well aware that there is a lot of disagreement surrounding this issue , but let me tell you what I believe .
How do you think Europe can become a political power and make itself heard if it cannot defend itself and deploy resources in support of its policy ?
Take the example of Kosovo , which to my mind is a European Union success story .
This is a European problem , which has to be settled by Europeans .
How can Europeans continue to do that if they do not acquire the military and human resources to enforce the decisions that we have taken together ?
How do you think that Europe can become the most prosperous economic area in the world if it is unable to defend itself ?
Yes , we have NATO .
It would not occur to anyone , least of all me , to dispute the usefulness of NATO .
It is not a matter of choosing between a European defence policy or NATO , but of having NATO - the alliance with the Americans - and an autonomous European security policy .
It is both of these together , not one instead of the other .
Let me add that we cannot go on having Europe ensuring its security based on the contribution of just four or five countries , with the others relying on the efforts of these four or five countries .
The Member States cannot keep on building their own aircraft separately , having armaments industries that compete with each other to the point of ruin and ultimately are weakened , simply because they are not strong enough to have a European defence policy .
Fourth priority : the extremely difficult issue of the common agricultural policy .
I am coming now to my conclusion , which is linked with this .
It is precisely because it is difficult that we need to talk about it .
I am perfectly aware that among us we have agricultural States that fiercely defend the work of their farmers and , at the same time , States that think that this policy costs too much .
Ladies and gentlemen , may I appeal to your common sense .
In 2050 the world will have 9 billion inhabitants .
Already , there 800 million people who are dying of starvation .
A child starves to death every 30 seconds .
Is it reasonable to ask Europe to reduce its agricultural production at a time when the world has such great need of foodstuffs ?
I do not think that this is reasonable .
It is not about French agriculture ; it is about common sense .
( Applause )
Let me add a second point : regardless of whether your country is an agricultural one , food security concerns everyone .
Is it reasonable to impose , rightly , traceability and safety rules on our breeders and farmers and go on importing meat into Europe which comes from other countries that do not abide by any of the rules that we are imposing on our farmers ?
( Applause )
Third point : agricultural prices have never been so high .
It is precisely the right time to talk about prices , to talk about subsidies and to talk about Community preference .
I also think that between the common agricultural policy 's health check and financial arbitration , we might be able to agree on certain concepts such as food sufficiency and food security for Europe .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a host of other topics : the social dimension , for example , is a huge issue .
May I make one point .
Sometimes I see a certain contradiction : a single-minded view sometimes exists that Europe should not meddle with everything and that Europe should intervene only in areas that concern it .
However , the same people who accuse Europe of poking its nose into everything are the first to speak up when we do not talk about the social dimension .
Until now , the Member States have always wanted social policy to be first and foremost a national competence , because pensions and healthcare are primarily national issues .
Ladies and gentlemen , there are a number of social directives that President Barroso did well to put on the agenda .
I am thinking of those on works councils , temporary work and a number of basic rules which have to be imposed on everyone in Europe .
The French Presidency will make this a priority .
Other subjects too should be put on the French Presidency 's agenda , even though they are not within Europe 's remit .
Let me take an example of something which affects us all : Alzheimer 's disease .
( Off-mike comment from Mr Cohn-Bendit : ' not yet ' ) .
Mr Cohn-Bendit , it would never have occurred to me that someone so young as you should already be affected by a disease which , although it does not affect you , affects millions of Europeans .
These millions of Europeans are just as important to me as your health .
( Applause )
Of course , subsidiarity means that this is not a European competence .
Nevertheless , I would like the French Presidency to organise a meeting of all specialists from all European countries so that we can share best practice , so that our researchers can pool their skills to find out more about this disease and so that together we can find a solution .
Just imagine what Europeans would say about Europe then : it is a way of curing these awful diseases .
What I said about Alzheimer 's could apply to cancer , which breaks families apart .
There is no reason for everyone to work on their own on finding solutions to cancer when together we will have more resources and be stronger .
( Applause )
Finally , with regard to culture and sport , let me say that it is a big mistake not to talk about the issues that affect the day-to-day lives of Europeans .
There is a European cultural exception .
We must make culture a part of everyday debate in Europe .
The world does not have to bow down to one language and one culture .
We must clearly address the question of VAT on videos and CDs , like that of VAT on books , which you have settled .
On sport , which transcends political divides , let me just say that I would like there to be a sporting exception in Europe , just as there is a cultural exception .
I am in favour of the freedom of movement of individuals and goods , but I do not accept the idea that we should make our football clubs pay , undermining the investment that many clubs make in teenage boys , who need to stay with the club for training purposes .
A sporting exception , which would mean that sport is not beholden to the market economy , should have the support of all MEPs .
( Applause )
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , I would like to finish - apologies for having been too long , no doubt - with a final observation .
I know where I am going to make this observation : where the heart of European democracy beats .
Europe has suffered a great deal .
It has suffered first of all from the cowardice of some of us , who were very happy to let Europe pay for responsibilities which were really those of political leaders , unwilling to make in public the choices that they refused to defend in Brussels .
( Applause )
That is cowardice .
I say this to the President of the European Parliament and to the President of the Commission : the Presidency will work hand in hand with you .
If any Member State does not agree , let it speak up .
As I said to the Polish President , he himself negotiated the Lisbon Treaty , he gave his word , and one 's word has to be honoured .
It is not a question of politics , but a question of morals .
( Applause )
However , Europe has suffered from something else too . Europe has suffered from a lack of debate .
I would like to end with this because it is very important to me .
Our institutions are independent , but independence does not mean indifference .
If we , the political leaders , do not have the courage to debate , who will ?
To debate what ?
What is the right economic strategy ?
What is the right monetary strategy ?
What is the right exchange rate strategy ?
What is the right interest rate strategy ?
Of course everyone is entitled to their own beliefs , and I say this to our German friends in particular .
However , no one has the right to prevent a debate , a constructive debate .
Of course everyone wants an agreement , such as the trade agreement which is in the process of being negotiated .
However , no one must be afraid of saying that Europe must not be naive .
We have to discuss the advantages of free trade , but we must also tell emerging countries that there are no grounds for them to demand the same rights without taking on the same obligations .
We must not be afraid to hold a European debate .
We must engage in a dignified European debate , but we must not be afraid to defend our beliefs .
We are not questioning the ECB 's independence when we ask whether it is reasonable to raise interest rates to 4.25 % when US interest rates are at 2 % . We are having a debate .
A peaceful debate , where no one has a monopoly on the truth .
I certainly do not , nor do the experts , who have to demonstrate the effectiveness of their decisions .
It is in this spirit , ladies and gentlemen , that I intend , together with French ministers , to shoulder this responsibility .
I know that it is difficult .
I know that , when you are President-in-Office of the Council , you are not defending the interests of your country , but the interests of the Union .
I know , Mr President , Presidents , that we have to work as a team in the interests of the Europe of 27 , and I hope that in six months ' time everyone will be able to say : ' Europe has made progress thanks to your participation and support . '
( Loud applause )
Mr President-in-Office of the European Council , thank you for your speech .
We wish you continued courage , determination and especially success throughout your Presidency - as , when you are successful , the European Union is successful and , with it , the European Parliament .
You can be assured that the European Parliament is at your side when you make your resolute contribution to taking the European Union forward into a good future .
The European Parliament will support you in this task .
I should also like to welcome the ministers with you today : Bernard Kouchner , Brice Hortefeux , a former fellow Member , and especially your Minister of State for European Affairs , Jean-Pierre Jouyet , who is almost always here in Parliament .
I welcome you all most warmly to the European Parliament .
( Applause )
President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad to be here with you today in the European Parliament for the presentation of the six-month French Presidency of the Council of the European Union .
I think that this will be a presidency full of drive and determination and rich in concrete results that we will all work towards .
You wanted France to come back to Europe , President-in-Office , and this is unquestionably excellent news for us all .
European citizens and the European Parliament assembled here today expect a great many things from the French Presidency .
As I said during our meeting in Paris on 1 July , the Commission will stand by the French Presidency , offering its full support to ensure the success of the European Union during these six months .
There will be no shortage of challenges .
Globalisation is here to stay and international competition is becoming increasingly tough .
The world faces new challenges such as the scarcity of fossil fuels and climate change .
We must act now to find common solutions to these challenges .
All of these factors mean that Europe needs to reform its economies to become more competitive , modernise its social models and invest in education , research and innovation .
Europe has many aces up its sleeve , particularly as one of the world 's leading trading powers .
However , it must have the courage to adapt .
If we want to offer protection , we must adapt .
That is the key .
There is no point in denying that Europe is going through a difficult period : the Irish ' no ' vote and the global economic climate , soaring oil and commodity prices , the sharp rise in food prices and inflationary pressures , which are the greatest enemy of purchasing power .
Inflation is also the greatest enemy of social justice as , when there is very strong inflation , those who suffer most are those on low wages or living on a pension .
All of these factors are casting a shadow over our economies and forcing our politicians , at both European and national level , to make difficult choices .
We must confront these realities head on and apply ourselves to them with realism and determination .
We have just come back from the G8 summit in Japan , where I could clearly see that the influence enjoyed by the European Union , as well as the expectations and respect that it engenders around the world , are in marked contrast with the gloom that is often expressed within the EU .
I can tell you now that , now more than ever , the European Union is seen outside Europe as a positive and decisive player , a player with enormous influence on the world stage .
Let us take two concrete subjects that were at the centre of the G8 summit : climate change and development - two issues on which Europe has taken the initiative at global level .
The United States has now joined us in the fight against climate change by largely subscribing to our views .
Last year in Heiligendamm , I remember that we had great difficulty - President Sarkozy was there - in convincing the Americans and the Russians to accept the principle of mandatory targets for 2050 .
Now we have achieved this .
It was possible thanks to our role as European leader ; I am proud of this as President of a European institution .
It is a success that we yet again owe to European unity .
The second example is development , and specifically soaring food prices , which threaten all of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) .
We were also able to act as a catalyst in this area thanks to the conclusions of last month 's European Council , which , and I quote , welcomed ' the Commission 's intention to come forward with a proposal for a new fund to support agriculture in developing countries . '
The European Commission will adopt this proposal next week .
I am counting on the full support of both arms of the budgetary authority so that Europe can swiftly provide the necessary aid to farmers , particularly those in Africa , in close cooperation with the competent multilateral organisations .
This support is essential to guarantee ' the green revolution ' that Africa needs for its stability and prosperity , which , as you all know , is also in Europe 's direct interests .
As the European Council requested , our proposal will remain within the limits of the current financial perspective .
Our approach consists of allocating the savings that the rise in international prices allows Europe to generate as part of its agricultural support policy to those who are hit hardest by this increase .
There are emergency and disaster situations all around the world .
If you could have heard what the President of the World Bank said , if you could have heard some of the leaders of African countries and other countries represented in enlarged meetings talk about the hunger and starvation that now represent a real threat to so many people in the world , you would understand to what extent European aid is necessary and indispensable .
( Applause )
This is why I believe that , yet again , we can set a good example of solidarity between European and African farmers , illustrating the fact that the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) and development policy can and must work in tandem , because , as President Sarkozy has just said , food security is a global issue and we need to tackle it together .
Not alone , but together .
Therefore , it is true that there are concerns , but it is also true that , more than ever before , the European Union has a central role in resolving them .
Rather than wallow in what I sometimes call ' crisisophilia ' - there is even talk of the phenomenon of declinism in Europe - let us emphasise the value of the concrete and positive action of the EU .
In any case , this is the best way of resolving the international issues raised by Ireland 's non-ratification of the Lisbon Treaty .
We must address this because the Lisbon Treaty could make us work more effectively , more democratically , although we must not use it as an excuse for failing to respond immediately to the needs of our citizens .
European citizens are looking to us for answers .
The best response we can give them is to talk to them frankly and show that we have political courage .
The French Presidency has both qualities in abundance .
In a Europe on trial , we must provide evidence that Europe works .
We must focus on policies that bring Europe closer to its citizens and change their daily lives .
More than ever before , we are plotting a course for a Europe based on results .
Personally , I am confident .
The priorities of your Presidency will allow Europe to meet the major challenges that it faces , while preparing for the issues of the future .
I welcome the priority given by the French Presidency to the introduction of an integrated energy and climate change policy .
As you said , President-in-Office , this is the top priority of your Presidency , and we know how determined you are to finalise this strategic agreement by the end of the year , which would put the EU in a good position to embark on the Copenhagen negotiations in a year 's time .
The Commission will lend its full support so that we can reach an ambitious and balanced agreement with the European Parliament and the Member States .
I have made this a priority for my institution , and I would like to thank the President-in-Office once again for his tireless support for the energy and climate package unveiled by the European Commission .
We must also move towards a policy of controlled immigration in Europe .
We must first address immigration , which an ageing Europe needs , in certain key economic sectors , and which must be accompanied by proper integration so that we can be proud in our humanist Europe of the integration that we offer to those who genuinely want to come here to work .
The adoption of the ' blue card ' under the French Presidency would be an important step in this direction .
However , we also need to tackle illegal immigration and the exploitation that often arises from this , particularly by furthering the proposal to penalise those who employ illegal workers .
It is here that we must effectively make the most effort ; we must not threaten the poor workers who only want to work in Europe , but penalise those who want to exploit them .
This practice is a disgrace to Europe .
Let there be no mistake : we must be realistic in addressing the issue of immigration .
I am firmly convinced , ladies and gentlemen , that our inability to address this issue seriously and responsibly is one of the greatest threats to Europe .
We will not solve the immigration issue by being permissive on all fronts .
This would be the best excuse for extremist forces , for xenophobic forces .
We need to be tough on illegal immigration , and at the same time show that we are generous and united in the integration of migrant communities who want to contribute to Europe 's growth and development .
I believe that we need to be clear on this ; we need to be tough on crime while continuing to show respect for human rights , which are the trademark of European civilisation and our plans for European integration .
Naturally these are sensitive issues , which are easy prey for polemic and misunderstanding .
This is why the Commission wanted to put forward a balanced proposal and why it has outlined 10 key principles so that we can go forward together .
I was delighted to see the French Presidency and the French justice and interior ministers endorse this integrated approach during their informal meeting in Cannes this week .
I am keen to point out , ladies and gentlemen , that in Europe , in the Schengen Area , where freedom of movement is a reality , it is absurd to continue with 27 different immigration policies .
What we need is a European immigration policy .
Also in the pipeline is our Social Agenda .
There can be no dynamic , competitive economic model without genuine social investment to prevent the risks of poverty , exclusion and marginalisation .
France has made the new Social Agenda unveiled by the European Commission a few days ago one of its priorities .
I welcome this .
To prepare Europeans for the future , we must offer them opportunities , access to quality services , education , healthcare and continuing solidarity .
Nobody in Europe must be left by the wayside .
Europe is all about opportunity and solidarity .
Ladies and gentlemen , many other projects will be launched over the coming six months .
I cannot describe them all here , but if I can briefly outline two , I should like to commend the projects for European defence and the Union for the Mediterranean , which will be unveiled next Sunday in Paris .
I see these as two opportunities for Europe to affirm its role in the world .
Here too , it is up to us to translate this ambition into concrete action .
I wish the French Presidency of the Council every success , guaranteeing the full support of the Commission throughout the next six months , which promise to be exciting .
The first duty for politicians is to face up to challenges and redouble efforts to meet them successfully .
We can do a great deal together .
I would like to pay tribute here to the efforts made over the past few months by French Government at the highest level to work closely with the European institutions .
The institutions , the Presidency and the Member States must all work hand in hand .
This is the key to the joint success that we owe the citizens of Europe , and I would like to pay tribute to the commitment expressed here again today by the President-in-Office so that together , the Council , Parliament and the Commission can find concrete solutions to the concrete problems that our citizens have to face each day .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , France has decided that its Presidency will be synonymous with political commitment .
We need political commitment to overcome the difficulties faced by European integration .
The most entrenched of these is without doubt the Irish ' no ' vote , discussed here this morning .
We must engage our citizens in Europe .
There are many reasons why they have doubts , including fears linked to globalisation , rising prices and changes in traditional family and social values .
If we cannot convince everyone that major issues such as security , climate change , energy and migration can be negotiated effectively only at European level - and with regard to the world 's major regions , Europe must also be strong enough to convince the United States , India , China , and Brazil - we cannot envisage a peaceful future .
The French Presidency will also need political commitment to convince its partners that the Lisbon Treaty will help us decide more effectively and democratically on all of these common issues .
Those members of my group who belong to the European People 's Party would like all Member States who have not yet done so to ratify the Treaty during the French Presidency .
After a period of reflection and with all due respect , we look forward , as we did with France and the Netherlands , to Ireland offering its 26 partners a solution to the impasse .
We ask each Member State to refrain from any one-upmanship and to act responsibly .
Our group would like to see an end to this institutional debate and we are confident that the French Presidency will work towards achieving this goal .
Presidents , ladies and gentlemen , while we are trying to equip ourselves with a better decision-making tool , our problems are building up . This is consuming energy that could be better spent on job creation , defending our interests and promoting our social model and Europe in general .
As I said , we will certainly need political commitment .
We should also make sure that we have the commitment to address the priorities that the President-in-Office of the Council has just unveiled .
We must act urgently to tackle the issues of climate change , energy , migration , food security and defence .
On climate change and energy , the alternative is clear : either our Member States are convinced that they must progress and set an example ahead of the Copenhagen Summit , and if so , we must make clear decisions before December to ensure reciprocity from our international partners , or they have decided that , despite worsening climatic conditions and our energy dependence , there is no need to take urgent action .
I hardly need tell you which way my political group leans .
On migration , too , we want an end to this hypocrisy .
While a number of countries around the world have already adopted an immigration policy with fairly satisfactory results , most of our countries have delayed these choices .
It is time for a debate and a decision on the subject , which must be positive , humane and responsible .
The draft European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , which will be debated in October , is a step in the right direction , and I congratulate the EU ministers on their response this week to the draft prepared by Brice Hortefeux .
You have our support , Mr Hortefeux .
Finally , I would like to mention two topics that are very close to my heart and are vital for the future and for our independence : food security and defence .
I would like us to think of the most disadvantaged people , both around the world and in our own countries , for whom rising food prices are a real problem .
I would like Europe and the French Presidency to make an effort to help them through these difficult times .
In terms of defence , I would just like to ask one question : how can Europe be credible without defence worthy of the name ?
We need defence to guarantee peace in Europe and to help the world 's most disadvantaged people .
Our group supports the commitment of the French Presidency to lead the way by making bold proposals to its partners in these two strategic areas .
Ladies and gentlemen , European integration is an eminently political affair .
I am in no doubt that , if we are brave enough to make clear political choices , our citizens will rediscover a liking for Europe .
I have every confidence that the new Presidency will encourage us in this and we have everything to gain in winning the trust of our citizens ahead of the 2009 European elections .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are aspects of your views that we share , Mr Sarkozy , and I should first like to go into some of these in more detail .
I am delighted that you have returned from Japan safe and sound .
We have now heard again about the next series of commitments on climate change and it is time we delivered on these .
You are right that the climate package is a priority : it is one that our group shares with you .
You are right , too , when you say that individual states cannot achieve this on their own - not even the Germans and the French , by the way , by reaching agreements on their own in Straubing .
There are 25 other countries that are part of this and , above all , it is the European Parliament that makes the final decision .
We shall do it with you , cooperatively , but do not take any initiatives on the side - not even with Angela Merkel , however good an idea that may seem to be .
Since you mention sport , I had a look at the French newspapers this morning , wondering what they would write today about Mr Sarkozy 's visit to the European Parliament .
Nothing !
They write a lot about the Tour de France , and it is a German who is wearing the yellow jersey there at the moment .
( Heckling )
I listened closely to you , Mr President-in-Office , as you made your other points , about climate change and particularly about the Treaty of Lisbon .
Indeed , if we want to deliver , we need instruments , and that puts us in a dilemma .
The citizens want us to be more effective , more transparent , more democratic , and they want the national parliaments to be more democratic and have more influence .
That is all correct but , every time we want to deliver , the instrument we need - a revised treaty - is snatched from our hands .
You are right : this means that we need a new approach , a fresh start .
We need to try to bring this Treaty into force .
I think it is great that you are going to Ireland and working constructively with the Irish people .
If I may give you a personal tip , leave Bernard Kouchner behind in Paris this time .
I had the impression that his previous contributions did not exactly help us to convince the Irish .
( Applause , heckling )
However , I am speaking about a matter on which we hold completely the opposite view to you .
You spoke of four priorities for your Presidency , and I was waiting to see if there was a fifth .
You then mentioned several other things you said were important - not priorities , just other things .
These ' other things ' included a social Europe , which you said was a matter for the nation-states .
I believe that is a serious error .
( Applause )
I want to tell you that we expect a different approach from the French Presidency .
A social Europe does not mean that we want to establish a social security office in Europe or that we want to bring in family allowance in Europe .
A social Europe is about something else : for a long time , people have believed - and rightly so - that Europe can make economic progress possible .
We have spent 50 years working to ensure that economic progress in Europe leads to more growth and more jobs , and always to a guarantee of more social security .
More and more people are now feeling that quite the opposite is true - that Europe 's economic progress is benefiting a few large conglomerates , certain insurance companies , hedge funds and large enterprises , but not the people .
It is the task of the European Union to restore to them the feeling that growth in Europe , the economic progress of this continent , does not serve the banks and the large conglomerates but each individual citizen .
Furthermore , if the nation-states have to guarantee this , then you as President-in-Office of the European Council are obliged to tell your fellow Heads of State or Government that they must make sure that social justice , rather than free-market radicalism , takes centre stage in their nation-states .
( Applause )
I should like to add that we have a European Court of Justice that delivers verdicts every day , and its verdicts can change the degree of social welfare in the individual Member States even though the Member States do not have any instruments with which to resist .
This is why we need a social Europe , Mr President-in-Office , and this is why I expect you to change your mind on this issue by December .
Otherwise , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will not be able to support you .
Mr President-in-Office , fears about social exclusion lead to dangerous developments , and one dangerous development is that governments that are on the defensive believe that they can take people 's minds off this fear of social exclusion by hounding minorities .
We are currently seeing this in one European Union Member State .
I do not know what percentage of the Italian population is made up of Roma children , but I do know that when a government goes and says ' they will be registered as by a police records department ; they must have their fingerprints taken ' , supposedly in order to provide them with social protection , that is a grave offence against Europe 's fundamental rights .
Your country , France , gave the European community of nations its first charter of fundamental rights .
The first declaration of human rights came from your country .
As President of that republic , you are part of the tradition of your country .
I ask you , in your role as President-in-Office of the European Council , to influence Silvio Berlusconi 's government , and tell it that Europe is a community founded upon the rule of law , not a union of caprice .
( Loud applause )
The European Union faces many major challenges but , if we do not guarantee social welfare in Europe , people will turn away from this Europe and , when they turn away , the Treaty of Lisbon will not be of any use ; the whole project will fail .
We need courage , therefore .
I know that you are a courageous man .
We support your priorities ; now support ours - a social Europe and climate change , institutional reform and human rights .
Then your Presidency will be successful .
( Applause from the left )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would put it to the President-in-Office that the Irish vote against the Treaty has made his impressively prepared presidency more problematic .
It has also made the case for a practical , problem-solving Europe stronger than ever .
The energy and climate packages become more urgent every day .
Capping VAT is a short-term sop : Europe should be cutting its dependence on oil and gas .
We need much more investment in renewable energy : small-scale and localised to bring household bills down , and large-scale , such as using the Union for the Mediterranean to invest in high-voltage solar thermal power production in North Africa .
On Tuesday the G8 , which is the source of nearly two thirds of the world 's CO2 , approved an emissions-reduction target of 50 % .
But the emerging economies are right to say that the target should be higher - perhaps 80 % - with interim targets .
To stabilise food prices we need good ideas , such as the recent CAP reforms of Commissioner Fischer Boel , not protectionism , however disguised .
The truth is that people care more about the petrol price and the bread bill than about the grand aims of our Union .
Today nobody should say ' Qu 'ils mangent de la brioche ' ( ' Let them eat cake ' ) .
The President-in-Office is right to put the focus on migration .
But migration will be manageable only when we manage the despair that leads so many to risk so much to come here .
There should be routes for legal migration , a crackdown on people-smuggling , and reform of our farm policy to kick-start growth in the countries of origin .
It may be optimistic to ask a French presidency to liberalise markets .
But to bring security within our borders we must bring hope beyond them .
There is another way in which the French presidency can break new ground .
France gave us the Rights of Man . Now France must lead in their defence .
At home , by pressing ahead with the anti-discrimination directive . Abroad : by anchoring peace in the Balkans in a European Union future ; by using the Union for the Mediterranean to improve human rights in North Africa ; and by uniting in our dealings with Russia and condemning China 's crackdown on dissent .
( FR ) President-in-Office , do not go to Beijing .
Play a team game .
( Applause )
It was Voltaire who told us : ' Mortals are equal ; it is not birth , but virtue alone that makes the difference . '
And by taking a lead , Europe can demonstrate its virtue and demand that the dignity of every man and woman be recognised .
President-in-Office , to succeed , you will need to build consensus .
You will need Parliament , Council and Commission to work together to a common agenda set by 27 Member States and this House .
If we are to argue , it must be about that agenda , not its messengers .
You have plunged into a polemic with the President of the ECB and with two Commissioners , but they represent our Union and the policies we have agreed .
It is not the European way to divide and rule .
We must stand on our principles but work together to achieve our common goals .
( FR ) Mr President , I know I am coming to the end , but please give me ' soixante petites secondes pour ma dernière minute ' with Carla Bruni 's husband .
( Laughter )
President-in-Office , if you stand on your principles and let us work together to achieve common goals , if you do that , Liberals and Democrats will work with you .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to bring citizens closer to Europe there is a need , as I said in the European Convention for the new treaty , to give Europe a soul , that respects the various languages and identities , reaffirming common roots and values , and you have tried to express that soul in your speech today , President-in-Office .
As Strasbourg is symbolic of renewed peace , so today the European flag flies alongside the national flags , and should be a visible representation of the symbol of all citizens united by a common project for defence , security , cultural and economic growth , and the transparency of the Central Bank : perhaps that is still missing from the new Treaty .
Politics needs to give young people definite goals .
There can be no economic future without respect for the environment and there can be no respect for rights without recognition of the associated duties .
We hope that the French Presidency includes in its objectives the European Charter of Duties .
Democracy and freedom are based on the application of rules .
The internet cannot be a tool of terrorism , child traffickers and incitements to violence .
We need to harmonise our countries ' laws , from immigration to the protection of minors , from energy to compatible progress .
A new Europe for a new relationship with Africa .
Not just green certificates or trade but mutual growth , jointly sharing the Euro-Mediterranean project ; we must think of the pockets of terrorism in Mogadishu and the violence in Zimbabwe that are preventing the development of democracy .
There is too much hesitation within the EU : we are asking the Council to approve ' made in ' so that international trade can have clear rules .
The fight against counterfeiting and illegality is an economic problem but it also affects our citizens ' health , and small and medium-sized enterprises are a cultural value that should be defended .
We offer the French Presidency our staunch support so that hopes may become reality shared by the citizens and so that , possibly , by supporting the development of scientific advances to combat rare diseases , we can also combat our intelligent friend Mr Schulz 's endemic antipathy towards Prime Minister Berlusconi .
Mr President , your European voluntarism , your ambition for Europe is a challenge that we share in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
I would even say , to paraphrase a song that you know , ' it is a drug we are all hooked on . '
However , there is one thing that I would like to say .
If we are ambitious enough to say that we must accept the climate package as it is one minute and that we will bow down before the German car industry lobby the next , then we have lost , because everyone will come and say : ' do not forget about us ' .
This is the problem .
We cannot complain about petrol being too expensive , yet at the same time allow the car industry to build gas-guzzling vehicles .
We have had the technology to build energy-efficient cars for 15 years now , but because there are no rules forcing manufacturers to do this , consumers are now paying for petrol at the price it is .
This is the truth of the matter ; this is how things are .
( Applause from the centre and left )
You mention the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum .
Let us have a European Pact on Immigration and Asylum , then .
Initiate a dialogue : for legal emigration , let the European Parliament take part under the codecision procedure so that we have a genuine political debate , a genuine democratic debate .
I am fed up , Mr Daul , because whenever we talk about emigration , after 15 seconds we start talking about illegal immigration , the threat of immigration .
First of all , if Europe is what it is today , it is thanks to the men and women who have built it with us . That is the truth .
( Applause from the centre and left )
Please , I am no angel , but we have built a house with no doors .
People are coming in through the windows .
I say to you : ' Let us throw open the doors so that people can come into Europe , and then we will decide what to do about those who come in illegally . '
You say to us : ' We need skilled workers ' , yet at the same time , Europe sends home tens of thousands of students each year who have come here to study .
Let them stay here ; if they have studied here , they are not illegal immigrants .
Now turning to the points on which you said that the social dimension is not within Europe 's remit .
President-in-Office , you will not protect Europeans if we do not work together to combat social and fiscal dumping .
We need Europeans to face up to this problem .
We need to put a stop to it , and we stand by you on this .
We need to have a discussion with the Central Bank ?
Let us have a discussion , then .
We need to have a discussion with the Irish ?
Let us have one .
We must stop saying that the social dimension is not part of the European remit .
This cannot continue .
( Applause from the centre and left )
I now wish to turn to the issues on which we are deeply divided .
You are going to China to attend the opening of the Olympic Games with the Chinese President .
I hope you enjoy it !
Personally , I will be thinking of all the prisoners rotting in Chinese prisons .
I will be thinking of all those who have been arrested .
I will be thinking of all those who are being mistreated in Tibet .
You had a golden opportunity to defend the European values of democracy and liberty by saying , ' I will not attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games , this masquerade of the Chinese Communist Party . '
This is what we want to hear .
( Applause from the centre and left )
I can tell you that when you come to write your memoirs , you will regret what you have done .
You will regret it because the people who locked up these innocent citizens will be saying to them , ' You see , we can do what we want : the Western world only wants our markets . '
Mr President , it is a disgrace , it is pathetic , to go to the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games .
( Applause from the centre and left )
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I would like to focus my speech on the twofold nature of this French Presidency , namely its unquestionable strong point and its all-too-obvious weak point .
Its strong point , in relation to the usual tenors of the Union , is that it does not say that Europe is doing well and that it should continue along these lines when increasing numbers of Europeans think that it is doing badly and that things should change .
So far so good .
But what then ?
This is where the problem lies .
What conclusions do you draw , Mr President , from this apparent lucidity about the crisis of legitimacy that the Union is experiencing today , in particular its economic model and its operating mode ?
You say that you want to understand and that you respect the concerns that Europeans have about the Union , but you put pressure on the Irish people to go back on their decision , when they were only voicing , like the French and the Dutch , what millions of other Europeans are thinking .
You criticise , rightly , the way the European Central Bank has been managing the euro from its ivory tower , but you never recommend re-examining the statutes which grant it all those powers and even assign it this task !
You state , on the subject of immigration , that you want to ' serve our values ' , but you supported the shameful directive , condemned by the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , by all human rights organisations and by European churches , precisely because it violates essential human values .
You ignore the social question - which , you say , should remain the sole responsibility of Member States - but you say nothing about the European Court of Justice , which delivers ruling upon ruling placing the different social models within the Union in competition with each other and basing itself on Articles 43 and 49 of the Treaty .
You say that you did not like the image of the ' Polish plumber ' .
Neither did I. This was an expression coined by the populist right and made popular on television screens by Mr Bolkestein .
I say ' Welcome to workers from all countries ' on an equal footing in all fields .
( Applause from the left )
This is precisely what current European law refuses .
President-in-Office , may I remind you that , according to the Commission , in Lower Saxony , for the same work on the same construction site , a worker from another Member State can be paid half the minimum wage applicable to a German worker .
This is what we do not want .
Do you know what a man who cannot be accused of populism , namely John Monks , Secretary-General for the European Trade Union Confederation , thinks ?
He considers these decisions ' considerably problematic ' because , he says , they decree ' the primacy of economic freedoms over fundamental rights and the respect of labour law . '
What is your answer to that ?
You claim that you want to build a ' Europe which protects ' , but we do not hear you criticising all those structural measures which make the existence of Europeans precarious : the obligation to open public utility undertakings to competition ; the pressures of the Stability Pact on wages and social spending and the number of ' guidelines ' prepared by the Commission and adopted by the Council , which you apply in your own country with zeal .
I could mention Guideline No 2 : the reform of pension , social security and health care schemes .
Guideline No 5 : labour market flexibility .
Guideline No 13 : the removal of regulatory , commercial and other obstacles which hinder competition unduly .
And I have not mentioned all of them .
The reversal of France 's - and Italy 's - position has just enabled the Council to go beyond the obligations that it set itself by agreeing on a draft Directive permitting a 65-hour week .
This consecrates Dickens as the new father of Europe !
One last word , Mr President : this weekend , in front of your European guests - the President of Parliament , the President of the Commission and in front of 2 000 French right-wing business executives - you concluded your speech with words which were interpreted by the trade union movement in its entirety as an incitement - and a very unwise one - by stating that now , when there is a strike , the French people no longer even notice .
The day after this lofty event , your Minister for Education explained that this was ' a way of reassuring our European partners in the presence of the most eminent among them . '
Well then , if you must insult the trade unions to reassure European leaders , it is definitely time for change in Europe .
( Applause from the left )
Mr President of the Republic of France , in their daily lives the people of Europe unfortunately have to cope with the disastrous effects of the policies of the European authorities in Brussels and Frankfurt .
The people of Europe are seeing more and more every day that all of their powers are trickling through their fingers , that their freedoms are being taken away , whether it be purchasing power , an expensive euro , GMOs , tax , fisheries , a lack of trade protection , immigration , or even football , which you yourself mentioned a few moments ago .
Everything is trickling through their fingers , and I would say , Mr President of the Republic , President of the European Union , that everything is trickling through your fingers .
You say so yourself , you point it out as a criticism .
Well it is high time to act and to bring your actions in line with your words .
A moment ago you criticised the lack of Community preference , and you are right .
However , let me remind you that it was removed by the Marrakesh Agreement , which you approved , and it is not in the Lisbon Treaty , which you drew up .
You deplore the irresponsibility of the Central Bank , and you ask for a debate to be started .
As for us , we want decisions .
Perhaps I can remind you here that this independence of the Central Bank , this irresponsibility that we see at work every day , was organised and formalised by the Maastricht Treaty .
You regret having obtained the agreement of Brussels for a drop in oil taxation , but that is simply a consequence of the Treaties of Nice and Amsterdam , which you ratified through the parliamentary route .
In short , you complain today and every day about the effects of what you encourage every day , in other words stripping away the powers of the State for the benefit of post-democratic forums , made up of officials , bankers and judges .
Your Presidency of the European Union is a historic opportunity to get Europe moving in the right direction again , a Europe rooted in the freedom of nations that respects democracy .
This is why we are asking you to honour the vote of the Irish people and to pronounce the Lisbon Treaty dead .
It is not the European people who have to reconcile with Brussels , it is Brussels that has to reconcile with the European people !
( Applause from the speaker 's group )
( FR ) Mr President , here you are invested for six months in the rotating and brief role of President of the European Union .
Unlike the majority of the French electorate , you have shown yourself to be zealously pro-European , even going as far as presenting once again , in the barely different form of the Lisbon Treaty , the Constitution which , along with the Dutch , the French people rejected in 2005 .
Alas , your plans have hit a snag in the form of the will of the Irish people .
The Lisbon Treaty is therefore void , despite all the schemes that it would seek to impose on the European people , the will of the ruling euro-globalist camarilla .
As a young member of parliament , in 1957 I voted against the Treaty of Rome , the first stage of a process which , according its promoters , Monnet and Coudenhove-Kalergi among others , was to lead to the United States of Europe : this Tower of Babel that can only be built on the ruins of the nations , and first of all of my homeland , France .
Since then I have been resolutely opposed to it .
We are told that globalisation is bringing about fundamental changes everywhere , that we must submit to .
In reality , however , all over the world the nations are gaining strength , supported by fervent patriotism , apart from in just one area - Europe - where nations and homelands are sacrificed , dismantled and demoralised for the benefit of a project that has no strength and no identity , while waves of foreign immigrants gradually invade it and the opening up of our economic borders leaves it open to furious competition from the rest of the world .
None of the promises made to the European people in order for them to accept the loss of their independence , their sovereignty , their identity and their culture have been kept : neither growth , nor full employment , nor prosperity , nor security , and the predominant feeling is of anxiety as we stand on the brink of a looming systemic crisis : energy , food and financial crises .
In the meantime it is true that the media circus will continue .
Yesterday , the European football championship , the tennis at Roland Garros , tomorrow the Olympic Games in Beijing , and today , the miraculous saga of an icon , Ingrid , who laughs , cries , prays and comes and goes on your brotherly arm !
In your desire to be the liberator , you got involved in the negotiations with the FARC terrorists , but it was not you or Mr Chavez who freed the Colombian Senator Mrs Betancourt .
It was President Uribe who persistently , against the general movement of global progressivism , won a decisive victory over criminal terrorism .
You made repeated futile attempts and you even went as far as inviting the repentant communist FARC terrorists to come and receive asylum in France ; but to protect them from whom ?
From President Uribe , the democrat ?
As you have gone this far , why not the Taliban , Hezbollah or the Tamil Tigers ?
You are like the amphisbaena that was so dear to Césaire .
Have no doubt , Mr President , all your talents in orchestrating the media will not be sufficient to ward off the imminent dangers that you will have to face before the end of the year .
Our Europe is a vessel that is going off course , battered by the wind and waves , the only region in the world that has deliberately dismantled its political and moral structures , that has no borders and is gradually being invaded by mass immigration that is only just beginning !
Economically ruined by ultraliberalism , socially impoverished , demographically weakened , with no spirit and no defence force , it is doomed at best to be a U.S. protectorate , and at worst to the servitude of dhimmitude .
It is high time to abandon the fatal illusion of federalism and build a Europe of the nations , united by more tangible alliances that will undoubtedly be more modest , but more effective .
The dual failures of the Constitution and the Treaty should serve as a warning .
The people of Europe do not want anything to do with these plans and will not allow them to be imposed on them because they do not want to die .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your speeches .
I would first like to thank Mr Daul , Chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats for his support and that of his group , which will be invaluable to the French Presidency .
I agree with your analyses and am sure you will understand that I will not go back over each of the points , even though your commitment regarding a defence policy is entirely necessary .
Mr Schulz , allow me to say that I appreciated the sense of responsibility in your speech .
As with Mr Daul , we met and had discussions , and there are no secrets .
Democracy should not be a shadow theatre .
It should enable us to compare our ideas and try to reach a compromise .
You can be sure that , as in the case of Mr Daul , the French Presidency appreciates the support of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and your support on matters of consensus .
Moreover , I do not see why I would say that this support is of less use to me because it comes from the Chairman of the Socialist Group , or why you would seek out conflicts with the Presidency under the pretext that I am not of the same political persuasion as you .
Allow me to say that regarding the energy and climate package , I am perfectly aware , and I also say this to Mr Daul , that it is Parliament that will have the last word ; but better than that , it is not just a question of having the last word .
It is the mobilisation of Parliament that will put pressure on the Member States that do not have the same ambitions as Parliament , the Commission and the Presidency .
I would not say , Mr Schulz , that you will have the last word .
I am saying that your commitment is absolutely critical .
I would also like to say to Mr Cohn-Bendit that it is not about getting down on bended knee in front of anyone , especially not the car industry , be it French , Italian or German .
Why just target the German industry ?
In this case , the President-in-Office of the Council has to take into account the legitimate interests of each of the Member States .
What we have to do is resist the industrial lobby while allowing it to have fair conditions , and clearly explaining that the fact that we are defending the energy and climate package does not mean that we are naive .
In other words , Mr Cohn-Bendit , as we want to achieve planetary balance , I would not like us to be accused of promoting relocations .
It is not about respecting the environment and accepting relocations ; it is about respecting the environment and rejecting relocations .
Any other way of thinking is suicidal .
If you ask the Member States to choose between the environment and growth , you will place us all at an impasse .
Sustainable development and respect for the environment are factors in economic growth .
This is why , Mr Cohn-Bendit , you will not resent my preferring Mr Schulz 's or Mr Daul 's analysis to yours , just this once .
Now , Mr Schulz , let us come to what you identified as a point of disagreement .
Allow me to say that I do not think so .
I would also like to say to you that Europe is not responsible for the fact that our German friends have not managed to reach an agreement on a minimum wage , but rather it is the German political debate that has caused you to reject a minimum wage .
Do not saddle Europe with the responsibility for a social failing that is down to national political debate !
In this case , as President-in-Office of the Council , it is not for me to pass judgment .
I would quite simply say , ' Do not ask us , Mr Schulz , to resolve problems that you Germans have not been able to resolve between you . '
I would like to add that in France , in terms of social matters , we attach a great deal of importance to the minimum wage .
What would social harmonisation mean ?
You Germans have rejected a minimum wage .
We French want to keep our minimum wage .
Social harmonisation would therefore mean that we would have to reject our minimum wage because the Germans do not have one .
I reject this social regression , including in the name of my European ideal .
Thank you , Mr Schulz , for allowing me to clarify my social commitments .
I would like to add , however , Mr Schulz , that you are entirely right about raising the moral standards of financial capitalism , the rules that apply to credit rating agencies and the entirely reprehensible conduct of some of our financial establishments , and I would like to say something else : in all of our countries there have been directors of large banks who liked to lecture politicians about the rigour with which affairs of state should be conducted .
Having seen what has happened in a number of large private banks , I would say that those who gave lectures were very poorly placed to give them , and that they should now prepare themselves to receive them .
I would like to add , Mr Schulz - I say this under the watchful eye of Mr Watson - that I am against protectionism .
I am in favour of freedom , but we can no longer continue in a world in which there are no rules , in which credit rating agencies do whatever they like , in which a number of financial establishments want to make billions of euros in a few seconds by speculating on the trading floors .
The Europe that we want , and , Mr Schulz , the French Presidency will make proposals on this subject , proposals for regulations to raise the moral standards of financial capitalism , because we can see now that the reasons that global growth has halted for a year is because of the sub-prime crisis and the crisis of confidence in the financial institutions , which have done whatever they like , whenever they like , lending money to anyone under any conditions .
If Europe has any sense , it needs to restore some order to what has become the law of anything goes .
I would like to say to Mr Schulz that I entirely agree with him .
Regarding the European immigration pact , I would like to say to Mr Schulz and Mr Cohn-Bendit that the French Presidency will involve the European Parliament .
This is the best way to avoid excesses .

You talked about the excesses , Mr Schulz , that are the practice in one country - it is not my place to mention it - but if we all agree on a minimum corpus for the cost , those excesses that you pointed out will no longer take place , and , Mr Cohn-Bendit , I am sure that Mr Daul would agree , why would the European Parliament not be involved in this ?
I am not sure that it would be institutionally possible .
( Off-microphone intervention from Mr Cohn-Bendit )
Mr Cohn-Bendit , I am aware of your generosity .
In general you are always ready to give advice , especially to me .
Even if I suffered from such modesty as yours , I would not need this advice .
I knew that unanimity was required , but irrespective of that there is no need for unanimity in order for me to say to the European Parliament that the question of immigration is sufficiently important for it to be discussed politically , for you to be involved in it , even before there is a Lisbon Treaty or any modification of it .
It is a political commitment that I am making and I will come with Bernard Kouchner and Brice Hortefeux to present the pact to you , to discuss it with you .
We will consider with the President of Parliament and perhaps the Conference of Presidents the conditions under which you would like us to put this in place .
Mr Watson , difficulties provide an opportunity .
Obviously , when one chooses to be the President of a country and has the responsibility of the Presidency of the Union for six months , if one does not like problems or difficulties it is better not to be European and not to be involved in politics .
Personally I think that these difficulties are an opportunity .
Can you see why ?
It is because they are an opportunity for us to move beyond our national selfishness and our partisan prejudices .
Allow me to say that , if everything were going well , my appearance before the European Parliament would not necessarily have gone better , because a year from the elections , when you have the wind behind you and everything is going well , everyone is thinking of their partisan or national interests .
As I believe that here , in the main , the vast majority of MEPs are Europeans , they are aware of the gravity of the situation .
Everyone has to make an effort .
I am not sure whether , Mr Schulz and Mr Cohn-Bendit , you would have been as open towards the French Presidency if things had been easier .
Personally I think that these difficulties can be an opportunity .
There is one point , Mr Watson , on which I clearly made an error .
I should have talked at more length about the European energy policy .
There are a number of you here who wear particular T-shirts because you are against a type of power .
I respect you .
Others have made other choices .
However , there is a point that could unite all of us , which is that we need a European energy policy , with transparency on stocks and pooling of resources on solar power , photovoltaic power , biomass power and hydraulic power .
Forgive me for not having said it during my initial speech , but defining an energy policy - notwithstanding our differences on nuclear power , notwithstanding those differences - will be a priority for the French Presidency .
I do not think that President Barroso will mind me saying this , as it is also his priority .
This is something on which we cannot waste any time .
I would also like to say to Mr Watson that I am not protectionist .
I never have been and I never will be .
However , the Liberals also need to think about something : we are opening up our borders and we have benefited from it .
However , at the same time the others cannot ask us to do here what they do not agree to us doing there .
China , India , Brazil , Mexico - the big emerging countries - cannot say , ' Open up your borders , reduce your subsidies , but here we will do what we want . '
That is not free trade , and that is not a service to give them .
Just as loving your country is not nationalism , wanting reciprocity and protection is not protectionism .
It is possible to be in favour of free trade and to want to establish a balance in that free trade .
Mr Watson , we will have more to discuss .
Some place an emphasis on protection , others on freedom .
Perhaps we can meet halfway .
Finally , allow me to congratulate you , Mr Watson .
I think that in terms of songs we have the same taste .
( Laughter )
I will pass on your appreciation to the person concerned , and I am sure that she will sign her latest CD for you , Mr Watson .
No hard feelings .
( Laughter )
Mr Cohn-Bendit , I have already answered many of your questions .
I would like to discuss two subjects .
The first one is the issue of students , which is an extremely important matter .
Of course Europe needs to open up to training the elites of the whole world .
I have even thought for some time that opening up to training the elites of the whole world means welcoming them into our universities and , at the same time , giving them the opportunity of initial professional experience .
I am particularly thinking about doctors .
However , Mr Cohn-Bendit , we need to be careful not to plunder the elites of the developing world .
In France there are , and you should think about this , more Beninese doctors practising than there are in Benin itself .
I think that Benin needs its elites .
It is not refusing immigration to refuse to plunder the elites of the developing world .
We will not exhaust this debate in a few minutes .
I am grateful to you for the way in which you mentioned it , but you must understand that it deserves an in-depth debate and not caricatures .
It is not a case of generous people on the one hand and heartless people on the other .
There are statesmen and women who are going to try to find the best solution .
If you will permit me , I would like to say one thing about the issue of China , which is an extremely serious and extremely difficult issue .
I would like to say , Mr Cohn-Bendit , that like everyone here , I heard the emotion in your voice , which is a credit to you , and I would like to say that I share your feelings .
I would also like to say to Mr Watson , who asked me to be a team player , that this is exactly what I have done , because as President-in-Office of the Council , I spoke to all the Member States to find out what they thought and whether any of them were opposed to my taking part - I will speak in a moment about the substance ; I am speaking first about the form .
I would like to say that I received agreement from all the Member States to attend the Olympic opening ceremony .
As you know it is a difficult subject , which I think we need to tackle very carefully , as we cannot afford to get it wrong .
However , Mr Watson told me to be ' a team player ' .
I want you to know that I discussed this with all the Member States .
None of them were opposed to my taking part , and currently thirteen of them will be represented at the opening ceremony .
This is not a reason , Mr Watson , it is simply a response to the issue of being a team player .
Now , if you will , let us get to the heart of the matter .
I understand those who say that Europeans should not attend the Olympic opening ceremony in Beijing .
Everyone has the right to have a view on the best way of defending human rights , and I have to respect those who say that we should boycott the ceremony .
However , my personal opinion is - and I think that this opinion should be respected , because it is respectable - that it is not by humiliating China that we will make progress on the issue of human rights , but through a frank and direct dialogue .
I would even like to say this : I do not think that we can boycott a quarter of humanity .
I do not think this is an intelligent or responsible choice for someone who has the responsibility of being the President-in-Office of the Council to say to a quarter of humanity , ' We will not come ; we are humiliating you in the eyes of the whole world . '
I want to go there and I want to talk .
Regarding the core issue of defending human rights , we are in agreement .
Regarding the way in which to defend those human rights , acknowledge that there can be a debate and that the debate will not end with the issue of the Olympic Games .
I therefore want to go there , talk about human rights and defend them .
I am even going to go further than that , Mr Cohn-Bendit .
There are things that I will not say to China , because China should be respected ; but there are things that China should not say to the European countries , particularly not to France , because France and the European countries should be respected just as China should be .
It is not up to China to fix my schedule and appointments .
In the same way , it is not up to me to fix the schedule and meetings of the Chinese President .
I will therefore defend the issue of human rights , and , at the same time , as a head of state , I have to consider something .
We always talk about agreements .
I would like to challenge this , as for a democratically elected head of state it is not illegitimate to defend the economic interests and jobs of his fellow citizens .
I want to talk about something else .
China is a permanent member of the Security Council .
We need China in order to put an end to the scandal in Darfur , because China is influential in Sudan .
We need China in order to isolate Iran , so that neither Iran nor anyone that dares to say that they are going to wipe Israel off the map has access to a nuclear bomb .
How can we say to China , ' Help us to establish peace in the world , to ensure stability in the world ' , and at the same time boycott the country at a time when it is hosting a fundamental event for 1.3 billion inhabitants ?
That would not be reasonable , it would not be responsible and it would not be worthy of a self-respecting statesman .
( Applause )
Having expressed my respect for the opinions and feelings of Mr Cohn-Bendit , and of everyone in this House who thinks the same way , I would finally like to add this : respect those who , like us , think as I do .

Before going , I questioned Mr Watson and Mr Schulz , the Chairman of the Socialist Group , and I think that I can say on his behalf that he is entirely in agreement with the need not to boycott China .
He is a socialist , I am not .
I questioned Mr Daul , who is entirely in agreement with this .
I would like to say one last thing .
Look at what China did in terms of being pragmatic regarding the issue of Hong Kong .
Remember , ladies and gentlemen , that it was a very difficult matter .
Fifteen years ago , there were demonstrations in Hong Kong .
China was able to be pragmatic in resolving the issue of Hong Kong .
Look at Macao .
China has been able , through dialogue , to resolve the issue of Macao .
I am even going to go further .
Look at the issue of Taiwan today , where the progress made by President Hu Jintao on Taiwan is remarkable .
Five years ago , everyone thought it inevitable that there would be a confrontation between Taiwan and China , which is not the case .
Will we move China forward through frank , courageous , direct dialogue , or through humiliation ?
I have chosen dialogue , frankness and courage .
( Applause )
Mr President , just one minute , out of courtesy to Mr Wurtz .
First of all , I would like to say to him that he can be reassured that I am not insulting the unions , but I thank him for pointing out that France can be changed , as is currently happening , without paralysing it .
It is an insult to the unions to think that their only use is to paralyse .
The unions have a role of social democracy , just as political leaders do .
No more and no less .
However , what I meant to say is that no one has the right to take users hostage .
I am sure that a man as courteous as you , Mr Wurtz , who has never blocked anything , can understand what I am saying .
For the rest , Mr Wurtz , we do not agree , but that does not prevent me from greatly appreciating the way in which you express your disagreement .
Mr de Villiers , I would like to say that I understand your discourse even more given that you indisputably represent a significant political tendency in our country , but also in Europe .
I will even say better than this , Mr de Villiers .
Personally I do not take your discourse as a discourse against Europe but as a call to build Europe in a different way .
Mr de Villiers , I do not want to pit the ' yes ' camp against the ' no ' camp .
I simply want to try to integrate everyone into a different Europe , based around democracy , peace and growth .
I noted your reservations , I am aware of them and I will try to respond to them , not with words but with facts .
As for you , Mr Le Pen , as I was listening to you I was saying to myself that for years France had the great misfortune of having the most powerful extreme right wing in Europe .
Listening to you , Mr Le Pen , I am very glad that this has come to an end .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , I welcome the President-in-Office of the Council .
Firstly , may I thank you , Sir , on behalf of the British Conservative delegation for your hospitality last week and say how much we look forward to working with you to ensure a successful presidency .
We are confident of your energy and your commitment and , having read a very good book recently , we are confident of your vision .
I refer , of course , to your own book Témoignage .
For those colleagues who have not yet had the benefit of reading this remarkable work , may I suggest that you do so and , in particular , I recommend that you open the book on page 146 .
There you describe the follies of the 35-hour week and you describe the benefits : to use the UMP slogan , ' travailler plus pour gagner plus ' .
You go on to say : ' Rather than the uniform and rigid policy of the 35 hours and the guillotine of retirement at 60 , I think our fellow citizens expect a policy of free choice which permits those that wish to earn more to work more and for everyone to regulate their own working hours according to their lifestyle . '
President-in-Office , you have got it in one !
That is the true social Europe .
It is not for governments to force people to work more or compel them to work less , but it is for governments to enable people to work more if people choose to work more .
Your party is about freedom ; your party is about choice , and that is what the British Conservative Party is about as well .
So , if these principles guide your presidency , we shall be alongside you all the way .
When the Working Time Directive is revised , we shall be on the side of freedom and choice ; when the Temporary Workers Directive is reviewed , we shall , again , be on the side of freedom and choice .
Finally , President-in-Office , let me say that our parties should not just be about enabling free choice ; they are also about respecting the people 's choice once the people have freely chosen .
Therefore , I urge you to respect the choice of the people of Ireland in their recent referendum .
I urge you to regard their decision not as a problem to be addressed but as an opportunity to be grasped - an opportunity for Europe to reconnect with its people .
This will , of course , take much work with you and your colleagues on the Council .
But as you yourself have said : travailler plus pour gagner plus .
( FR ) Mr President , I am a French and European socialist .
This means that in Paris , I am not one of your supporters , but in Strasbourg , I am not entirely one of your opponents , especially when I see you surrounded by two social democrats .
Even if my President is in the wrong in my country , he is still my President .
I therefore wish the French Presidency , and therefore the European Presidency , success .
Since the start I have relaxed while observing you , because I understand your desire to be in the French Parliament .
What I am seeing is a head of state , certainly , but also a somewhat frank Prime Minister .
Regarding the social chapter and your priorities , I think that a distinction needs to be made .
There are indeed matters that need to remain national .
I am thinking about pensions .
However , for everything that affects employment , such as a single market , a single currency and free movement , we need to aim at harmonising towards the best that we have .
A distinction therefore needs to be made .
I would like to add that , in this chapter , I would have liked you to put considerable effort into establishing a framework directive for public services .
You did it for restaurateurs , and it needs to be done for public services .
Finally , I do not think that the European crisis is only social and democratic .
I think that it is also an identity crisis .
From the point when peace was obtained , freedom won and democracy established , the world as it is has made it difficult for many of our citizens to see and understand the meaning of the history of the Union .
That is why matters such as culture , education , the mobility of artists , young people , students and twinning , all of those things are fundamental , because European consciousness can no longer be taken for granted .
It will build itself up , and I think that these subjects need to pervade the French Presidency .
Finally , obviously we are going to judge you on six months .
For a French person that is fine , because in France that is a long time , as you know .
So in December we will have the results .
What is certain is that the Treaty will definitely not have been ratified .
You wanted a simplified treaty , and you have a complicated situation , so get yourself out of it !
I would like to conclude with a phrase that I have borrowed from a Polish writer , which says this Mr President , if you will allow me , ' Being French means taking into consideration something other than France . '
That is the reputation we have , and perhaps you have too a little bit , Mr President .

Mr President , I would like to sincerely apologise to Cristiana Muscardini because I got so carried away by my enthusiasm that Mr Poignant so kindly highlighted that I forgot to respond to you and say how much we will need your group .
I am aware of who is part of it , and I know that you are among those who love Europe , and that there are MEPs who equally love their nations .
Mrs Muscardini , you can be sure that I will take your remarks fully into consideration , and that during the next six months I will try , along with the European institutions , to build a Europe that responds to your concerns .
So , you are the one who has shown - proving Mr Poignant right - that I am forgetful of how overrated my reputation is .
( FR ) Mr President , a few weeks ago Ireland said ' no ' , and I think that , as we all know , this illustrates the increasing split between European citizens .
This ' no ' should obviously not be underestimated , and I think that , on the contrary , it should force all political leaders to take into account the expectations and concerns of the people and try to provide answers to them , whatever treaty is in force .
It is not the case that if we had the Lisbon Treaty tomorrow everything would disappear with a wave of a magic wand .
The French Presidency has chosen to focus on four areas , which is obviously very helpful , especially regarding climate change .
However , during this time of deep crisis , a financial and food crisis , an explosion in the price of raw materials , and increasingly scarce and increasingly expensive oil , I think that what the people are expecting is not only a matter of issues , but also a matter of vision ; what the people are expecting is a matter of prospects .
Right now I would like to suggest three avenues for reflection .
The first concerns the fundamental , essential issue of our identity .
I believe , I have a deep conviction , that there is a European model , that there is a European blueprint for society .
This European model is economic , sustainable and also social .
This European model , for example , seeks to combat the growing inequalities .
There is , therefore , a European model , and we should be proud of it , we should assert it , carry it , take it up , defend it and protect it .
That is the first avenue .
Then there is a second avenue for reflection .
I think that we need a new vision for the organisation of the world .
In saying that , I am thinking particularly of Africa .
I am thinking of the issue of agricultural products ; I think we should stop subsidising exports of our agricultural products and instead work towards Africa being self-sufficient in terms of food and energy .
This is the new revolution that we need in order to have a fairer world in the future .
( Applause )
Finally , I believe , and we should never stop reminding ourselves of this , that there are European values that we should never renounce : they are called democracy and human rights , and they are valid for us in Europe , and will be valid in the future of the Union for the Mediterranean , where it will not be about doing business above all while neglecting human rights .
The issue of human rights is essential for the coming decades ; it is the deep-seated identity of Europe and deserves to be defended .
Mr President , these are some of the questions that I feel are before us ; they concern fundamental matters , in other words , the vision and the deeper meaning that we must and want to give to Europe .
These questions are not only a matter of politics , but also a matter of conscience .
Mr President , I would like to welcome President Sarkozy again to Strasbourg and to congratulate him on engaging with Parliament , for being real with regard to ideas , even though he knew there would not be general agreement across the House with regard to those ideas .
For too long we have been hoisted with the petard of failed ideologies of the past , the failure to look to the new frontiers which come before us and to meet those challenges head on .
We have played safe by falling back into the comfort zone of either past imperialistic ideals or post-fascist commands or even , dare I say it , new 20th-century thinking with regard to human life and human rights .
Because the complexity of the world today is very different and far more varied than what can be offered by any one single ideology or any one single plan .
And rightly you mention the importance of engaging with other governments around the world : with China to solve the problem of Chad and of Sudan , ensuring that the problems with regard to Africa and the developing world are met head on .
We are already commemorating today the lives of seven peacekeepers in Sudan who have lost their lives under a United Nations mandate , simply because of a failure of governments to intervene properly and put pressure on the authorities in Chad and in Sudan to protect the lives of refugees and asylum seekers .
It is all very well to speak woolly words here in Parliament about the importance of immigration and allowing the free movement of people .
It is better if we allow people to stay at home .
I come from Ireland , a nation that had to export 12 million of its people over a hundred years .
None of them wanted to leave Ireland .
They were forced to leave Ireland .
If we give people the opportunity to remain in their own countries , give them support through the mechanisms of the policies that we set up , whether in trade or other areas , then we can do it .
Finally , Mr President-in-Office , you spoke earlier about how you felt the legitimacy of your position in bringing the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty before the parliament was the only way to do it .
I agree with you .
That is right for France .
But equally legitimate is the right to have a referendum and that should always be protected .
It is not an either / or .
There are problems and difficulties with regard to the result in Ireland , but that is not just a problem with regard to Ireland 's relationship with Europe .
It is reflective of a deeper malaise for the people and Europe .
( FR ) Mr President , right now I would like to ask you about the position of the French Presidency regarding linguistic diversity .
Diversity is a founding principle of Europe .
All the languages in the world are part of humanity 's heritage , and it is the duty of public institutions to take action to protect them .
( ES ) Mr President , the Council conclusions of 22 May on multilingualism invited the Commission to draw up a detailed framework on this subject , which it has announced that it will do by the autumn .
What will the position and actions of the French Presidency be regarding the multilingualism policy ?
What is the Presidency 's position going to be and what role does it intend to give to the non official EU languages , which are also called ' regional ' and ' minority ' languages ?
Because , Mr President , as we await the vote in the French Senate next week , France is currently a very bad example to all those of us who believe that linguistic diversity is a common heritage of all Europeans .
( The speaker continued his speech in Basque )
Mr President , I should like to reply to Mr Sarkozy .

You are a very good orator , Mr Sarkozy , but I am not so sure that you are that good a listener .
This presidency programme that you have unveiled this morning shows that you want a European Union that controls literally every single aspect of our lives , everything from a common immigration policy through to how we run our hospitals and our football clubs .
I also took it from your comments that you want us to be very isolated from the rest of the world , that if people do not have the same standards as us we are not going to trade with them .
But worst of all , it is the sheer arrogance of saying that you know best when it comes to the European project .
You are showing contempt , not just for the Irish people , but for the very concept of democracy which you say you are a champion of .
You said the Polish President must keep his word , that he must ratify the Treaty because that was his agreement .
Well , the Irish people have spoken .
Will you respect the Irish vote ?
Will you keep your side of that bargain which says this Treaty is dead ?
I do not think that you get it , do you ?
The peoples of Europe do not want deeper political integration .
That is why in France they said ' no ' , and in Holland they said ' no ' , and in Ireland they said ' no ' , and if we had a vote in Britain an overwhelming majority of us would have said ' no ' .
What price democracy , Mr Sarkozy ?
You are going to Dublin on 21 July .
Please do not try to do with them as you did in France and try to bypass a second referendum , try to get them to change the rules and to ratify this Treaty through the back door .
That would be showing utter contempt for democracy .
Please do not do it .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , in order to meet our expectations and those of our fellow citizens , the Council that you preside over and Parliament must demonstrate a clear , understandable and concrete political will .
Your presence at the head of the Council is already a guarantee of determination .
In this respect , we have all seen , here in Strasbourg and in Brussels , the quality of preparation for this six-month Presidency , and the extent to which the members of the French Government make themselves available .
The priorities that you have just set out are the right ones to respond to the concerns of EU citizens .
In the same way , the other challenges that you raised , including the economic governance of the euro area in response to the explosion of global prices of raw materials and hydrocarbons , or the creation of an area of stability and prosperity in the Mediterranean Basin , are entirely representative of your commitment to a European Union that is more reactive to problems and more attentive to its population .
In response to public opinion , where there are doubts and people sometimes give in to the temptation to withdraw to national level in order to solve problems , it is more important than ever to point out that our continent has a considerable number of assets and is still one of the rare areas of stability in a world that is increasingly unpredictable .
The European Union should seek to demonstrate that it does not undergo globalisation without protecting its people , and I welcome your commitment to proving that .
Finally , as the Union is going through a significant crisis of confidence , we sincerely want the French Presidency to bring an end to the more than fifteen years of efforts to reform the functioning of the enlarged Europe .
We need the Lisbon Treaty to come into force as soon as possible , which you have strongly affirmed .
We all have confidence in you to negotiate with our Irish friends and to convince the few Member States that are still hesitating to ratify it and to do so once and for all .
Mr President , you said last weekend that you were not ready to put your European flag back in your pocket , and indeed we have seen that you have raised it under the Arc de Triomphe next to the French flag .
We interpret this symbolic gesture as proof of your determination to act in the service of the Community , and we thank you , Mr President .
Mr President , may I just address the President-in-Office and say that I am Rasmussen I , not to be confused with Rasmussen II , but I want to assure you of one thing .
You talk wisely about the new Lisbon Treaty , and I say to Mr Farage that he has forgotten the Danish case .
We voted ' no ' to Maastricht but we voted ' yes ' to the Edinburgh agreement and we would never ever dream of saying that because we voted ' no ' in the first instance we will block the rest of Europe .
We would never say that .
Mr Farage is wrong : this is not democracy .
I want just to assure you , Mr President-in-Office , and assure France , that we found the solution for Denmark and we will find a solution for the Irish people .
My second point is this : I have an appeal to you on behalf of the European Social Democratic Party and all my colleagues and leaders and political family . My appeal is that you should add one more priority to your four priorities .
My priority - and I hope it will be yours , I know it is yours - is about jobs , is about growth , is about sustainability .
You said - and I was so happy to hear you say it - ' We need better regulation of the financial markets ' .
I could not agree with you more .
We are just working right now in this very Parliament on getting a report through and I hope - and I appeal to my colleagues in the PPE-DE and ALDE Groups - that we can deliver to the French presidency a wise report on better regulation .
I am talking about transparency .
I am talking about better regulation on fairness , bonuses and stock options and all the rest you talked so wisely about .
I am talking about accountability , responsibility , to ensure that the financial market is a long-term patient financing power to our long-term investment needs for more jobs and better jobs .
Connected to that is another idea for you .
You are right in saying that we are losing growth right now , we are losing jobs right now , especially in the UK , in Spain but also in France .
Why do we not take a new initiative for growth , a new coordinated investment action ?
Imagine the following scenario : if we invest just one per cent more together in education , in structure , in all relevant issues , within the next four years we will get at least 10 million jobs in addition to what we now have .
Imagine what we could do together .
You said that sport is more than the market economy .
I would add : I agree , and that goes for the whole of Europe .
Europe is more than the market economy .
It is about jobs and people .
Let us care about them .
I wish the French presidency every success .
( FR ) Mr President , you said ' France cannot pass judgment on the Irish " no ” ' .
( DE ) I agree .
The Irish ' no ' must be respected .
The Irish people are fully within their rights to vote as they have done .
However , all the other countries in Europe also have the right to proceed along the road to a more democratic , more transparent Europe that is more capable of taking action .
The Treaty of Lisbon is a step in this direction .
Therefore I welcome the fact that ratification is being continued .
However , I also think - and here I do not share your view , I disagree - that it would be good to speak openly about the fact that a multi-speed Europe already exists .
Think of the euro , the Schengen Agreement , the Charter of Fundamental Rights and many other areas .
The sensitivities and wishes of the Member States of the EU are reflected in their choice of different speeds for things that they undertake together .
A multi-speed Europe makes it possible for countries that want to do more together to do so , for it is important that we maintain the voluntary principle in Europe .
It is important that the countries who want to do something together do so voluntarily and that all countries have the option of joining in at any time .
No country should be forced into a greater degree of solidarity .
A multi-speed Europe also makes it easier to continue accession negotiations .
I believe it is wrong for Croatia and Turkey to be punished because the majority of Irish people voted no .
Mr President-in-Office , you are quite rightly proud that your country is the home of human rights .
Human rights are timeless ; they are universal .
The Olympic Games are a sporting event , not a political event .
Therefore , I believe it is wrong for you to want to go to China for the opening ceremony , and I am glad that the President of the European Parliament , Mr Pöttering , will not be going to China .
Mr President-in-Office , let me say in closing that you found on your seat a greeting from many of my female fellow Members - a rose and a letter .
The letter asks you to play your part in getting more women to the top of the European Union .
Women are pinning their hopes on you as a ' ladies ' man ' .
Please allow me to add one more request : as a democratically elected representative , I hope that you will support us in ensuring that this European Parliament is able to take an independent decision about where it is based .
( PL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , first of all I would like to offer you my sincere congratulations on taking over the Presidency of the European Union .
This will not be an easy presidency .
It coincides with a difficult period , but of course I wish you success .
Ireland has rejected the Treaty of Lisbon .
We cannot rule out the possibility that Ireland will change its mind in the future , but it is definitely not acceptable to try to influence the Irish decision by means of threats , just as the French and the Dutch were not threatened when they rejected the Treaty three years ago and set today 's problems in motion .
EU countries must not be divided into better and worse .
I therefore thank you for saying today that none of the 27 Member States can be excluded from the European family , as the lady who spoke before me , Mrs Koch-Mehrin , might perhaps have liked to do .
Mr President , I would also like to take this opportunity to thank you for the recent opening-up of the job market in France to Poles , among others .
We had waited some time for this to happen - a lot longer than in other countries , but better late than never .
One thing I missed hearing in today 's speech was any reference to our largest European neighbour , Ukraine .
I nevertheless hope that the summit planned for 9 September 2008 in Evian will bring us significantly closer to the signing of an association agreement with Ukraine .
After all , just now a clear signal from us is of particular importance to our friends in Ukraine , especially at a time when there are further threats from Russia .
Finally , on behalf of the millions of Europeans who are currently afflicted by ever-increasing costs , I would like to thank you , Mr President , for your efforts towards bringing down VAT on fuel .
I would like to hope that during the French Presidency you will succeed in winning other leaders over to this idea , including the Prime Minister of my own country , Poland .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to pay an explicit compliment to the President-in-Office of the Council .
This is the 29th Presidency of the Council that I have experienced , and I must say without reservation that I have never seen such a convincing presentation of a programme and a European idea as this , and I say that in all honesty .
( Applause )
There has been only one other time that a President-in-Office of the Council was received even more warmly , but that was only at the opening .
By the end , he had delivered nothing on the agenda .
That was the British Prime Minister , Tony Blair .
We are sure , President Sarkozy , that you will finish your Council Presidency in six months ' time with good results .
The way you have explained everything today - the way you have dealt with points put by our Members , the fact that you have familiarised yourself with the dossiers , and that you are not presenting a ' wish list ' but a series of priorities backed up by good reasoning - all this gives me hope that you are indeed capable of carrying out your ambitious programme .
If it is a matter of working with you to bring the climate package to completion , you can count on the support of this Parliament .
However , I fear it is more likely that there will be further problems within the Council , problems with the responsibility of the Council and of the individual Member States : that the quotas envisaged will not be accepted there .
We also agree with you that nuclear energy needs to be represented in this climate package .
Here in this Parliament there is a clear majority in favour of the civil use of nuclear energy .
Do not let those T-shirts confuse you .
When it comes to Germany and France wanting to take over the leadership of the European Union together in matters of content - not for major declarations of a global political nature - then we are on your side .
I must tell you that Mrs Koch-Mehrin was obviously not listening when you explained the reasons behind your position on China .
That was a foreign affairs tutorial for this Parliament , and I can only encourage you to remain as consistent and undeviating as you have been in these matters .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , 10 nations produce 60 % of the global carbon dioxide emissions .
These 10 countries include only one European country - Germany .
The 27 EU Member States represent only 14 % of global emissions .
The United States , 17 % ; Brazil , Russia , India and China have cumulative emissions that exceed one third of the global carbon dioxide emissions .
All of this proves that European initiatives to combat climate change will continue to be in vain without comparable efforts from the Americans , the Chinese and the other industrialised nations .
While awaiting such an agreement , Europe must fight against carbon leakage .
Currently no large industrial group is making investments in Europe .
ArcelorMittal is closing in France but investing in Brazil , Russia , Turkey , India and China .
ThyssenKrupp is investing in Brazil ; the Austrian Vöest Group is investing in India .
In North Africa 10 factories are currently being built to produce floating glass for the European market .
In the absence of a specific commitment from the other industrial States , Europe must show its determination to defend its industrial fabric , its industrial know-how .
Imposing sacrifices on European citizens will not serve any purpose if the rest of the world does not follow suit .
( Applause )
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , like the President of the European Parliament , like many other fellow Members , I am a child of the ruins of the Second World War , and I very much appreciate the dedication that you therefore put in your speech , which flouts scepticism .
I see scepticism as something that belongs to the spirit of Munich , and it is the acid that dissolves the European will .
That is why I very much appreciated the energy that you put into a speech which , as Mrs Lulling just said on television , for example , we found clear , precise , and , I can say without the least affectation , convincing .
The second thing that I would like to say , Mr President , is that of course you are right and this has to be said here .
The fears in Europe and the threats to it were certainly largely during its construction in the 1950s , but while the nature of these fears has changed , there are obviously still a great number of them today .
That is why there needs to be an absolutely determined response .
I am very happy with the priorities : I will say that frankly , because they are real , and in particular the immigration policy which will be conducted by your Minister , Mr Hortefeux , our former fellow Member .
Two years ago I had the honour of representing the European Parliament at the Euro-African Conference in Rabat .
For the first time it brought together the countries that had the same responsibilities , whether as countries of origin , transit , or reception of immigrants , and , as Mr Watson said a moment ago , I think that it is very important , especially - and why not ? - through the structure of the Union for the Mediterranean , to have a generous policy of proximity and surveillance .
Finally , one last thing , Mr President , do not forget that the reason that Europe has a unique influence throughout the world is because it is a cradle of culture ; because it is culture that cements our differences ; because culture is the platform for our political systems , and that is why we are viewed in a completely different way .
Your energy will probably also be needed if there is to be determination in this field of culture too .
( CS ) Mr President , I should first of all like to show my appreciation for the fact that France has opened up its labour market to new Member States from 1 July and thus removed one of the last barriers between the old and new Member States .
I only hope that Mrs Merkel will follow this example .
France , the Czech Republic and Sweden have together prepared an 18-month presidency programme and I am pleased that this prioritises the issue of energy , which is absolutely key , and also the issue of reforming the common agricultural policy , because this relates to the financial framework after 2013 and thus to what money is going to be available to us in the future .
I appreciate the fact that France wants to resolve these current issues and problems , because this is what worries and interests people .
On institutional matters , I am speaking not as a member of the PPE , but as a member of the DE , so it is probably no surprise that we shall not be in complete agreement here .
I believe that we cannot stand before the Lisbon Treaty like a rabbit caught in headlights .
It is not the end of the world and we do not wish to create an atmosphere of crisis , so the situation must be resolved calmly , without any political pressure , without any legal tricks and in accordance with our own rules .
These rules state that no treaty can enter into force without unanimous agreement and we do not have such agreement at present .
I do not believe that it is impossible to expand further without the Lisbon Treaty .
I believe that Croatia at least can be accepted into the European Union without the Lisbon Treaty .
Similarly I do not believe that we have to make a choice between Nice or Lisbon .
We certainly have several options and we must be able to look at them soberly and without hysteria and to resolve the situation .
In any case , Mr President , I wish you great success in your leadership of the European Union .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have followed the Union for the Mediterranean initiative , on which next Sunday 's summit in Paris will focus and we hope that the initiative is successful .
I would like to clarify a few things , however .
This initiative aims to reinforce the multilateral Euro-Mediterranean dimension .
I believe this is right and that we should go in this direction .
I think that if there is a policy that needs a critical appraisal , however , it is the neighbourhood with the southern countries , because the neighbourhood policy actually brings countries into competition with one another that are very divided .
So we need to work on integration between these countries and between them and Europe , and channel resources into that as well .
I will tell you this openly , President-in-Office of the Council , that we really did not appreciate - and I am saying this to President Barroso as well - your stopping funding for the Audiovisuel Méditerranée programme , which was the only cultural co-production instrument .
You have said that there is a European cultural exception but I would add , Mr President , that there is a Euro-Mediterranean cultural exception .
If you consider the world 's top twenty intellectuals , in the top ten you will find many from the Muslim culture and a great many Euro-Mediterranean ones .
So let us help one another to put in place effective policies to change the lives of many people in these countries , especially young people and women , who place hope in Europe .
We do not need good students : we need to change the reality of this relationship and Parliament is very ready to cooperate with your Presidency if you intend to move in that direction .

( ES ) Mr President , the priorities of the French EU Presidency are realistic priorities that in my opinion are sufficiently capable of responding to what Mr Durão Barroso , the President of the Commission , was saying , to the criticisms that Europe is impotent and incapable of responding to the daily concerns of our citizens : the constitutional problem , food and energy prices , the Europe of defence , and immigration .
Today , the death of an immigrant in a refrigerated lorry in the Channel Tunnel , or thrown overboard from a patera boat heading for the Canaries - as happened just a few hours ago - is one of the greatest contemporary tragedies .
It is a serious and urgent problem and the European Union needs to come up with an adequate response .
The Chairman of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Daul , spoke of the need to mobilise political will and I think that this Presidency has absolutely no shortage of political will .
However , Mr President , political will is necessary , but not sufficient : circumstances also count , and even if they are passing , short-term or temporary , while they exist they affect us and place limitations on us , and I welcome the fact that President Sarkozy said that we need to convert circumstances into opportunities .
I regret the fact that Mr Schulz is not here with us now , because when he talked about sport it brought to mind a particular circumstance .
I would like the yellow jersey to be Spanish once again , as was the case in the first stage of the Tour de France .
You are right , though , President-in-Office , that there does need to be a European dimension to sport , and several MEPs have asked me to pass a request on to you to consider whether it would be appropriate for the French sportsmen and women who are going to take part in the Olympic Games , which we have discussed here today , to wear an EU emblem next to the national flag , so that other Member States can voluntarily join in such an initiative .
President-in-Office , we hope that the French Presidency will be capable of joining forces and forging consensuses so that , as you proposed , the European Union can move forward decisively under your Presidency .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , you wanted to place your Presidency under the aegis of the Europe that protects , and I think that there is indeed a very high expectation among European citizens .
However , this is why there is a contradiction here - and you understood the key message from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - with the fact that the social dimension of European integration has not been given the status of one of the four main priorities of your Presidency .
Indeed , as we have seen in recent referendums , people are questioned regarding the institutions and the treaties , but in fact they respond on the basis of the progress of European integration , and finally on Europe 's policies .
I think that the imbalance that has been created in recent years between the progress of economic integration - which has been pursued and this is a good thing - and the stagnation of the social dimension , is also behind this disenchantment among the people of the Union , this disaffection towards the European institutions .
This is why the problem is not saying that Europe should get involved with all social matters , but rather that as soon as there is a single market , including a single employment market , there need to be common rules for combating disparities , which otherwise lead to social dumping , and to ensure that convergence elements are focused upwards , towards the best , rather than dragging social situations downwards .
The Commission has just published a social agenda , but if the Council does not commit to some concrete issues - you talked about a concrete Europe - to strengthen the powers of the European works committees , to protect temporary workers , to improve the Directive on the posting of workers so that - and this needs to be added - there is a Directive on the protection of public services and social services in the general interest , then there will not be a response to this need for protection .
One of your priorities is the Europe of immigration , but the Europe of immigration cannot be reduced to a Europe of expulsions .
This is why we need to add to this a pact for integration , which we talked about with Mr Hortefeux - and a pact for development .

You have just come from the G8 ; Europe and some of the Member States , including France , were accused of not fulfilling their commitments in terms of public aid for development .
Ensure that during your Presidency this commitment of moving towards 0.7 % of GDP is fulfilled , which will be more effective than the disgraceful ' return directive ' in contributing towards managing international immigration more effectively .
( PL ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I agree with the President-in-Office .
This is a difficult moment for Europe .
Each of us feels this personally , including me .
When I was responsible for the negotiations on my country 's accession to the European Union , I did everything I could to make sure that future European cooperation turned out well .
I would also like to emphasise that today , happily , there is no problem with Polish support for the EU and for the Treaty .
A considerable majority in the Polish Parliament voted in favour of the Treaty , and almost 80 % of Poles are in favour of EU membership .
I support the assessment by the President-in-Office .
We must act for and on behalf of our citizens .
The priority for us politicians is an energy and climate package , but we must do all we can to ensure that its implementation does not hit Europeans with high prices and loss of competitiveness for our economy .
This package needs to be adopted pretty quickly , but it would be a bad thing if speed came first and deliberation second .
Our package should be the proof of our leadership in the battle against global warming .
I agree that we need this , first in Poznań and later in Copenhagen ; but this package will not serve as an example to anyone .
No-one will follow it if the European economy loses out in its implementation .
I am therefore glad that you see these hazards , President-in-Office , and that you believe that the principles of emissions trading - because that is mainly what this is about - will be restructured in good faith .
We do have experience .
The REACH Regulation was amended significantly in Parliament with the involvement of the Council and the Commission , to the benefit of all .
We can go down that same route .
President-in-Office , may I congratulate you on taking up the reins in Europe .
I wish you success in the two most important matters for the next six months : the Treaty , and the energy and climate package .

( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , you will have to take the bull of doubt regarding Lisbon by the horns ; France already has a great deal of experience in the art of sometimes moving European integration forwards and sometimes moving it backwards .
I ask you to find a solution for the Irish , while respecting the will of the overwhelming majority of Europeans , which also counts .
I would also like to say that , from a social point of view , in the Lisbon Treaty there is the Charter of Fundamental Rights , there is the European social model .
So for example , more than a million signatures have already been collected from disabled Europeans , who represent one in four households and are in favour of the Treaty because it eliminates secular discrimination .
You therefore have support behind you to move forward and to integrate the social model .
Regarding immigration , you addressed the left , but you will also recognise that left-wing governments have had ideas that have enabled you to prepare a less closed and more progressive package , which I think Parliament can improve further , but we need to work relentlessly on this issue .

Also , Mr President - and this is directly connected with immigration - you talked about the CAP , but you did not mention Doha ; it is nevertheless important for the united Europe to be able to find a solution and respond to the Millennium Goals , because it is all the same package ; it is about exploiting our economic capacity in order to move all of humanity forwards .

( IT ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , as Head of the Italian delegation of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , I am pleased that you have taken over the helm of Europe and I am pleased at what you have said .
You radiate enthusiasm and pride .
You believe in and make people believe in an institution , Europe , which has many problems and really needs wise , enlightened and aware leaders , which is what you have shown yourself to be .
Italy has always enjoyed strong cultural and social ties with France : two countries that have made major sacrifices to found and build Europe , which all its members now have the duty to develop .
Anyone working in this institution knows how many difficulties may be encountered in moving forward with the process of development and integration , because this process has to be built between people of differing histories , cultures , social status and traditions .
The politically opportunistic positions expressed just now by Mr Schulz about the present highly popular Italian Government certainly do not help .
However , it is a process that must be moved forward despite the disappointments that it sometimes involves .
The Lisbon Treaty , an excellent treaty , is on the back burner and it will require a lot of goodwill to bring it back , if we are avoid marginalising those who have not understood it .
However , I do agree with what you said : before any further enlargement , we need to define new rules but without leaving Ireland out on a limb .
The wave of immigration into Europe , especially into certain Member States , and mainly my own country and those in the Mediterranean area , must be regulated and viewed as a common problem rather than a reason to make distinctions or actually exploit the situation by penalising countries that are already making so many sacrifices .
The people of our countries must be safeguarded and integration must be built on a reasonable basis .
President-in-Office , the Italian Government and people are watching your mandate attentively and trustingly , in the certainty that the history and social standing that you represent today will inject hope and development into Europe .
( HU ) Three things - as the only speaker from the eastern side of the Berlin Wall .
I am disappointed that equal opportunities were left out of the President 's speech .
Fortunately , President-in-Office , we women from the seven political parties have accurately described what we want in a letter : it 's the flower , it 's our flower for you , dear President .
Firstly , I welcome the efforts of the French Presidency at European level in the interests of social equality between genders , but at the same time it seems contradictory that the local institutions dealing with equal opportunities are being closed down .
Is policy other than what France is applying recommended at European level ?
Two : the President has informed French citizens that 350 000 childcare places will be created over the next 5 years .
This is an important measure , since it provides an equal opportunity for men and women in the labour market and an opportunity for them to combine their working and family lives .
Good quality , affordability and accessibility for everyone are essential for this , since it is an instrument for equal opportunities and integration .
On the subject of family life , does he feel that women will be capable of combing their working and family activities if they work 65 hours a week ?
Women are more defenceless in the workplace and are generally not members of professional organisations .
Yes , we need a common European immigration policy , but it must discuss the rights and obligations of citizens and immigrants .
Migration policy must be supplemented with the integration policy of the reception nationality . Thank you very much .
( EL ) Mr President , I would like to address the President-in-Office of the Council to say : I was looking forward to your speech today with particular interest .
Your position today has convinced me that you will make waves during the six months of your Presidency .
The whole world is faced with one of the gravest economic crises in recent decades , but Europe is also facing its own crises .
It is obvious that today the Europe of 27 cannot operate according to the rules of the Europe of 15 .
This is the institutional crisis that Europe is going through .
It is also obvious that today some Member States do not want political unification for Europe , and do not want our predecessors ' vision to be realised .
This is a crisis of identity .
The institutional crisis will be solved , but how can the identity crisis be solved ?
I am afraid there is only one solution : the Member States that want political harmonisation should advance , and the Member States that see Europe only as an economic union should stay behind .
Indeed , I am afraid that if we do not go ahead with this solution , Europe will at some point cease to be a player on the international chessboard .
Crises can lead to great leaps forward , but only if the necessary courage is there .
I believe you have both vision and courage .
Be courageous !
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , your basic orientation has my full support .
I believe you are the right President-in-Office at an extremely sensitive time , with the necessary sensitivity to people 's concerns and the determination to lead and reconcile .
When you were answering the questions , you did not pass the buck , and you called a spade a spade .
You do not run away , but face up to things .
I should particularly like to emphasise your strong commitment to parliamentary democracy .
This commitment is particularly important in these times because , in several Member States - including my home country , Austria - we have been experiencing the playing off of direct democracy against parliamentary democracy and thus the incapacitation in European matters of parliaments in parliamentary democracies .
Let us stand together for parliamentary democracy and against its incapacitation .
( Applause )
It is also important to me that you have directly addressed the cowardice or , it could be said , the double standards , of many governments and members of governments in relation to their shared European responsibilities , as these double standards are one of the main causes of the lack of trust and mutual finger-pointing to which we must put a stop .
We do not require everyone to be bolder , but we do require everyone to be honest and principled .
I should like to touch on three more issues .
The first is your position on the Treaty .
You are not like a rabbit caught in the headlights , you are not waiting for Ireland , but are continuing the ratification process whilst approaching Ireland .
I firmly believe that we shall come to an arrangement with Ireland only after all the other 26 Member States have ratified the Treaty .
However , we must not leave Croatia out on its own .
I welcome your commitment to opening all the chapters by the end of the year .
We also need a timetable for Macedonia .
I would ask the Council to also take a decision on the Small Business Act at its December Summit , as the main competences lie with the Member States .
We need legal binding and not just another public political statement .
( PL ) Mr President , I have some good news from Poland .
Today , Mr President , a debate is being held in the Polish Parliament that will culminate in a resolution urging the Polish President to fulfil his constitutional duty and sign the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is the will of the Polish people , 80 % of whom support the European Union and are very happy to be a member .
Show me another state in which support for the EU is so high .
This is a signal that Poland will discharge its obligations with regard to the Treaty .
On another subject : I have a request for you , Mr President .
Could you see your way to putting the situation of children in the European Union on the agenda and appointing an ombudsman , an attorney for children 's affairs , on the model of the European Human Rights Ombudsman ?
We would like the Council to come to an agreement and accept this institution that Europe is so in need of .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if I were to summarise this morning 's debate , I would say that it is good that France holds the Presidency at this time , and good that you , President Sarkozy , occupy the position of President-in-Office of the Council .
This has been a good day for Europe and for this Parliament , as for the first time in a long time we again have before us somebody who speaks for Europe with passion , not just with good arguments .
Perhaps that is just what we need to win over the Irish and to win back our citizens : passion and good judgement , and good judgement includes Europe confining itself to certain limits .
I should like to give you the ' secret of success ' : we need not only the Treaty in Ireland , but also a new culture of subsidiarity .
We need boundaries for Europe in relation to the rest of the world , but we also need boundaries within Europe .
A new culture of subsidiarity will bring renewed approval to Europe ; I am in total agreement with President Barroso on that .
Good luck , President Sarkozy .

Mr President , I welcome President Sarkozy to the European Parliament .
I certainly appreciated his considered and well-argued contribution .
As an Irish member I will also welcome him when he visits Ireland as President of the EU , as a President who is taking practical steps to improve the lives of citizens .
That was clear from his priorities .
I also appreciate his comments on food security and about finding a balance when imposing regulations and restrictions on our own businesses and farmers .
As he said himself , protecting without protectionism .
I could hear in his presentation and in his voice his commitment to Europe .
I and very many Irish people share that commitment .
He spoke about overcoming our difficulties .
That will take time and a willingness to compromise on all sides .
There can be no deadlines .
As somebody who canvassed for a ' yes ' vote , I know he will agree with me when I say that an Irish ' no ' is just as legitimate as a French , Dutch or Danish ' no ' .
It must be given the same respect , then we can move forward .
We can make progress .
I look forward to that , and I wish him well in his presidency .
( FR ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , the French Presidency has just set out its objectives , and I wish it success .
The ultimate objective that is before you is to strengthen the European Union and its power to act .
With this in mind , the non-ratification of the Lisbon Treaty would be a missed opportunity .
Europe needs France , especially at this difficult time ; it needs the France that was converted , with you , President Sarkozy , after the French referendum .
It is not Poland , unfortunately , that is taking Europe forward today , but one day it will be , and I believe it will be soon .
I hope for you that the French Presidency , with its policies of European integration , of desired immigration , of enlargement to the Balkans , and not necessarily to Turkey , will give Europeans back their confidence in and their taste for Europe .
Mr President , it took Ireland 700 years to get the British out of the Republic of Ireland and I have to sit here time and again listening to people we threw out telling us what we should be doing in Ireland .
I think it is a little bit too much .
Please let a decision in the Republic of Ireland be made by the people of the Republic of Ireland .
Secondly , I should like to say to the President of the French Republic : if you want to change the people of Ireland 's opinion , bring Mr Le Pen with you .
That will be enough to change the opinion of the people of the Republic of Ireland .
I was director of elections for Fine Gael , which is part of the European People 's Party , for four European referendums : the Single European Act , the Maastricht Treaty , the Amsterdam Treaty and the Lisbon Treaty , and I want to say to you that the Lisbon Treaty was lost for a variety of reasons .
People did not understand it ; the Government has been in power since 1994 ; politicians are appearing at tribunals of enquiry ; the main government and opposition parties - the political establishment - wanted it passed .
There were fears concerning defence and conscription , abortion and euthanasia - accompanied by syringes circulated by Members of this House - taxation , jobs , immigration .
Much of this was led by the extremes on the right and on the left .
I would just say this to the President-in-Office . Please prepare for your visit to Ireland .
If it is important that you help change the situation in Ireland , please come prepared and come prepared to listen .
You will be very welcome , but it is complex and it will take some time to resolve what is a difficult situation .
( FR ) Mr President , Europeans are placing a great deal of hope in the French Presidency , and this hope needs to be well managed .
The Presidency needs to avoid fuelling both unrealistic dreams and unreasonable fears , including in the neighbouring and candidate countries .
With regard to the Lisbon Treaty , there is not enough diplomatic encouragement for ratification .
The Presidency needs to help to draw up an exit or safeguarding strategy in case things go wrong .
In order to avoid the worst , we need to show from the outset that we are prepared to face the worst .
I would like to conclude with a few words on the dangerous phenomenon of the re-nationalisation of Europe .
National-populism is the most alarming expression of this phenomenon , and is also behind the propaganda in favour of the Irish ' no ' , the racist xenophobia in Italy , but also the rhetoric on the national nature of social policies .
Either Europe will be social or it will collapse .
I hope that the French Presidency will be sensitive to this side of things .
I am sorry , but I cannot take any more speakers .
We have already gone well over time .
I am very grateful to President Sarkozy and of course also to President Barroso for giving us their time today .
Therefore I should like to finish by giving the floor first to President Barroso and then to President Sarkozy .

Mr President , I will start by very briefly echoing the congratulations expressed by the vast majority of MEPs who have taken the floor : congratulations on the conviction , enthusiasm , energy and political will that President Sarkozy has expressed here today , which I am sure he and his ministers and colleagues will demonstrate throughout the French Presidency .
I would like to say that this is not at all a surprise to me .
I was entirely convinced that it was very good news that France was to take on the responsibility of the Presidency of the Council during this particularly difficult period .
Of course , President Sarkozy and all of us would have preferred the horizon to be clearer from an institutional point of view , but I think that it is precisely during these difficult times that we can see the political capacity and measure the full importance of a strong political will .
I am in favour of this democratic political debate .
I have said many times that we need to acknowledge politically the differences and multiple points of view that exist , for example here in Parliament .
We need to know how to express these differences because Europe is different from a national political system .
In our democratic national systems , each time that there is a political discussion , even sometimes one that is very polarised , we do not call into question the very legitimacy of the State , while very often in Europe when those of us who are for Europe strongly express these objections , we have to confront those who are against Europe and who explore all sorts of populisms in order to damage our institutions and compromise this great project of peace and solidarity that is the European project .
( Applause )
This is why we really need to be able to express all these points of view , but while strengthening the pro-Europe camp during this particularly difficult time .
Let us be clear , we have the European elections in June 2009 .
If the different European political forces and European institutions do not work hand in hand with a constructive position , we will be giving arguments to those who , at the extremes , want to exploit populism , xenophobia and nationalism by establishing a connection between nationalism and homeland , which is an error .
Moreover , I often quote a great French author , who said that ' Patriotism is love for one 's own people ; nationalism is hatred of others . '
We can love our homeland and , at the same time , defend our European project with conviction , as President Sarkozy said just now .
I therefore hope that the debate that takes place over the next six months will strengthen the European institutions as well as our project for the Europe of the future .
I am keen to answer a specific question .
It is the only specific question that I was asked , and I will of course leave the rest to President Sarkozy , who is in a much better position than me to deal with them .
This specific question was from Mrs Napolitano regarding the Euromed cultural programme .
I am keen to inform you that the current programme , the Euromed cultural programme , still has an allocation of EUR 15 million for this year .
For 2009-2010 it is true that nothing has been decided yet , but there is a great deal of pressure on external expenditure , and in these cases , what happens , quite frankly , is that the third countries concerned tend to prioritise bilateral cooperation to the detriment of regional budgets .
It is therefore an issue that should be discussed with the Euromed countries .
Indeed , one of the interesting aspects of France 's initiative aimed at creating a Union for the Mediterranean - which , for that matter , I supported from the very start - is that it brings a stronger element of regional cooperation .
Sometimes I am asked what the Union for the Mediterranean adds to the Barcelona process .
It is , of course , an element of greater political appropriation , and is also political upgrading , in particular thanks to the biennial summit ; but it is also the dimension brought by specific regional projects and , now I also hope , by very specific projects to which we will be able to add a stronger private sector dimension , as we still need more resources .
So this is the specific area in which we are working and , to conclude , I would just like to say : ' Good luck France , and good luck my dear friend President Sarkozy ! ' .
( Applause )
I would like to thank President Barroso and Vice-President Jacques Barrot for being here for 3 hours without interruption .
Mr President , I would first like to say that I think it is natural , when one has the honour of being the President-in-Office of the Council , to be before Parliament for as many hours as Parliament wishes , not only on the first day of the Presidency , but rather I will say to you , President of the European Parliament , as well as to each of the group chairmen and to the Conference of Presidents , if you want me to come at particular times during the Presidency , I am at Parliament 's disposal .
You have to play the game of the European institutions .
The European Parliament is at the heart of parliamentary democracy .
It is not a question of availability ; it is a question of priority .
The Presidency needs the European Parliament and is therefore at its disposal .
( Applause )
If the speakers will excuse me , I would like to say a few words to each of them .
First of all I would like to say to Mr Bushill-Matthews that I am among those who think that Europe needs the United Kingdom .
I have never been one of those Europeans or French people who thought that we should be wary of our British friends .
The United Kingdom can bring much more than it believes it can to Europe .
The United Kingdom is the gateway to the Anglo-Saxon world , it represents the leading world language and it is economically dynamic , as has been shown in recent years .
I would like to say to our British Conservative friends , ' believe that Europe needs you , that you have a place there , and that if the British have one foot in and one foot out , Europe will be weakened ' .
The United Kingdom is a great nation .
It has nothing to fear from Europe , and Europe has a great deal to expect from the United Kingdom .
To Mr Poignant , who saw deep inside me and therefore understood that I loved politics and that Parliament was a little like my garden , I would like to say that yes , Parliament is the place for democracy , and I do not respect or understand those political leaders who would not be happy to express and defend their ideas in the cradle of parliamentary democracy .
I hope that in your remark there was an element of regret , rather than an excessive view of the harmonisation of the employment market .
The same also applies to Mr Désir ; I am entirely with you , I am against complete harmonisation because the people would reject it .
However , having minimum rules in the context of an employment market , in the context of a single economic market , is perfectly natural .
Let us all be aware of the difficulties .
Take Austria , for example , which is led by a socialist Prime Minister and Government ; they will tell you that the retirement age is 65 , and that the contribution period is 45 years .
You are aware of how many difficulties I encountered in bringing the contribution period to 40 years , and I did not immediately gain the support of the French Socialist Party .
So explain to me how it is , when I encountered so many difficulties in securing a 40-year contribution period in France , I only need to be President of Europe for six months to preferably achieve between the 45 years of contributions in Austria and the 40 years in France .
How can that be done ?
It is a long way from the dream to the reality , but this is perhaps the difference between the French Socialist Party and the European Socialist Party .
At times I even feel closer to the European Socialist Party than to the French Socialist Party ; I confess my fault and of course apologise for it .
( Off-microphone intervention from Mr Schulz )
It does not work that way .
It is not up to you to decide who speaks .
Speaking time cannot be split between the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the President-in-Office of the Council .
President Sarkozy , are you willing to allow a question from Mr Schulz ?
If so , I shall give him the floor .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( FR ) Mr President , yes , provided that I do not get caught in the crossfire of an all-German debate .
( DE ) Thank you very much , Mr President , you are most kind .
President Sarkozy , it is nice that you want to draw closer to socialism in this way .
Having strongly supported the positions of the German Social Democrats in your speech just now and thus distanced yourself from Chancellor Merkel , I propose that you proceed as follows . If you feel so comfortable within the European social democratic fold , come first to German social democracy and we shall take you gradually closer to French social democracy and , by the end , you will be a really good comrade .
Mr Schulz , this has less to do with kindness and more to do with observing proper procedure - something we in Europe wish to do , after all .
Mr President , you will notice that I already have a socialist on my right , but there is a space for a socialist on my left .
( Applause )
As you know , ladies and gentlemen , I do not think that we are wasting time because I think that democracy at European level can be free of the violence that it sometimes has at national level .
The European level enables everyone to step back a little from the electoral routine , which is brutal , often unfair and always difficult .
Finally , the fact that in a forum such as yours we can talk while smiling and respecting each other is perhaps also something that will encourage people to warm to the European ideal and make it their own .
In any case I do not see this as wasted time , and I would like Mr Poignant and Mr Schulz to be certain of this .

Mrs De Sarnez is quite right .
We need to change our development policy , making food agriculture a priority .
It is entirely essential ; the African countries need to have the resources to become self-sufficient in terms of food , and undoubtedly part of the money that we have dedicated to developing large infrastructures needs to be invested in agricultural micro-projects .
This is a point on which I fully share your opinion .
You also called on me to defend a vision of Europe .
I share this ambition .
I hope that you will be generous enough to advise me on the content of that vision .
You are perfectly aware that , again , between the somewhat disembodied big ideal and all of the technical issues of daily life , the problem for each of us is having to constantly decide on what to do about the big ideas that sometimes go far beyond the day-to-day difficulties experienced by our citizens , and what to do about resolving the technical issues that affect their daily lives .
It is not that simple , but I will try my hand at it in any case .
To answer you , Mr Crowley , yes we do need development in order to avoid illegal immigration .
Moreover , everyone is aware that the best response to the immigration issue is development .
There are 475 million young Africans who are under the age of 17 , and there are 12 km of the Strait of Gibraltar between Europe and Africa .
Africa 's disasters will be Europe 's disasters , and there are no barriers or borders that can resist that .
We therefore do indeed need a development policy .
Again it is very difficult to decide between multilateralism and bilateralism .
This is a significant subject and I intend to devote a great deal of attention to it .
Mr Irujo talked about linguistic diversity .
I am entirely in agreement , including - and I understand that you do not like the expression ' regional language ' - with regard to official languages .
I am among those , you see , who think that we would be helping all the pro-autonomy or independence movements by giving them the monopoly on defending regional languages , and this would be a very serious error .
I am talking about Corsica , in the French Republic , where there are people who are Corsican , who love Corsica , and who speak Corsican in their villages ; but that is no threat to national unity .
Therefore , linguistic diversity is , in my eyes , just as important as cultural diversity , and in any case there will be no cultural diversity if there is only one language .
Mr Farage , I very much liked your speech , but I am going to say one thing to you : the British were quite happy for me to close Sangatte , because it was in fact me who closed Sangatte , and it was you who asked me to .
Even if you are a British person who loves his country , you cannot resolve all its immigration problems , and I have to tell you that France does not intend to be the United Kingdom 's border guard .
Allow me to say that it is all very well to say , ' in my country I do not want identity cards and I do not want a common immigration policy ' , but this does not stop you from being quite happy for foreigners whose papers are not in order to be stopped in France so that you do not have them in the United Kingdom .
Just like France , the United Kingdom cannot manage alone .
I would like to add , Mr Farage , that I respect the Polish , but you were not in my office negotiating the Lisbon Treaty with a number of colleagues .
We were in Brussels , and who was in my office ?
Not Prime Minister Tusk , because the Prime Minister at that time was Mr Kaczynski 's brother .
There was President Kaczynski and I will say one thing : he is a man that I trust and he is a man that I respect .
However , in Europe , when you sign something , if you start by not respecting it , there is no more Europe , there is nothing at all , there are no negotiations .
When one of us commits his country , in Brussels , he must make a commitment at home as well .
I said that , nothing more , nothing less .
( Applause )
This is completely respectful of the Polish : Mr Farage , I think that I defended Poland .
President Barroso will be able to say this better than anyone .
We need Poland , but we also need to have respect for a man 's word when it is given .
Mrs Sudre , thank you for your support .
I entirely agree with your analysis and sincerely thank you for it .
Mr Rasmussen , who I understood was Rasmussen I , and I am just about clear who Rasmussen II is , I would like to say that Denmark is a good example of a country that has been able to move forward , and that enables me to respond to all the speakers on the Irish issue .
Of course we should not force the hands of the Irish and we need to respect them , but we need to have the courage to say to our Irish friends : ' You also need to respect the other countries that have ratified the Treaty .
We are not lecturing you , but consider that others also have an opinion to offer and that at some point we will have to find a common path .
Europe does not want to continue without you , but Europe cannot come to a halt just because of you . '
I say this with all the respect I have for a country that has voted ' no ' .
We , the French , have caused you considerable problems and difficulties , but at some point we need to get out of this situation in which everyone is watching each other and waiting for someone else to take the initiative .
The French Presidency , along with the Presidency of the Commission and the Presidency of the European Parliament need to take the initiative .
After that , some will say yes and some will say no .
Personally , I think that there is a solution , but it is certainly not in maintaining the status quo or in saying ' we will wait and let time do the work ' .
Personally I think that time works against us , that Europe has been waiting for years and that there is no point in it waiting any longer .
We will find a solution ; I am convinced , just as the Danish found one .
Mrs Mehrin , I was very touched by your assessment of me as a ' ladies ' man ' .
I will leave the content with you ; I honestly do not know exactly what it means and I will be careful not to go down that road as I would not like you to misunderstand me .
I know that the multi-speed Europe does exist .
We are not all in the euro , and we are not all in Schengen .
However , ultimately , before we build a multi-speed institutional Europe , I would like us to try to do it all together .
Do not criticise the Presidency for having the ambition to take everyone along because , if before we have even started , Madam , we say , ' In any case , it does not matter , let us leave it ' , then one day we are negotiating a social exception for the British , the next we are negotiating an institutional exception for the Irish , and the next we will be negotiating an exception for the Polish .
At that point I fear that we will get to a situation in which all the countries will , quite rightly , ask for an exception , and where will the European Union be then ?
Where will the project be that the founding fathers baptised ?
This is what I am saying .
Perhaps we will have to get to that point , but I would like us to get there after we have tried to take the whole family along together .
I would also like to say to those who are concerned about Croatia that I am of course in favour of us continuing the negotiations , and I think that it would be a serious mistake to close Europe 's door to the Balkans , because the Balkans need the peace and democracy that the Union can bring them , but I will not go back to the Lisbon debate .

I would like to say to Mr Bielan that I do not wish to threaten Ireland ; besides , I would not be able to do so and it would not even occur to me to do so .
I will go there and listen but , at the same time , everyone needs to understand that in the polls 80 % of the people say that they are pro-Europe ; we can nevertheless work with them without threatening them .
VAT on fuel is a French proposal ; I do not want to impose it on anyone .
I would simply like to draw your attention to the fact that I am convinced that the price of oil is going to continue to rise .
We need to have the courage to say this to our fellow citizens .
There is 3 % less oil production each year due to stocks being exhausted , and 2 to 3 % more oil consumption , due to the growth of emerging countries .
My thought is simply that VAT is a tax that is proportional to price .
If tomorrow oil is 175 dollars per barrel , will we be able to continue , without saying anything , to collect 20 % tax on rocketing oil prices ?
This is the question that I want to ask .
Along with the Presidency of the Commission , we will report on this in October .
I will try to push it in the direction of my convictions , and we will see what the result is .
Regarding Ukraine , there will be a summit , and we will move things forward .
We need to encourage Ukraine along the road to democracy and we need to bring it closer to the European Union .
Ukraine is not insignificant , it has 42 million inhabitants .
This is not a small decision .
For now we are at the point of association , but anyone who walks through the streets of Kiev can see that it is a European capital .
Mr Langen , I would like to thank you for your compliments , which really touched me .
I rather liked the reference to Tony Blair .
I do not know if this is the reason that you made the reference , but I think that Tony Blair is one of the statesmen who have done a great deal for Europe , and a great deal for his country , and frankly I do not know if he would mind me saying this , but in many areas I find that he has restored credit and strength to the British political debate and to the European political debate .
I think that in Europe , we need leaders and that in his time Tony Blair was indisputably one of those leaders .
This is going to mark me out as being more towards the left , even though I have observed that compliments are not always forthcoming for Mr Blair from that side of the political spectrum .
Yes , Mr Goebbels , others do need to make an effort , and this is entirely the issue that will be raised in the negotiations on climate change , but Europe needs to set an example .
I am not naïve in saying that .
I think that we have more credibility when we practise what we preach .
Some might say that it is better to wait .
Personally I think that we need to take the risk of acting .
Fundamentally , Mr Goebbels , my political philosophy is that nothing is worse than inaction .
The worst risk is to take no risks .
Mr Cavada , you are quite right , we need to respond to these fears .
Thank you for your support .
Regarding the Union for the Mediterranean , I would like to say that in my mind , following on from President Barroso , there is no criticism of the Barcelona Process .
I would nevertheless like to say one thing .
Barcelona was a very good idea , but there was one problem at the Barcelona Summit .
As far as I remember , there was just one Arab head of state , Prime Minister Abu Mazen .
How do you think we can create a Union for the Mediterranean , bringing the northern and southern shores closer together , if the southern shore does not come ?
At the Paris Summit , I believe , although Bernard Kouchner may correct me later , that all of the Arab heads of state will be present .
This may be a minor difference , but to me it is fundamental .
I would also like to say to Mr Zahradil that it is not a question of creating a crisis regarding Lisbon , but we should also not act as if nothing is happening .
We should not dramatise , but at the same time it is nevertheless worrying that the last three referendums in the European Union ended in a no vote , which was certainly for other reasons , but the fact remains that at the very least it is not a particularly encouraging sign .
I will not respond to Mrs Napoletano as President Barroso gave you a good answer .
Mr Sánchez-Neyra , yes there does need to be a European dimension to sport and I think that it could only be beneficial if the statistics for the Olympic Games were counted nation by nation , but if there were a specific column for European medals .
This would be a way of showing that we also exist in the Europe of sport .
Mr Désir , I answered you regarding standards in the labour market .
Regarding social policy , we have a famous debate .
The 35-hour week is not enough to win the elections , or to have a genuine social policy .
I would like to add that the reason why I took so much trouble in overcoming the automatic , rigid code of the 35-hour week in France was precisely in the name of European harmonisation , because no other country had followed you along that path .
None .
Not a single one .
Including the European socialist governments .
Therefore , you see , I am quite happy for us to call for social harmonisation , but I would like to say to our French socialist friends that social harmonisation involves not advocating ideas in France that no one else is advocating in Europe , because that is an exception and our country is suffering as a result .
I would like to thank Mr Buzek for Poland 's European commitment .
I have never ever doubted Poland 's European commitment .
Poland is one of the six most populated countries in Europe , and this is precisely why I say to President Kaczynski that we need his signature , because Poland is not just any European country .
It is extremely important , it is a symbol , and naturally we need to reduce the institutional crisis solely to the issue of Ireland .

Mr Barón Crespo , Doha , yes I said it to President Barroso , I said it to Gordon Brown , but in short , Doha , but not at any price .
I would like to defend two ideas that are close to my heart .
First of all , I am told that if there is no agreement , there will be no growth .
Excuse me , but there has not been an agreement for seven years , and for six years the world has undergone unprecedented growth .
The WTO agreement is preferable to having no agreement , but it should not be said that without an agreement there can be no growth .
For six years we have had growth .
Secondly , what President Barroso , the Canadian Prime Minister and even Angela Merkel are currently saying is that it is not good enough .
Brazil is not making any effort regarding lowering tariff barriers in the industry ; there is no effort on services .
Also , what can be said about the closure of the Chinese market ?
There is no French exception from this point of view .
Firstly , as President-in-Office of the Council , I must loyally defend the Union 's position .
However , in terms of the Union 's position , I have not heard anyone , even the British Government , saying that the agreement should be signed at the current stage of the negotiations .
We are therefore unanimous in Europe , even if it is not for the same reasons , in saying that as things stand , it is not good enough ; that Europe has made all the effort and it cannot continue to make efforts if the other big regions of the world are not committed to moving forward .
From this point of view , I think that we are all in agreement .
I would like to say to Mr Zappalà that I thank him for his support for the European immigration policy , and to Mrs Gurmai that I think that equality between men and women is very important , but I do not know whether her remark was addressed to me as well .
In any case , the fact that she is Hungarian is already an undeniable asset .
I would like to say to Mr Varvitsiotis that I am perfectly aware that there is a European identity crisis , and perhaps also that the European Parliament could help all the institutions with this issue .
Why not imagine that there is a real debate , President Pöttering , on what European identity is ?
This subject of European identity is a subject for European parliamentary debate , rather than a matter for a head of state or government .
Perhaps the European Parliament could even organise debates on this subject , and in that case we will come and give our opinion .
Personally I think it is more the role of Parliament to define European identity rather than the role of governments , who naturally deal with daily administration in each of their countries .
If there is indeed a place where European identity should be defined , I think , and I hope that President Barroso will agree , it is not in the European Council , or the Commission , but first of all in the European Parliament .
I would like to respond to Mr Karas , who said that I need to demonstrate diplomacy .
Yes , understood , I will try to be diplomatic .
I hope that on his part he was not questioning whether my temperament would prevent me from being diplomatic .
It is not simply a question of being weak yet clever , or being dynamic yet clumsy .
Perhaps it is even possible to be both dynamic and skilful but , in any event , thank you for giving me the opportunity to demonstrate this .
( Loud applause )
Many thanks , President Sarkozy .
I have been a Member of the European Parliament for 29 years , and I cannot remember a time when a President-in-Office of the Council spent three-and-a-half hours in discussion with us and responded to every speech .
We look forward to your next visit .
That concludes this item .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) I believe that France has taken over the European Union Presidency at a crucial moment , when Europe is in search of adequate answers to the numerous challenges of a strategic nature .
France has the task of ensuring the continuity of the Lisbon Treaty ratification process , of focusing on the energy field and of consolidating the European Union 's security and defence policy .
I express my support for these priorities of the French presidency and I hope their implementation will be a success .
As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Rapporteur on the Black Sea cooperation , I would like to focus on an important aspect to be promoted in the EU foreign policy .
I welcome the initiative of France to consolidate the European Neighbourhood Policy , but I insist on the fact that its Eastern dimension should receive the same attention and involvement as the Mediterranean dimension .
This objective should apply both to bilateral relations , in the context of negotiations on the EU future contractual relations , and to multilateral relations , within the Black Sea Synergy .
Finally , France will take over the EU presidency during the Year of Intercultural Dialogue and it should successfully continue the actions in this field .
I would first of all like to welcome the European commitment of the President-in-Office of the Council , Nicolas Sarkozy , and his vision concerning the current challenges facing the Union .
I support the political statement that new institutions based on the Lisbon Treaty are essential , and without them it would be irresponsible to envisage further accessions .
The Europe of results must take into account the expectations of citizens and show itself to be a solution , not a problem .
I support the idea of having a mechanism at the borders that will enable fair and non-distorted competition , taking into account the impact of the environmental measures associated with the issues of energy and climate .
The priority of a European legal immigration policy is also a human , economic and social necessity .
I would like to congratulate Brice Hortefeux on his excellent work on the European immigration pact .
Regarding European defence , the President 's bold positions will enable us to move forward on this difficult issue , particularly by involving soldiers from all the populations , and supporting the emergence of a European arms industry .
The President is right to defend the CAP , which has never been more necessary .
Finally , I would like to stress the need for better political dialogue with the ECB , in order to have European economic governance that is in line with current global demands .
Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to offer President Sarkozy my best wishes for his work as he takes charge of the Council 's fate for six months .
Unfortunately clouds are gathering over the EU 's future : the paradoxical Irish vote ( Ireland having become the ' Celtic Tiger ' that we know thanks to EU funds ) , the government crisis in Austria , the statements of the Polish President , are all worrying signs .
We must find the strength and skill to relaunch a European path that must revive the enthusiasm and emotion of citizens , who still perceive the EU as something distant and rather abstruse .
I also take this opportunity to offer a provocation to the President-in-Office : to bring citizens closer to the EU , concrete signals must be sent out .
It would be excellent if the French President could start a serious debate on sorting out the issue of Parliament 's two seats : let us concentrate all activities in Brussels and avoid the monthly move to Strasbourg ( where the site could be used for other purposes , such as the centre of technological excellence ) : this ' trip ' actually represents a huge and unjustified waste of financial and energy resources .
The French Presidency has set the right priorities , for example the climate , immigration and defence , but I should like to focus on one aspect that receives less attention but is nevertheless extremely important for our young people and the whole sports sector in Europe .
The French Presidency supports the ' six-plus-five ' rule in sport : a restriction on the number of foreign players .
The objectives are good : obliging clubs to invest more in their own youth training and thus also going some way towards restoring the competitive balance .
This Parliament agrees with this one hundred per cent .
Hence our support for the ' home-grown ' rule , which - albeit more modestly - has the same objectives in mind .
The question is whether the six-plus-five rule is feasible at European level .
It conflicts with the free movement of workers and can only be applied if a derogation is made from the EU Treaty , and we are a long way from this course of action .
It is doubtful whether the Court of Justice would ever accept such a thing , even in the light of the new article on sport in the Treaty of Lisbon .
We in Parliament want to join in the search for a solution that benefits European football .
We are simply calling for a solid solution , one that does not plunge football into chaos .
Nobody needs a Bosman Mark 2 .
President Sarkozy spent roughly a third of his speech defending the Lisbon Treaty and on continuing pressurisation and blackmail of Ireland , forgetting what the very rules of the European Union say on the entry into force of a new Treaty - ratification by all Member States .
Well , if a majority of the Irish people rejected it then the Treaty is dead in the water .
Ratifications should not continue .
Insisting on ratification of the Treaty is an anti-democratic attitude .
Another priority is deepening immigration policy , where the return directive , otherwise known as the shameful directive , stands out due to its disregard of fundamental human rights and its treatment of illegal immigrants as criminals and not as people who have fled hunger in their countries , looking for a better future for themselves and their families .
The social area was totally overlooked .
He is aware of the opposition that exists to the proposal to amend the working time directive and the proposals that the Council approved and sent to the European Parliament , aimed at weakening labour rights , opening the door to a longer average working week of up to 60 or 65 hours , deregulation of employment and lower wages .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to express the hope that the six months of the French Presidency will be marked by fruitful , effective work for the good of all citizens of a united Europe .
I should like at this juncture to stress the considerable significance of agriculture for the European Community .
In Poland , for example , in 2005 over 17 % of employed people were working in agriculture .
The agricultural issue is of indirect importance to Member States - here I am chiefly thinking of the problem of food security in the context of rising food product prices on the world markets .
I hope that the French Presidency will bring a solution to several disputed questions relating to the European agricultural model .
Europe does not have such a good climate or agrarian conditions to be able to give up support for its farmers altogether .
The cost of producing meat , milk or cereals will always be higher on our continent than in South America , the United States or Australia .
We need to bear in mind that these countries too support their farmers .
My view is that higher agricultural product prices are creating a development opportunity for European agriculture .
There is a danger , though , that the additional income will be intercepted by intermediate agencies ; in other words , a rise in food prices causes a disproportionate rise in the cost of the agricultural production method .
The result is that the surplus income is absorbed by intermediate agencies .
Agriculture continues to be an important economic sector .
The conditions under which it currently functions have changed , but the main priorities - ensuring a decent level of income for farmers and food security - are still there .

After Sarkozy pulled the wool over his people 's eyes , stating that he would respect the will expressed in the referendum carried out in 2005 - which rejected the ' European Constitution ' - , at the same time as pushing ahead with the ' mini-Treaty ' , which basically rehashed the content of the rejected Treaty , presenting it in another form and avoiding a further referendum , he now finds himself in charge of the process kick-started by Angela Merkel , that is to say , to attempt once more to impose the federalist , neoliberal , militarist Treaty that has already been rejected three times .
Given the deepening crisis of capitalism , big business and the EU 's major powers , especially France and Germany , are showing the ' way out ' by forging ahead with federalist , neoliberal and militarist policies and this draft Treaty , seeking to consolidate the foundations of a ' super-State ' to reinforce imperialist intervention mechanisms working in close collaboration with the USA and NATO .
To do so , pressure and blackmail are being piled on ( enlargement , the two-speed EU , etc . ) .
Deaf , dumb and blind to the will expressed by the Irish people , the EU is conspiring for the latter to hold another referendum in 2009 even before the EP elections .
in writing . - ( HU ) One of the most important tasks of the French Presidency will be coordinating the climate change obligations of the Member States .
It is very important that we reduce the emission of greenhouse gases at Union level .
This can happen if we take the Kyoto Protocol seriously , and reduce emissions continuously and significantly in comparison with the 1990 base year , in accordance with its provisions .
It would certainly be scandalous if the Member States that did not reduce but rather increased their emissions between 1990 and 2005 now received a reward from the European Union and continued to keep the advantage they have that is contradictory to the Kyoto Protocol .
It would be even more outrageous if the Member States that take the Kyoto Protocol seriously and reduce their emissions honestly - including Hungary - were punished with more restrictions .
I hope that the French Presidency will never accept such mockery of the Kyoto Protocol and negative discrimination against the new Member States , including my homeland .
in writing . - ( PL ) I would like to thank the French President for a speech that raises many of the EU 's fundamental problems .
It is true that we must consider how to get Europe out of its crisis .
It is little consolation that virtually the whole world finds itself in a situation that is close to critical .
This has a significant economic and social dimension .
I am talking about the threat of hunger in many regions of the world , since food prices are rising steeply , about energy security and also about the status of the environment .
The world 's financial system is becoming increasingly unstable .
Why am I placing emphasis on this ?
Because it is not for us to be self-righteous .
The almost 500 million citizens of the EU currently constitute less than 8 % of the world 's population , and in 40 years ' time this proportion will be barely at the election threshold - 5 % .
Our European view must therefore not overlook values of a higher order linked to the maintenance of Euro-Atlantic civilisation .
This also has an ethical dimension .
In each country of the EU , then , we need due care for the family , which , while being a tiny community , is at the same time the cornerstone of the whole European Community .
We should not let this slip from our view .
If we do , we shall lose touch , as we are doing now , by abusing the word ' marriage ' in applying it to unions that are not marriage .
It is true that we need new legal frameworks , but they must be ones that people can understand .
EU citizens are the subject of actions taken by Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
We are merely carrying out a service .
It is precisely in this light that we view the case of Ireland .
in writing . - ( PL ) As generally anticipated , one of the priorities of the French Presidency has become the issue of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Unexpectedly for most observers , though , the principal character at the start of the French Presidency is Poland or , to be precise , not so much Poland as the Polish President , Lech Kaczyński .
I do not understand the arguments deployed by the President of Poland in declining to sign the ratification documents for the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Treaty was ratified by the Sejm and by the Senate .
Nothing has happened to delay the appending of the President 's signature .
The Treaty has not , for example , been referred to the Constitutional Tribunal .
This looks like disrespect for Parliament and violation of an agreement with the Prime Minister , Donald Tusk .
I agree with the President-in-Office that this matter is not by nature political , but ethical .
Poland negotiated the Treaty , signed it , and under international law is obliged to go through with the ratification process .
I also very much hope that the situation regarding ratification of the Treaty will change soon and that attitudes will be significantly better by the end of the French Presidency than they are at present .
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , I respect the clear wish of the President-in-Office of the Council Nicholas Sarkozy to adopt an ambitious attitude towards the EU energy and climate package and to achieve a Convention in that regard during the French Presidency .
I hope this says above all that the challenges of climate change are at last at the heart of policy .
I would , however , like to remind the President-in-Office of the Council of the seriousness of the task - emissions trading is a very significant market tool and affects so many people that we cannot afford to aspire to the kind of political timetable which goes on at the expense of the environment and sustainable development . Otherwise France may end up with egg on its face , something of which it could not be proud .
Last month I held a seminar at which environmental organisations , research bodies and bodies affected by emissions trading were able to express their views on its economic effects .
The message I received was clear : the Commission proposal will result in much higher costs without providing comparable environmental benefit .
I refer to the worrying McKinsey analysis of the matter .
Emissions trading must be improved .
The situation is serious .
We will not be able to use European industry , which has been dealing with its own affairs well , as a guinea pig again unless the system is operated in a slip-shod fashion .
It is better to fail to accomplish than to accomplish failure .
I believe that we can deliver a good result in time , but some vital adjustments are required .
Carbon emissions will not be prevented by pious hopes and promises , unless they become part of the directive itself .
We should remain firm on reducing the obligation but the procedure is very much open to discussion .
In Parliament we have presented a broad front to the way the Commission has approached the alternatives under consideration .
I would ask that you become acquainted with it , President-in-Office .
in writing . - ( RO ) Mr. President , you have presented an extremely ambitious programme , which I hope will be successfully completed .
The pact on immigration is a necessary priority in order to diminish illegal immigration and build a common policy on legal immigration .
Nevertheless , I would like to emphasize an aspect you should take into consideration before starting the planned actions : the pact should comprise a series of actions taking into account the restrictions on the European labour market , imposed on workers from certain new Member States .
It is not normal for the economic migration from third countries to outmatch the free movement between countries inside the Union .
There are Member States that have transitory provisions in force , regulating access to the labour market for EU workers .
Once the legal immigration policy is enforced , there is a risk of disadvantaging European citizens as compared to third country citizens .
In this respect , I would like to congratulate France , which has taken the first step in this direction on 1 July , when it opened its labour market for the citizens of the countries acceding in 2004 .
I hope Romania and Bulgaria shall receive the same treatment as soon as possible and I encourage the other Member States to follow the example of France .
in writing . - France has taken upon itself the mission to lead the European agenda for six months in a difficult context created after Ireland rejected the Lisbon Treaty .
The programme of the French presidency of the EU is ambitious , but it should also be aware of the expectations of the population .
The latest Eurobarometer poll shows that only 52 % of EU citizens consider membership to be a good thing for their country .
There is need of a strategy to make European citizens aware that the common interests are much more important from an economic and political view than the things that differentiate us .
Obviously , the priority of the French presidency is the identification of the method of absorption of the Irish flaw as the European process must go on given that the Treaty of Nice blocks enlargement .
As regards the second priority of the French presidency of the EU - the common agricultural policy and its preparation for future challenges - mention should be made that the maintaining of a single-payment system is applicable in Romania as of 2013 .
A beneficiary of the CAP as well , Romania will receive this year EUR 735 million in European direct aid for Romanian farmers .
I will limit myself to two points :
It is absolutely impossible to apply for asylum in 27 countries .
We have the Dublin II regulation , which settles the issue of the responsibility of host countries .
However , it is true that there are still differences between Member States regarding recognising international protection , and that is a real problem .
The second point that I want to cover is the basic problem of humanity in this world .
How can we live all together in a globalised world ?
We need to tackle the underlying causes that drive some desperate people to leave their countries and , in my view , the European Immigration Pact does not achieve the right balance between combating traffickers , promoting legal immigration and establishing ambitious co-development policies .
in writing . - ( ET ) This year is an opportunity for the European Union to look in the mirror and see whether the decisions we made last year have borne fruit .
Last year saw the beginning of the environment and energy action plan to reduce greenhouse gases and combat climate warming .
We have discussed a common immigration policy for Europe and a short time ago heard testimony on the huge growth in illegal migration .
We have also tackled issues of protection : joint European forces have been carrying out military operations in the wider world and since 2004 we have created EU battle groups and emergency response units .
The new Presidency in the person of President Nicolas Sarkozy has brought freshness and promise to European policy , has given us the idea of a mini-agreement , and has taken a new approach to the new Member States .
There are many examples of this .
Through his own drive and initiative he will certainly be able to launch or speed up many challenging projects .
Because of this I wish to stress that the country holding the Presidency does not drive European affairs separately , although it does have the right to propose certain items for the order of business .
The fact that the Presidency is not responsible for decisions taken at the European Council table is a fundamental matter for it , and one on which it should focus its Presidency , rather than a party festooned with empty promises .
Above all I hope very much that the French Presidency is able to inspire hope in Europeans for specific projects .
in writing . - Mr President-in-Office of the Council , at the last European Summit in Brussels the creation of the Mediterranean Union was discussed - a significant initiative for the whole Mediterranean region and a priority of the French Presidency .
But I truly hope that , when emphasising the Mediterranean Union during this Presidency , the Baltic Sea Region and the Baltic Sea Strategy will not be neglected .
The Baltic Sea has become basically a European Union lake , with eight Member States surrounding it since 2004 .
The Baltic Sea Strategy covers the areas of environment , economics , culture and education and security , providing a sustainable plan for the development of this region .
It would give me great pleasure if the French Presidency took time to attend to the issues concerning the Baltic Sea , and the prioritisation of the Mediterranean did not mean grabbing the blanket from the Baltic Sea region .
Bearing in mind the near future Presidency of Sweden , it would be reasonable to start addressing the Baltic Sea Strategy to ensure greater coherence between Presidencies .
in writing . - ( RO ) In the next six months , the French presidency shall have a great responsibility for the future of the European Union .
The Union needs the Lisbon Treaty .
The existent institutional framework , with the requirement of unanimity for certain decisions , is a heavy one .
Moreover , the Lisbon Treaty increases the degree of democratization , increasing the power of national parliaments and introducing the codecision procedure for most of the fields .
The French presidency should also support the common agricultural policy enabling European farmers to produce more .
Together with all Member States , the French presidency should find solutions to the Union 's impasse following the Irish referendum .
The French presidency announced its priorities for the next period : climate change , immigration , the common agricultural policy , the Union 's defence and security .
Next autumn , in Copenhagen , the Union shall participate in the conclusion of an international post-Kyoto agreement .
The Union should give an example of action in the fight against climate change and , for this reason , the adoption of the energy and climate change package should be one of the main objectives for the French presidency .
in writing . - Nobody is able to explain the reasons for the outcome of the referendum in Ireland .
A norm becomes a law based on universal approval of the people .
Its sense should correspond to the conviction about the unity of all .
Your fellow countryman , a thinker resting in the Pantheon , Rousseau , wrote that ' any law that the people have not ratified in person is void , it is not a law at all ' .
That is why the people should control the governments which pose a danger of usurpation of their rights .
But how are the people supposed to take control by means of an instrument they do not understand , the structure of which is as complicated and unclear as the recent treaty ?
I have no doubt that you wish to appear - to paraphrase Dominique de Villepin - in this ' temple ' of the European Parliament - as a ' guardian of an ideal and a guardian of a conscience ' .
I count , however , that you will be more interested in conveying the information about the platforms of shared realisation of European interests to the public opinions , which , in turn , may allow the media to restrain from your private life in order to focus on your political one .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.40 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Quorum
I am pleased to see that the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs is here , because we have a delicate problem to solve .
My dear Jo , if you will return to your seat . I will explain the problem that we have , ladies and gentlemen .
Rule 149 states that we can establish whether a quorum is present .
As you know there are always large numbers in Parliament to debate its agenda and adopt the minutes , so in that case no quorum is required .
However , Rule 149 ( 3 ) states that if there is a prior request from at least forty Members , we can establish whether or not the quorum is present .
I have received a written request from forty Members who want us to verify whether or not the quorum is present .
Therefore , obviously ...
Mr Posselt , please allow me to explain the facts . Obviously I consider that there is indeed a prior request that has been clearly made .
The problem is as follows : after that the Rules of Procedure are much vaguer .
It does not say anywhere that the forty Members have to be present in the Chamber in order to submit this request for the quorum to be established , but it is also not excluded .
I therefore have discretion .
On previous occasions , which we have checked , the President of the sitting has always considered that the forty Members had to be in the Chamber in order to give some substance to Rule 149 ( 4 ) , which states that when the quorum is counted , the forty should be counted .
That implies that the forty have to be present .
However , I have discretion , and there is also the way in which the request is worded : it concerns the vote on urgencies , which is all the urgencies ; not just one of them but all of them .
If we consider that the quorum request is admissible and the quorum is not present , all the urgencies will be dropped , and as you know they cannot be deferred .
This means that we will not vote on Kashmir , the death penalty or Bangladesh .
If we do not vote on them , we will not defer them to the next sitting .
Parliament will not decide on these issues that are said to be urgent .
Before giving my opinion , I would therefore particularly like to have the opinion of the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs .
Mr Leinen , in your view , should I consider that the forty petitioners should be present in the Chamber as Rule 149 ( 4 ) implies , or can I consider that a prior written request alone is sufficient , as Rule 149 ( 3 ) implies ?
I shall listen closely to your reply .

Mr President , I have just looked it up , and it is true that Rule 149 ( 3 ) states that , provided 40 of them do so together , Members may request that it be established whether or not the quorum is present .
The quorum shall exist if one third of Parliament 's Members are present in the Chamber .
The President responds to such a request by establishing whether or not the quorum exists .
Then comes paragraph 4 , which you mentioned , which states that ' Members who have asked for the quorum to be established shall be counted as being present [ ... ] , even if they are no longer in the Chamber . '
We are presently in a sitting that has resumed and , in my view , Members who were present and said they wanted the quorum established should be counted as present even if they are not here in plenary this afternoon .
That is how I understand paragraph 4 .
I hear that you have received a request from 40 Members of this House for you to establish this afternoon whether the quorum is present or not .
You can look around - one third of 785 is a little over 200 , and there are about 30 of us here .
Try as we might , we are unlikely to reach 200 this afternoon unless everybody turns up .
Mr President , we can discuss the matter but , if you determine that the number of Members present does not reach one third , then we cannot vote .
That is what the Rules of Procedure say .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Leinen , I am a veteran of these topical and urgent debates .
They used to be held on Fridays , then they moved to Thursday afternoons .
All the groups regularly used to try the trick of making a request like this if there was some urgent matter that did not suit them , like the topic of Kashmir in this case .
That is why the Rules of Procedure were amended and the stipulation introduced that 40 Members - it may not be formulated very clearly , but that was the intention of the reform - have to be in the Chamber and contest the quorum .
It was introduced because we were aware of the problem and , since then , there has never been the required number of Members present in the Chamber to request that the quorum be established , so it was always deemed to exist .
I think it is important legally to consider the intention of this rule .
I am sure it can be looked up in the committee and plenary Minutes .
The intention of the reform was to link the question of the quorum with a number of Members present that was high enough to prevent it becoming a frequent parlour game , for that would almost have ruined these debates .
It was with the purpose of saving them that we introduced this quorum of 40 back then .
However , if we now make that 40 signatures , then the reform no longer makes sense .

( FR ) Mr President , you asked for the opinion of our colleague Mr Leinen first , in order to find out our feelings on this .
As my colleague has already said , it is true that this manoeuvre appears to be a little dilatory ; in other words forty of our colleagues who , for reasons that are their concern , have not been able to attend this sitting , are trying to use measures and procedures in order to prevent an urgent debate taking place here this afternoon .
I really think that perhaps , rather than scrupulously applying the rules , we should look at the spirit of the Rules of Procedure .
The spirit of the Rules of Procedure is really to ensure that the people who are tabling this quorum request are at least present so that they themselves can establish that there is no quorum .
Otherwise , I find that the request is either a political manoeuvre or it is tactical , but it is dilatory .
I would not wish , by strictly applying the law , for us to end up in the position where the urgent debates regularly organised on a Thursday afternoon , which are important , ended up being ' avoided ' , which would not enhance Parliament 's work .
Mr President , I think the previous speakers have made valid points .
I thought I understood Mr Leinen in reading out the Rules - and he will correct me if I am wrong - to imply that the Members should at least be here at the beginning of the sitting , even if they then leave .
Any other interpretation surely would be entirely self-serving , because people who are absent can put in a demand to say that there is no quorum , but they have helped to ensure that there is no quorum !
I cannot see how it could possibly be right to conclude that they can be entirely absent and say that the rest of us do not form a quorum .
The other fact is , frankly , habit on Thursday afternoons .
We know there is never a quorum for the urgencies and , if is suddenly to be invoked now , that may be a problem with the Rules that we will have to sort out .
If you are going to torpedo this afternoon 's urgencies , you could torpedo every Thursday afternoon 's urgencies .
My basic point is : how could it be possible to interpret the Rules to say that 40 absent people can say to the rest of us that we do not form a quorum and ensure that we do not make a quorum ?
( PT ) Mr President , it is not the first time that we have seen such a tactic and I would like to draw the attention of my fellow Members and of the Bureau to the following : all the world 's parliaments have two things , rules and regulations but also parliamentary conventions , the established practice .
This happens in all the world 's parliaments , and this is customary practice for our Thursdays , as used to be the case with Friday mornings .
We are all aware of this .
The tactic we are witnessing is obviously an unfair one and I believe that a demand by Members who are not present in the room cannot be considered .
Furthermore , I should like to call on those Members who are more expert at preparing amendments to the Rules , namely Mr Leinen , and Mr Corbett as well , to prepare an amendment to this rule , stipulating the following : if there is a request for a quorum count and if the person who made the request is not present in the Chamber at the time the count is carried out , they will lose their per diem for that day , and all those who are not in the Chamber , if there is no quorum the count establishes that , shall lose half their per diem for that day , so that we can put paid to this type of tactic once and for all .
It is an unfair attack on the way Parliament operates , and especially the way proceedings are conducted in Strasburg .
( PL ) Mr President , I am not a lawyer , but it seems to me that decency dictates behaviour that differs from that exemplified by the applicants .
That is one issue .
Now a second : if someone is absent , there are no grounds for doubting whether or not there is a quorum .
Thirdly , this approach to human rights matters , which are of particular importance to us , along with absence and attempts to break off proceedings , seems to me distinctly reprehensible .
It seems to me that the spirit of the law is more important than its letter .

( FI ) Mr President , the matter at issue should be dealt with in accordance with the Rules of Procedure of Parliament and in my opinion Mr Leinen does not have the authority to interpret the Rules of Procedure because it is not his place to act alone as their interpreter .
In my opinion , Mr President , it is your place to take responsibility for how we should proceed on the matter in question and afterwards the course you take should be examined by the Legal Office and the Presidents , otherwise this matter will become no clearer .
Mr President , on a point of order , I think Mr Leinen said that you should have been satisfied that the 40 Members were counted at the beginning - i.e. earlier on today .
This has not happened .
Did the President count the 40 Members who submitted this earlier on today ?
Obviously he did not .
So , Mr Leinen 's point that this satisfies paragraph 4 does not apply in this case .
( PL ) Mr President , this is undoubtedly a procedure that should not have to take place , but we too are rational people .
We can see , we have eyes , and I wish to say in all honesty that there is no quorum .
We can all see that .
We must not kid ourselves .
We cannot come up with interpretations that are in breach of the Rules and the law .
On the other hand , this is such an important matter that we cannot neglect it .
I am therefore making a specific application for this debate to be held , but to make amendments to the Rules , and not to make interpretations that are out of kilter with the idea of the Rules .
If we break the Rules and the Constitution , this means that we ourselves are doing something that is not good for democracy and we ourselves are violating it .
Mr President , actually the quorum issue does not relate to this debate .
The debate can take place .
The quorum issue concerns voting .
I am surprised we are actually discussing this issue now because the quorum is really needed for the vote .
I agree with all my colleagues that these urgencies are very important issues . However , we have hardly any people here .
Last time 58 out of 785 Members voted in this House .
I really do not think it enhances the credibility of this House if you have so few voting and taking part on major issues .
So I would urge you to make a decision at the vote because the issue is that it is not acceptable that there is never a quorum .
We think these urgencies are important .
We should make sure that Members are present .
We are trying to make sure that people do turn up to vote for these urgencies .
It is not OK for us to keep passing urgencies when we do not have the full number of people .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Onesta asked me how I read Rule 149 ( 4 ) .

I do understand that Mr Posselt and others are saying that we should act anyway , even if we do not keep to the Rules of Procedure .
I am delighted with the Member 's argument : either we have Rules of Procedure and keep to them , or we do not keep to them and therefore do not need them .
I may be Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , but it was Members before me who made this rule and adopted it in plenary with an absolute majority .
Paragraph 4 is quite clear .
It states : ' Members who have asked for the quorum to be established shall be counted as being present [ ... ] , even if they are no longer in the Chamber . '
That is clear .
If 40 Members , who were present at the sitting in Strasbourg , request that the vote or quorum be established , then they will be added to the number of those present .
That is how I read it .
If you wish to have it otherwise , then you have to change paragraph 4 but , as for now , it reads as it reads .

Mr Posselt , anyone who reads it must understand it that way ; there is no other way to understand it .
Therefore , Mr President , now it is up to you to take a decision .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Leinen has accused me of suggesting that we ignore the Rules of Procedure .
I was present when it was adopted , and you were not .
The context was that , previously , 40 Members used to come into the Chamber , ask for the quorum to be established , and then leave .
That is what the rule is about .
This is my interpretation having , believe me , listened to you very carefully .
The way in which the request from the forty petitioners is worded does not mention the issue of Kashmir , but all the urgencies , all the urgencies this afternoon , including the death penalty .
This is an important matter .
We can have the debates without any problem , Mrs Gill is right .
The issue solely concerns the vote , but I wanted to have this debate from the start so that there would not be ambiguity all afternoon .
I think that the reason why Parliament took the trouble to write Rule 149 ( 4 ) , stating that the Members who have asked for the quorum to be checked shall be counted , in accordance with paragraph 2 , even if they are not in the Chamber , as Mr Posselt said , I think that this Rule was written solely to prevent Members from leaving the Chamber at the time of the count , which implies that they were present at the start of the count .



As I cannot see that the forty petitioners are present at the start of the count - unless , as Mrs Gill says , they are all present later at voting time , which we will check , in which case there will be a quorum request - I will follow the precedents set by the other presidents of sittings who , like me , have been faced with this problem , by saying that the quorum request cannot be validated because the forty petitioners are not present .


Having said that , Mr Leinen was right to draw our attention to the fact that the way in which paragraph 4 is written could cause confusion .
This is why I think that this is a very good time - and it is not up to me to decide this , but to the competent bodies - for the Committee that you chair , Jo , to clarify very quickly whether or not paragraph 3 states that the Members have to be present when they submit their quorum request , and whether or not the Members have to be present when the count is done , at the start of the count .
I think that the interpretation of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs will get us out of a tricky situation .
However , as far as today is concerned , given the importance of the debates , and given the opinions that you have given me , which clearly largely support what I have just said , and on the basis of the previous decisions , we are going to have our debates , and when it comes to the vote , if the forty petitioners are not present , I will not ask for the quorum to be checked .
The debates will therefore begin .
1 .
Allegation of mass graves in Indian-administrated Kashmir
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the allegation of mass graves in Indian-administrated Kashmir .
author . - Mr President , I am very glad about the very wise decision you have taken .
Commissioner , thousands of civilians have been the victims of extrajudicial killings and forced disappearances , torture , rape and other serious human rights abuses which have occurred in Jammu and Kashmir since the beginning of the armed conflict there in 1989 .
Shamefully , most of these crimes have not been fully resolved to date .
Furthermore , there is real concern about the safety of human rights activists , including those who are seeking to investigate the fate of the many missing persons .
This Parliament strongly condemns all acts involving human rights abuses in the region and calls upon all governments concerned to show a strong will to uphold the rule of law and justice and to redouble their efforts in order to secure full investigations into the politically motivated crimes committed in Jammu and Kashmir in the past .

author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I must say that it is not good when a president from the old EU discriminates against Members from the new EU by twice allowing a Member from the old EU , Mr Posselt , to speak , while I , the co-author of three reports , cannot rise to speak even once on this matter .
I class this as discrimination and something that is totally unacceptable .
I shall be submitting an appropriate letter on this , Mr President .
This is a very disturbing thing .
With regard to this situation , we are not looking at a black-and-white film .
On the border between India and Pakistan conflicts arise that are often provoked by the Pakistani state , as we very well know .
We know about the so-called line of control guarded by the armed forces of the two countries .
Following the recent 20-year period of peace along this border , Pakistan has resumed its attacks on the state of Kashmir .
I am therefore asking for attention to be given to the other side too .
Of course , I am not underestimating the issue of the graves that we are discussing here , although the number of victims is probably considerably smaller there .
author . - Mr President , I welcome the opportunity to debate this particular issue because it is of great concern to many of us in this House whenever , in any part of the world , a significant number of graves come to light that are only accessible with permission of the security forces .
Therefore this motion for a resolution - along with the hearing in the Subcommittee on Human Rights next week - takes on an even greater significance because of the political and security situation in the area .
As this House well knows , we have ourselves debated that general situation before , perhaps also under less than transparent conditions .
There is indeed a history of disappearances in the region .
We know that a number of these have been linked to the activities of the security forces .
We know that it is the most heavily militarised area in the world .
We know that this also is an area where there are arrests and significant detention without trial .
Therefore that also colours our interpretation of such findings , making it all the more important that there should be a really open investigation allowing full transparency and full access for the international community .
I hope that the European Union will , as the resolution states , offer its support for high-quality forensic expertise and any other assistance which is needed in this investigation , because it is important for our interpretation of what is happening there that we reach the fullest possible understanding .
With that also goes - as others have said - the protection of human rights activists who are themselves trying to investigate the issue , such as Pervez Imroz .
I think we would all agree that it is the duty of all democratically elected governments to investigate such findings fully in complete transparency , and to try and trace those whose bodies are there and their relatives , so that we can fully understand the situation and not apply various interpretations to it which might not be the truth .
I think Parliament is absolutely right to be discussing this issue , and absolutely right to be calling on the Commission to offer its assistance , particularly given the ongoing problems that we are seeing in the region at present .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , I regard your interpretation of the Rules of Procedure as politically correct but legally incorrect and would definitely like the matter to be examined by the Presidents and the Parliamentary Legal Office ; this is because the application of the rule in question does not allow for the interpretation you have made today and requires more detailed study .
As for the matter in hand , India has been called the world 's largest democratic State .
It is indeed large in terms of population but the idea of whether a country is democratic also depends on its human rights situation .
Measures alleged to have been taken by the government 's security services against human rights activists in Jammu and Kashmir indicate that not all principles of the rule of law are respected in India , despite the fact that the country 's government has clearly declared that it does not allow violations of human rights .
We regard the action of the Indian government as lacking in credibility and ask where thousands of people have disappeared to and whose are the bodies found in the mass graves .
We condemn forced disappearances , torture , rape and other violations of human rights .
The fact that we suspect the Indian government of having a part in all this is an especially serious matter .
Therefore we in the European Parliament demand that an independent investigation be carried out by the Indian government to identify the origin of the mass graves and the identities of the murderers and their victims .
The matter is not insignificant given the nature of the Kashmir region .
There is a risk that the neighbouring state , Pakistan , would be party to any new conflict and in that case the events in question may act as a spark to nationalist kindling in this explosive area .
We must support the joint resolution on a thorough investigation into the events which occurred in Jammu and Kashmir .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , we have often discussed the conflict in Kashmir here , and I must add that there was a time of hope , of rapprochement between Pakistan and India .
It was hoped that the situation would ease .
Alas , the domestic political crises in both nations have brought a renewed hardening and we , the European Parliament , are working very hard to get the situation moving again .

I am very grateful to Mr Gahler , who , as Chief Observer of our Elections Observation Mission in Pakistan , has worked so hard for democracy in Pakistan and to ensure that our contacts with India serve the same goal and that we are supporting confidence-building .
One might wonder why we are addressing mass graves , as this will not bring the dead back to life and may worsen the climate between the two countries .
We are doing it because real peace can only be created when there is justice for the victims - and there are victims not just with Pakistani or Indian passports .
There are victims on both sides , and the main victim is the Kashmiri people .
That is why we must investigate these mass graves , we must determine where the many people are who have disappeared and are being mourned by their families .
Only then can the confidence be established that is necessary for a truly peaceful solution that people also feel they are part of .
Kashmir belongs first and foremost to the Kashmiri people themselves .
We should therefore support a solution that finally gives the Kashmiris some breathing space , finally creates political freedom and provides a sensible compromise solution , for this is one of the longest-running conflicts of all .
It has been raging since the Second World War , and it is scandalous that nobody has yet managed to bring the problem under control .
We therefore support all efforts to carry out these investigations and help give the victims the dignity and justice they deserve .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , just for the record , I am not an author of this resolution .
I do not know who has put my name down because I have not signed it .
I just want to say that I am really surprised to see this item as an urgency before we have debated it properly in either the Subcommittee on Human Rights , or for that matter , any other subcommittee or delegation of this Parliament .
This is not a new issue and it has been extensively investigated by the media in India .
It has been raised over and over again .
It would have been good to have had the debate before .
This is the reason that the Socialist Group were against having this item as an urgency now because we believed it should have been properly discussed in committee before .
The whole urgency is based on reports by a single NGO .
I am not denying that these things are happening , but I have had communication with the Commission , who are calling into question various things in this report .
So I would really question what it does for this Parliament 's credibility to have an urgency before things are properly investigated .
As Chairwoman of the European Parliament 's Delegation for relations with India , I personally would have liked an opportunity to look at the contents of this report and examine how many cases we are looking at and the result of the conflict in the region , where there have already been something like 4 500 deaths among military personnel and 13 000 civilians have lost their lives .
The graves we are talking about are in the line of control .
This resolution text ignores the fact that the issue has been investigated over the last five years , following the 2002 elections , and I have been informed that NGOs have had access to the area and have been invited to submit their names of disappeared persons to help the authorities to identify the graves .
Nobody is denying that security forces have been involved in disappearances .
What this resolution leaves out is that they have been investigated by the authorities .
I personally would urge this House not to vote for this resolution .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I can only join in the concerns about the discovery of hundreds of graves in Jammu and Kashmir since 2006 , but I am particularly concerned about the armed attack on the respected human rights lawyer , Pervez Imroz , just 11 days ago in Srinagar , and the continuous harassment of numerous human rights activists .
I think it is opportune , therefore , to urge the Indian Government to launch an independent investigation into these graves and as a first step to secure the grave sites so as to preserve the evidence .
We also call on the European Commission to offer the Indian Government financial and technical assistance through the Stability Instrument for such an inquiry , and possibly further measures of conflict resolution in Kashmir .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I think we should be clear what this motion for a resolution is not : it is not a re-run of the rather controversial and contentious report that we had last year ; it is not about how to get a political solution to the territorial dispute and conflict over Kashmir .
It is nothing of the sort .
It is a simple focus on humanitarian questions , with a call for an independent and impartial investigation and accountability for alleged disappearances .
It could have been handled in various ways .
It is true that these discoveries of unidentified graves go back to 2006 .
But two things prompted the urgency request .
One was the report going back to 29 March from the Association of the Parents of Disappeared Persons and the second was the attack on 30 June , with perpetrators unknown , on Pervez Imroz , the award-winning human rights lawyer and founder of that association .
I think that justifies the urgency .
At least part of the purpose of this resolution is to urge some action by the European Union , not least in paragraph 2 , which urges the Commission to offer financial and technical assistance to the Indian Government .
It also calls for EU Member States to take up the issue in the dialogue on human rights with the Indian Government in the second half of this year .
So the focus is on getting an independent investigation and not least to assign a civilian prosecutor to the task .
I think it is justified and is something that has a particular and circumscribed focus and does not talk about the whole issue of Kashmir .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the resolution speaks of facts that are an outcome of the conflict over Kashmir between Pakistan and India that has been going on for the past 50 years .
This conflict has been the cause of several wars .
Only China has benefited from it .
There has been indirect involvement by Russia and the United States in the conflict , and funds have come from Arab countries and China .
The UN has played a positive role in ameliorating the conflict .
This conflict is still going on , and attacks by fundamentalists continue to bring a bloody harvest .
This is the most serious problem faced by the inhabitants of Kashmir .
Victims on the Indian side are buried , while on the Pakistani side in many cases they become objects of revenge .
The key role in resolving the conflict and evaluating the facts should be played by the UN , not by us .
We feel morally obliged , in so far as the democratic government of India does not take this on , to provide assistance and stabilisation in the prevailing situation in Kashmir , and in a moral evaluation of the actions taken in the conflict .
I view the holding of a discussion on this subject more as a political manifestation than a pragmatic action .
I do not support the resolution .
( LT ) We are fully aware of the fact that the military conflict in Jammu and Kashmir has been going on for several decades .
However , today the most important point is that , in spite of the commitment of the Indian Government not to tolerate human rights abuse in Jammu and Kashmir , the international community still receives information on human rights violations , most recently regarding a large number of unknown graves containing hundreds of unrecognised human bodies .
We want to know and must find out who these people were , of what violence they are the victims and what crimes they are alleged to have committed .
We not only condemn unlawful killings and disappearances , but also insist that the Indian Government carry out a thorough independent investigation into the mass graves , having protected them in order to preserve the evidence .
I do believe that the European Commission will find ways of rendering financial and technical support to the Indian Government in order to facilitate the investigation .
Mr President , I only want to take the floor again because , as an author of this resolution , I feel obliged to answer what Mrs Gill has said .
It is extremely rare that the urgency subjects we discuss on Thursday afternoon go before a committee before they come here , otherwise they would not be urgent .
It is an urgency because there are mass graves which have been discovered recently , and we need to sort this problem out .
Secondly , if the Socialist Group wants to have a majority when voting , then perhaps Mrs Gill 's group should make sure that their MEPs do not leave before the end of the part-session in order to go back home earlier - while we have to stay here and discuss and vote .
I would say to Mrs Gill : I think you should first look at your MEPs because you are the one who is complaining about it , and then discuss other groups ' MEPs .
( PL ) Mr President , the mass graves and mass burials of thousands of people in the states of Jammu and Kashmir make one 's blood run cold in one 's veins .
For us Europeans it is a reminder of German and Soviet crimes and of the dark sides of Fascism and Stalinism .
It revives memories of Hitler 's concentration camps and of the Soviet murder of Polish officers at Katyń .
After our distant and more recent experiences , we should be doing all we can to put a stop to genocide , and where it has already taken place we should commemorate it and give families the right to the graves of their ancestors and compensation for them .
The situation in Kashmir demands that the necessary financial and technical assistance be given to the Indian Government and that the UN response be strengthened in order to return the situation in this region of the world to normality .
Mr President , when mass graves are found , wherever they are found , it is imperative to find out who the victims are , how and why they were killed , who is investigating and who is being investigated .
Rather than being an incendiary activity , it establishes the truth and honours the humanity of the victims , and that is the start of establishing the truth that sets us all free .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is aware of , and has seen reports about , mass graves in Indian-administered Kashmir and we are following closely requests from NGOs to the Indian Government to launch urgent , impartial and independent investigations on this matter .
Meanwhile , the Indian authorities and the government at central level remain silent on the report .
We have also received information that the lawyer Pervez Imroz and another NGO activist who investigated the charges of human rights violations in Kashmir were subjected to intimidation and harassment on 20 and 21 June .
The Commission delegation in New Delhi is further investigating this matter , in close cooperation with the French Presidency and the Member States ' embassies in the Indian capital .
The Presidency has contacted the resident Commissioner of Indian-administered Kashmir in New Delhi and has expressed the EU 's concerns over the situation .
If accurate , such reports would constitute very worrying developments as to the respect of democratic principles and the rule of law , and would run counter to certain positive developments in Indian-administered Kashmir , such as the composite dialogue , which is still on track .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates unless , as I said earlier , a request is properly submitted and it is properly established that there is no quorum present .
2 .
Situation in Bangladesh
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the situation in Bangladesh .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , in connection with the disturbances in January 2007 , the caretaker government in Bangladesh introduced a state of emergency , and on 11 June this year it passed a new regulation limiting human rights through an imprecise definition of a terrorist act .
In June there was a mass wave of arrests in Bangladesh , taking advantage of extraordinary powers enabling arrests to be made without a warrant when a link between the person being arrested and criminal offences can be presumed .
In fact , the arrests concerned leaders , members and sympathisers of the two main opposition groups , the Awami League and the Bangladesh People 's Party , who were refusing to cooperate with the government in organising general elections until their leaders were released from captivity .
Today 's incipient negotiations with the Awami League are cause for hope .
The massive rise in food prices is threatening the stability of the country , however .
Under these conditions , the elections planned for December are no guarantee that Bangladesh is setting off down the road of democracy .
We call on the Government of Bangladesh to lift the state of emergency and respect human rights , which will help to maintain democratic standards during the course of the elections .
We call for the armed forces to be withdrawn from actions linked to the organisation of the elections .
author . - Mr President , as we know , Parliament has been concerned about the situation in Bangladesh for a considerable period of time .
We supported calls for moves to ensure free and fair elections and we also supported the calls from civil society for revised and updated electoral registers to ensure that maximum participation would be possible within those elections .
I think it is important to say that we very much welcome the progress that has been made on that new electronic register .
It is a major task which has been undertaken and indeed , if it is fulfilled in time and ensures that minority groups etc. are also included on it , this will really be an historic achievement by the Bangladeshi authorities .
We know that the electoral register has also had a very positive effect already , certainly for a number of women from poorer families and backgrounds , who feel that at last they have an identity , that they can now borrow small amounts of money to set up their own businesses etc .
So there have been some positive moves .
We also welcome recent action on war criminals and the action that the government , or at least some of it , has taken against corruption .
But we have major concerns about the role and activity of the continuing interim government and the state of emergency .
There are some who have said that the state of emergency is a technical issue , as it were , to ensure that a government can at least continue beyond the caretaker period .
But whether one agrees with that or not , I think that what is happening with the state of emergency is really beginning to reflect a clear lack of checks and balances within the system there , particularly given the reports , as we have just been hearing , of mass arrests , the lack of due process , the allegations of torture , reports of extrajudicial killings , pressure on journalists and increasing violence against women .
So there is a clear need for the interim government to rein in the security forces , to cease the mass arrests and to proceed to either charge or release those people arrested and to ensure due process .
Certainly this resolution reflects the wish which I think is there in Parliament to lift the state of emergency and to ensure that civil society can proceed to full , fair , free elections with the support of the European Union , at any rate in its electoral monitoring capacity .
author . - Mr President , Bangladesh is one of the poorest countries on the planet and one whose physical integrity has an expiry date since , if the curse of global warming is not stopped , much of the country will be submerged under the sea by 2050 .
The state of emergency , with all its anti-democratic manifestations - a state which was declared by the caretaker government set up in January 2007 amid violence in the run-up to the election - should have been lifted by now .
All individuals held under emergency power rules should either be brought before a court of justice or be released .
Furthermore , the new anti-terrorist ordinance must be urgently brought into line with internationally accepted standards , safeguarding personal rights and freedoms .
In addition , the country 's armed forces must terminate their involvement in the political processes of the country and the forthcoming elections must be held in a climate of non-militarised political tranquility .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , in the resolution which we have just adopted , the European Parliament demanded human rights for the people of India .
The situation in Bangladesh is very problematic .
The whole country has been in a state of emergency for 18 months and there are no free elections on the horizon .
Bangladesh is not a democratic state , but of course the world is full of undemocratic states and violations of democracy .
Of all the undemocratic states only Zimbabwe has received the condemnation of the EU and the United States .
The undemocratic nature of its elections can be freely criticised in the western media because the country has no oil .
Oil is a protective buffer against condemnations of violations of democracy .
Bangladesh is not an oil state either .
For that reason the media could highlight the situation in the country with the silent blessing of the oil-dependent ruling powers .
Bangladesh has re-introduced the death penalty and following the declaration of the state of emergency 300 000 people were arrested on flimsy grounds , 12 000 of whom have died in the last month .
Several of the people arrested in recent weeks were defenders of democracy , active local members of political parties and supporters of democracy whom the state and the government regard as criminals .
Terrorism is the word of the day in Bangladesh too , and is the guise for violations of human rights .
Bangladesh is not a state based on the rule of law .
Human rights violations are carried out there in the form of detentions of the most varied kinds , shortcomings in the defendant 's rights of defence , and defects in both the publication of judgments and in the grounds on which they are based .
The human rights enshrined in the constitution are not respected .
For those reasons we call on Parliament to support the joint resolution demanding the immediate abrogation of the state of emergency and the holding of free elections in due course .
Mr President , the Ahmed transitional government must concentrate on its real goals : fighting corruption , making the country safe and creating the preconditions for elections to take place - in August at regional level and in December for the whole country .
However , the elections must be conducted fairly , respect international conventions and give ethnic and religious minorities the opportunity to be involved , both passively and actively .
Electoral observers , including from the European Union , should perform the necessary monitoring within the country .
Obviously , extremist attacks must be prevented .
The new Counterterrorism Ordinance 2008 , aimed at achieving this , must comply with international law , however .
That is not yet the case .
Currently , it is being used mainly to target people who are victims of political persecution .
It is no wonder that Bangladesh is a place of fear , when human rights activists and citizens who express criticism are arbitrarily arrested .
Those arrested have a right to due process .
The human rights organisation Odhikar has stated that information about mass arrests and maltreatment has been substantiated .
As a member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ( SAARC ) delegation of the European Parliament , I have visited Bangladesh several times .
Many Members here today were also present .
In that moderate Islamic country , there are many in positions of responsibility who are favourably disposed .
They are waiting desperately for input from outside , namely from the European Union - the Commission and the Council .
Mr President , I congratulate you on the decision you have just taken regarding quorums in the European Parliament .
Mrs Gill , I wish we could keep all our urgencies alive and did not constantly have to say that they would be handled by the relevant committee .
Mr Matsakis is absolutely right .
One step further in this regard would be that suddenly there were no more intergroups .
That would also be fatal , because committees cannot do this work .
We must make the most of the opportunity of having enough time , so that we no longer see the situation we now have , where the poor President has to use the gavel - because , in the future , we shall hopefully have twice as long to speak , so that the European Parliament will be known as the voice of human rights and can become stronger - and that takes time .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , having chaired the Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia and having visited Bangladesh , I would say that this is a fragile state which has faced more than its fair share of political , environmental , economic and social setbacks .
However , when I was there I was impressed by the vibrant and free media and the determination of the people to overcome their difficulties .
I believe the focus of our relations with Bangladesh should be to support the democratic movements in the country and the establishment of rule of law , as well as helping to build democratic institutions .
Whilst the EU has an important role in assisting Bangladesh to achieve these goals , this should be translated into constructive action towards assisting the country , not into trying to micromanage their problems .
I really welcome the announcement of elections scheduled for the third week of December this year and I call on the caretaker government to ensure that these elections will be free and fair , and to allow the Election Commission to continue with its road map .
I would like to address the points Mr Mann raised against me because I think it is not proper to take on points from the previous debate .
I would say that , if we take our urgencies really seriously , Mr Mann should make sure that those people are here .
The onus is on all of us to make sure that our colleagues are here because we have minority groups influencing how the European Parliament is viewed across the world .
It is important when we have these debates that we keep that in mind : it is important to have urgencies , but get all your people here .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in terms of population numbers , Bangladesh is the seventh largest country in the world , with a population in excess of 150 million .
This is a country that achieved independence in 1971 , but has suffered for 20 years under autocratic governments , which have very often been of a military nature .
In 1991 , however , something else began there .
Democracy sprang up , and there was a 5 % rise .
The well-known company Goldman Sachs stated that Bangladesh was a country with a very promising future , as far as swift economic growth was concerned .
Today we are looking at a massive regression , and there is a political crisis .
The army has appeared in the streets .
Moreover , the army would like to change the Constitution in order to introduce , as it puts it , its own form of democracy .
We have heard this one before .
We have had the opportunity to observe close up what this special form of democracy is all about .
If this new form is to involve bringing the army into politics , my view is that it is a very bad direction to take .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the situation in Bangladesh has always been very serious , but especially so in the last 18 months - since the time when a state of emergency was introduced there .
One effect of this has been , for example , to increase the number of death sentences , and more than 300 000 people have been arrested , a number of them having been tortured .
The problem is that these repressions are showing no signs of weakening .
Six weeks ago more than 12 000 people were arrested .
All this is taking place against a dramatic economic background .
Rice and basic foodstuff prices have risen by a third .
There will probably also be a vast wave of emigration , which will reach 25 million in the next 40 years .
This exodus will be caused by the floods that are highly likely as a result of rising water levels in the Bay of Bengal .
This all points to one conclusion : Bangladesh is a country in which we must take an interest ; we must give it support .
We must also support economic and democratic change in that country - the poorest country in the world .
Mr President , under the emergency rule instigated in 2007 , one can be imprisoned indefinitely without a court warrant on the grounds of reasonable suspicion of involvement in corruption-related activities .
With the recent arrest of Motiur Rahman Nizami , the three main political party leaders of Bangladesh have now been apprehended on illusive charges of corruption .
Since March 2008 at least 12 000 persons have been arrested and denied the right to seek release on bail .
The number involves hundreds of political party members , but business people and journalists have also fallen prey to this anti-corruption witch hunt .
With elections pending for December of this year , the key political leaders are unable to participate in dialogue , inhibiting the democratic process .
Though the caretaker government denies allegations that these arrests are politically motivated , the strategic timing of these events is too coincidental to ignore .
The detainees should be charged lawfully on the basis of substantiated evidence or released immediately .
Otherwise the outcome of the coming elections will be fraudulent and far from democratic .
( PL ) Mr President , the problems in Bangladesh to which we have been drawing attention for some years now continue to remain unresolved .
The world keeps hearing of more and more instances of human rights violations in that country .
Since January 2007 , Bangladesh has been in a state of emergency .
The Anti-Terrorism Ordinance introduced on 11 June has placed additional restrictions on human rights , becoming another tool in the political battle .
During the past 18 months 300 000 arrests have been made and the scope of application of the death penalty has been widened .
Prisoners are subjected to torture and die in unexplained circumstances .
The Bangladeshi authorities are not doing a lot to support the economy in the country , where food prices have risen by more than a third in recent months , and where a quarter of the territory is threatened by a constant risk of flooding and humanitarian disaster .
An opportunity for change in the country is provided by free parliamentary elections preceded by a lifting of the state of emergency .
It is essential for the caretaker government to guarantee freedom of the media in the pre-election period and the involvement of representatives of all the country 's ethnic and religious minorities in the elections .
The EU should restore as soon as possible its election observation mission in Bangladesh , and prior to that the European Commission 's Office in Bangladesh must carefully monitor the political situation in the country and the status of observance of fundamental human rights .
( PL ) Mr President , freedom and statehood in Bangladesh were secured and purchased at the cost of the lives of many millions of its citizens .
This nation also suffers vast losses because of its situation and the lie of the land .
It is beset by natural disasters .
The country is overpopulated , with 1 040 people per square kilometre ; it is not urbanised , and it has a very low income per head of population .
This is a country that is difficult to govern because of illiteracy and a lack of roads and communications .
It requires constant assistance from outside , not least in the creation of an effective democratic system , which is an important and difficult problem in Islamic countries .
Consideration of effective forms of assistance is a very important matter , with a view to Bangladesh not being run by totalitarian governments .
I support the resolution .
A discussion on the subject of democracy may stimulate positive action on the part of Parliament .
( PL ) Mr President , Bangladesh 's caretaker government , supported by the army , is arresting thousands of people , among them members of the opposition .
They are held in captivity for months on end without being charged with anything .
This is being done under the pretence of a fight against corruption and terrorism .
The government is also persecuting the independent media and allowing the practice of torture .
This situation is taking place in a country that is in the vanguard of the world 's poorest and most densely populated countries .
Against this background it has to be stated with concern that the European Union is attributing too little importance to the problems of Bangladesh .
This must change .
A good opportunity for this should be provided by the parliamentary elections that have been announced for the end of the year .
The European Commission and the Council should most definitely play a more active role in getting the state of emergency lifted and putting an end to human rights violations .
The EU should apply special pressure particularly to the forthcoming elections and carry out careful monitoring of both the preparations for and the holding of these elections .
( DE ) Mr President , the European Union has a major interest in democratic conditions and respect for human rights in Bangladesh .
I also join the call for free and fair elections and the lifting of emergency measures in the near future .
Clearly , there cannot be any democratic debate in a climate of fear and intimidation .
We make our demands to the caretaker government , that is true , but we must also point out that the political powers that be in Bangladesh also have a rather uncultured style , and that things do not happen peacefully , but very violently , particularly during election campaigns .
Election campaigns are invariably used to intimidate minorities .
Thus our message is directed to all the actors , primarily to the government , but also to the parties .
Nevertheless , Mr President , I respect your decision , but I should just like to point out that our Rules of Procedure state that , ' If the vote shows that the quorum is not present , the vote shall be placed on the agenda of the next sitting . '
( Rule 149 ( 3 ) ) .
I should hope that such votes take place not with 30 Members present , but 600 , which is always the case for midday votes .
( LT ) Bangladesh is one of the poorest countries in the world .
It is also one of the most densely populated countries in the world .
Bangladesh is the country at greatest risk from climate change .
Lastly , this country is one of the least democratic .
I have enumerated four problems , four threats , just one of which could bring even a flourishing country into submission .
Therefore , in order to break this chain , democracy should be reinstated ; even today 's debates should lead in this direction .
Mr President , I am sorry that I have to take the floor again , but I must again reply to Mrs Gill .
She has made the accusation that the discussion on Thursday afternoon and the resolutions are the result of the wishes of small minority groups .
Can I say that this is disrespectful , unfair and unfounded .
These resolutions are discussed extensively at meetings where representatives of all the groups - including the PSE Group - are present , one or two days prior to coming here on the Thursday afternoon .
They are approved by the representatives of these groups , if they agree to their content , and then they are debated and voted upon .
So , if there is a problem with regard to the Socialist Group , it is not our concern .
It is Mrs Gill 's group 's problem and concern .
Perhaps they do not debate these issues sufficiently or in time , but it is her problem .
As far as Thursday afternoon goes , it is exactly the opposite .
It is not the minority groups .
The PPE-DE Group has the majority on Thursday afternoon and it is what the PPE-DE Group wants that passes because they have the majority .
( PL ) Mr President , it has become a practice of the European Parliament to consider instances of violations of human rights , democratic principles and the rule of law and to adopt appropriate resolutions in plenary .
One of the things we are looking at today is the situation in Bangladesh , where the elections planned for 22 January 2007 did not take place and have been postponed until December 2008 .
This fact has exacerbated the situation , leading on the one hand to numerous socio-political protests and on the other to a tightening of legal regulations and a tougher response from government forces .
The expressions terrorism , acts detrimental to goods and individuals and serious crimes are often used as grounds for arrests and court rulings .
The state of unrest is being made worse by a food crisis , causing a rise in expenditure on food by as much as 60 % .
The problem is not one that can be resolved by the use of force - arrests , court rulings , incarcerations .
What is needed is a reconciliation between the warring factions .
Such a reconciliation could be brought about by democratic elections , so a resolution calling for them to be held makes sense and should be supported .
Before giving the floor to the Commission , I would like to respond to my friend Mr Leinen .
Jo , you were saying that if we did not vote this afternoon , the vote would take place next time .
You would be right if it were not a vote on urgencies , because Rule 115 ( 6 ) of our Rules of Procedure , according to the interpretation produced by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that you chair , states very clearly that motions for resolutions on urgencies that cannot be dealt with within the time period allocated for the debate shall lapse .
The same applies to motions for resolutions for which it has been established that the quorum is not present .
Therefore , for urgencies and urgencies alone , if it is established before the votes that a quorum is not present , the vote never takes place .
It cannot be deferred ; this is stated in Rule 115 ( 6 ) .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the parliamentary elections in December are indeed essential for securing sustainable democracy in Bangladesh .
There is progress but much more progress is needed , especially in the field of human rights .
So far we assess largely positively the steps taken by the government to prepare for these elections as regards the electoral framework and dialogue with political parties .
Technical preparations have made substantial progress .
Yet , since Bangladesh is under a state of emergency , we will be monitoring closely whether the progressive lifting of restrictions to the exercise of civil and political rights allows credible free and fair elections .
Let me also make it clear that our engagement in the process , including the eventual redeployment of an electoral observation mission suspended in early 2007 , will be linked to this commitment by the government .
We also share the concerns expressed in your resolution of 6 September last year as well as in your motions submitted by political groups for this debate today .
Restrictions to the exercise of fundamental freedoms must be limited to what is strictly necessary to guarantee security .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
in writing . - Bangladesh is a large and strategic South Asian country with 153 million inhabitants and some 80 million registered electors , making it one of the world 's largest democracies .
The caretaker government has now informed the EU and USA that it will proceed to democratic elections in December 2008 , having successfully completed an electoral register which is robust against fraud .
The military are now committed to withdrawing from policy-making .
Ex-Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has been released on humanitarian grounds .
The emergency powers , which this resolution rightly wishes to see lifted , are still in place and need to go before the election .
The large numbers arrested following the violence last year , which led to the state of emergency , need to be released or charged .
Long-term EU observers should return as soon as possible to monitor the pre-election situation .
The EU is watching Bangladesh very carefully , given the concerns about the deteriorating human rights situation over the last few years and increasing Islamist radicalisation of its society , with an exodus of Hindus , Ahmadias and Christians , and the government 's seeming abandonment of its successful model of a secular multiparty democracy .
Bangladesh has the makings of a successful democracy in the Muslim world and the EU needs to strongly support this .
3 .
The death penalty , particularly the case of Troy Davis
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolutions on the death penalty , particularly the case of Troy Davis .
author . - Mr President , this House has taken a clear and strong stance as far as the death penalty is concerned .
It supports its abolition and the need for an immediate moratorium on executions where the death penalty still applies .
The latter is the case in many states in the USA such as Georgia , where Troy Davis is awaiting his lawful killing to be carried out at the end of July .
Apart from ideological and humanistic considerations against executing human beings , in the case of Troy Davis there appear to be additional reasons in the form of serious doubts as to the robustness and validity of the evidence which led to his conviction in the first place .
Such doubts , we believe , justify the reasoning of any individual using common sense that retrial should be granted in this case .
Consequently we call on the relevant authorities in the USA to order that Troy Davis be retried and , if found guilty again , that his death sentence be commuted to life imprisonment .
Furthermore , we call once again on the US Government , and all governments in the world that still have capital punishment , to abolish the death penalty in the interests of humanity .
In particular we call on the governments of those countries such as China , Iran , Pakistan and Saudi Arabia where executions are still carried out regularly , and where in many instances this is done in a most appallingly barbaric way , to stop executions .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would not want this to be a debate on the subject of the death penalty as such .
Since we cannot conceal the fact that opinions differ on this matter , it seems to me that we should be talking about the very specific case of an individual who was given the death penalty , subsequent to which seven out of nine witnesses to the charge against him withdrew their testimony .
This is a very specific situation .
I would not want us to veer off in an abstract fashion into a debate on whether the death penalty is completely bad or not .
I do not want at the present moment to call on the US authorities to amend a law that in 1972 , that is 36 years ago , brought back the death penalty .
We are talking about a specific and extraordinarily controversial case .
It really is worth defending Mr Davis and demonstrating that there are situations in which it is worthwhile intervening .
I would caution against generalisations , and that is why I did not sign this joint resolution .
author . - Mr President , this case certainly is an urgency because , as we have been hearing , the execution is due to take place by the end of this month .
So I would urge each and every one of us in this Chamber and listening to this debate to make personal representations to the American Government - and indeed the Georgia state government - to see if clemency can be applied .
Then we would move towards a retrial , if that is necessary .
At least we would have a living being and a retrial would be able to take place .
I think it is really important that we take our personal responsibility on this as well as looking to representations by Parliament .
Certainly , in this particular case , the evidence - as we have also been hearing from many of the witnesses - has been retracted and contradicted .
The American Bar Association 's Georgia Death Penalty Assessment Team released a report looking at the circumstances in that particular state and felt that one of the major problems they had found was inadequate defence counsel , and a concern that defendants already on death row may not have had adequate counsel at the time of their trials .
They noted that Georgia was the only state that did not provide lawyers to death row inmates for their post-conviction appeals .
So there are a number of reasons to be very concerned about this particular case , which is the one cited in the title of the resolution on the death penalty , notably the case of Troy Davis .
But I would also like to raise other cases , in particular what is happening at the moment with some of those still detained in Guantánamo .
One case in particular concerns a British resident , Binyamin Mohamed , who has been detained there for over six years now and is likely to face a military commission where the death penalty is all too possibly an outcome .
This Parliament , and the European Union as a whole , takes a very strong view on the death penalty .
We consider that it is not something that a civilised society should be applying , and that there are all too many reasons for death penalties not to be imposed .
The case of Troy Davis is , I think , an absolutely classic example of the real problems with the implementation of the death penalty .
Once again , as well as what is called for in this particular resolution , I would call on each and every one of us , as responsible individuals , also to take action in communicating our distress on this particular case .
author . - ( LT ) The European Parliament has adopted quite a few regulations encouraging the abolition of the death penalty and executions or at least a moratorium on executions in the countries in which the death penalty still exists .
Today we , the European Parliament , are supporting a person we have never met , Troy Davis , who is to be executed at the end of this month .
Can you imagine yourself in his place , having had to spend 17 years waiting to be either cleared or executed , when there is strong evidence that he is innocent , with the seven witnesses who gave evidence against him having retracted their statements , and so on .
We are aware of quite a few cases of a person being executed and his innocence being proved only afterwards .
There are a lot of known cases where people are given the death penalty but avoid execution owing to the discovery of new evidence that proves they are not guilty of the crime .
Therefore , today we are once again calling on all the countries of the world in which the death penalty is still used to take immediate measures to abolish it .
Today we are making our position against the death penalty clear , standing by a real person and pleading with the relevant US courts to reinvestigate the case of Troy Davis and pass a more lenient sentence instead of the death penalty .
In my opinion , supporting a real person , trying to protect him from being executed , even if he has made a huge mistake , is the best way to make our position on the necessity of abolishing the death penalty absolutely clear .
Mr President , the first human right is the sanctity of life .
The death penalty is the most disrespectful of all the instances of contempt for dignity , civilisation and progress .
Right now , at this precise moment , when we are breathing and speaking freely , one man , Troy Davis , is locked up in a cell , counting the minutes left of his life .
He has been on death row for more than 15 years and has always denied committing the crime he was accused of .
Some of those who testified against him have recanted or contradicted themselves in their statements , which were obtained under police coercion .
There is no clear , objective and convincing evidence in this case .
The application of the death penalty to Troy Davis by the authorities of the State of Georgia runs completely counter to the moratorium on the death penalty adopted last December by the United Nations General Assembly .
Although the moratorium is not legally binding , it carries enormous moral and political significance .
It is now up to the States who do not abide by it to review their policy with a view to abolishing the death penalty and respecting human rights in their entirety .
The State of Georgia now has the opportunity with this case to give the most fundamental values of democracy the substance they deserve once again .
Commissioner Louis Michel recently heard the President of Sudan himself , Omar al-Bashir , say that he would not hand over those who have been indicted for crimes against humanity to the International Criminal Court , just as the United States does not .
The United States ' example in these two areas is a disgrace , and we have to bring all means available to bear on the United States to show that we cannot accept this stance and the terrible example that is being set for the world in the field of human rights .
Therefore , as the resolution requests , it is vital that the Presidency of the European Union and the European Commission Delegation in Washington make representations so as to prevent Troy Davis ' sentence being carried out and for the United States to effectively review its position on the death penalty .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in 2007 some 1 252 executions took place in the world , in 24 countries .
The true number was undoubtedly higher .
Of those executions , 88 % were carried out in China , Iran , Saudi Arabia , Pakistan and the United States .
There are two matters I would like to raise in today 's debate .
Firstly , I disagree entirely with what was said by my fellow Member Mr Czarnecki , that this issue is the subject of differences within the European Union .
That is not the case .
I would like to remind Mr Czarnecki of the official stance taken in the Roman Catholic Church 's doctrine , which was also the personal view of Pope John Paul II , who was against the use of the death penalty .
It seems to me that that should be a very clear indication to Mr Czarnecki of the stance of the majority on this matter in EU countries .
The second matter is of course the ongoing situation linked to the situation of Troy Davis in the United States , on whom the death penalty is to be carried out .
We must do all we can to suspend the execution of this death sentence and to enable a review process to take place , with a possible replacement by a life sentence if he is proven guilty .
( RO ) Over 40 countries have given up the death penalty method since 1990 and , today , over 120 countries have legally prohibited such a penalty .
At the European level , under the European Convention on Human Rights , which comprises an article 2 on the right to life and protocol 6 , article 1 , " Abolition of the death penalty ” , no one shall be either condemned to such penalty or executed .
Shocking statistics have been presented worldwide .
Over 1591 people were executed in 2006 ; over 3861 people were sentenced to death in 55 countries .
I believe that no person has the right to take another human being 's life .
How could you take something that is not yours ?
According to my reasoning , I cannot even conceive something like that , especially since , in the countries using the death penalty , the number of serious crimes has not decreased thanks to such penalties .
We propose the replacement of the death penalty with the deprivation of liberty .
( PL ) Mr President , our discussion must of course allude to one fundamental matter , and that is the sense in general terms , as well as the moral aspect , of such court verdicts as sentencing a person to death .
One of the arguments that I think is very important in this discussion is doubt regarding whether someone who has been accused in an absolutely final way may be recognised as guilty of the deed with which he is charged .
In any other situation there is always the potential to drop the verdict and return someone to normal life .
In the case of the death sentence this potential does not exist .
In view of this , besides the purely moral aspects , exceptionally important though they are , this legal aspect too must be taken into consideration .
This is particularly the case in the instance we are discussing , where there are major doubts regarding the grounds for the charge .
( PL ) Mr President , everyone should have the right to a fair trial .
In this case , where there are many doubts about guilt , and seven witnesses have withdrawn their testimony , there is a need for the case to be re-heard .
A further matter , which those who have risen before me have mentioned , is the problem of the irreversibility of the death sentence .
If doubts exist , this is all the more reason for not applying such a punishment .
Mr President , I should like to take the opportunity provided by this debate to call for a moratorium on the death penalty for innocent unborn human beings .
It is high time civilised countries discontinued the practice of abortion .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the European Union is firmly opposed to the use of the death penalty and actively works towards the abolition of capital punishment worldwide .
In countries that maintain the death penalty , the EU aims at the progressive restriction of its scope , as well as at the establishment of a moratorium so as to eliminate the death penalty completely .
The Guidelines to EU Policy Towards Third Countries on the Death Penalty , adopted in 1998 and revised in 2008 , set out the framework for EU action .
They include declarations or demarches in international fora and towards third countries , including the United States of America .
As regards the USA , the EU is deeply concerned about the resumption of executions since the lifting of the de facto moratorium on the death penalty in May .
We have repeatedly urged the US Government to reintroduce a moratorium on the death penalty at Federal level and we hope that the United States will consider abolishing the death penalty by law in the foreseeable future .
We take note of Parliament 's motion for a resolution regarding the individual case of Mr Troy Davis .
We have intelligence from our Washington Delegation that the Governor of Georgia has not yet signed the execution order and that he is apparently in no hurry to do so .
The Commission , along with EU Member States and the Presidency , will of course follow this case very closely .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debates .
Mr President , reference was made to me earlier by Mr Matsakis and I wanted to respond to it .
I did not want to abuse the catch-the-eye system on a different debate , which was an important issue on the death penalty .
But I think he made reference to my not understanding the system of urgencies .
I would just like to say , for the record , that I have been involved in a number of urgencies and I would say that it is the least transparent and open system we have .
Of course in my group we have a debate about it , but urgencies are only agreed on the Thursday before Strasbourg and there is an hour-long meeting on the Tuesday before , where urgencies are quickly cobbled together .
I think that some of these issues are not urgent and should be properly debated in this Parliament to maintain its credibility .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( debate )
Quorum ( continuation )
At the start of the sitting this afternoon , therefore , I asked the opinion of at least one representative per group , as I had received a request for the quorum to be established in accordance with Rule 149 of our Rules of Procedure .
This request was based on a written request from forty Members .
In fact , to be entirely honest , 39 + 1 , because the eleventh name on the list is completely illegible .
I cannot tell you , we cannot tell you , who the fortieth signatory is on that list .
After a debate and having received the opinion of the Chairman of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , I took responsibility and I also interpreted Rule 149 ( 4 ) of our Rules of Procedure , which states that the Members who made a request for the quorum to be established shall be counted as present even if they are no longer in the Chamber .
I would like to draw your attention to the words ' no longer ' .
It does not say ' are not in the Chamber ' , but ' are no longer ' .
This implies that they must have been there previously .
The ' previously ' certainly does not refer to the fact that they were present in previous months , but most definitely to when the quorum request was made .
I therefore specified that before the votes I would check whether the forty signatories were present , even if I was having trouble telling you who the fortieth one was .
According to the services , five of them are present .
Having said this , if forty Members now stand up and make a request for the quorum to be established , I will do so .
Are there forty Members who will stand up and make a request for the quorum to be established ?
Mr President , could you verify whether there are 40 Members here , because it is very difficult to tell ?
Mrs Gill , I think that , especially since this afternoon , I am beginning to learn Rule 149 by heart .
You are referring to paragraph 5 .
It is the job of the President of the sitting , and him alone , if he decides to do so at any time , to establish that a quorum is not present .
However , given the importance of the votes that we are going to hold , especially on the case of a person sentenced to death , I will not play this little game .
If forty colleagues do not take respon