Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on 3 April 1998 .
Tribute
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my sad duty to inform you of the death of our colleague Spalato Belleré on 21 April .
Mr Belleré was a medical doctor and a colonel in the reserves .
He was elected to the European Parliament in June 1994 and was an active member of the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the interparliamentary delegation for relations with Kazakhstan .
Furthermore , as you all know , on 23 April the former President of the Republic of Greece , Constantino Karamanlis , passed away in Athens .
As a statesman , he was responsible for the restoration of democracy in his country and its entry into the European Union , and he deserves recognition from all Europeans .
I would ask you all to observe a minute 's silence with me .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of 3 April have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , next Saturday , 2 May , in Brussels , we are going to make an historic decision with regard to a number of aspects concerning the introduction of the single currency .
Whatever my personal opinion regarding the euro , or that of my group , we would like to remind you formally that the Edinburgh agreements confirmed Parliament 's seat as Strasbourg and it is thus there that we should be meeting on Saturday .
As a Member of this House and a native of Alsace , I protest against the choice of Brussels for this extraordinary sitting .
Yet again , the House is ignoring the treaties and shunning Strasbourg .
( Applause from various quarters )
Mr President , as a European , I would like to say that I am perfectly happy about meeting here in Brussels on Saturday .
Mr President , I would urge you to press for the release of Vincent Cochetel on behalf of the European Parliament .
Mr Cochetel works for the High Commission for Refugees .
Three months ago today he was kidnapped in Russia .
During the night of 29 January he was taken away by armed men and he has not been seen since .
Mr Cochetel is 37 years old and has two children .
He leads the delegation of the High Commissioner for Refugees in Vladikafkas , which is looking after 100 000 refugees and exiles from the Caucasus region .
I would ask you to intervene and urge you to do everything in your power both here and in the Russian Federation to ensure the release of Vincent Cochetel .
Mr President , less than three weeks ago an important peace agreement was reached in Northern Ireland , which we should all be very happy about .
We should congratulate ourselves and , especially , the people of Northern Ireland as well as all the political actors who have had the courage to reach this agreement , including the former British Government under Mr Major , the current one under Mr Blair , and the Governments of the Republic of Ireland .
From the Basque Country , a significant majority of the population has watched this agreement with political interest , in the hope that dialogue may soon bring about an end to the sad and violent conflict we are experiencing .
We hope ETA may have the same courage as the IRA , to renounce arms and use political negotiation to try to reach agreement through their representatives . We also hope the Spanish Government will have the same political courage the British Governments have shown , so as to embark on a process of this type .
I hope this House will soon be able to celebrate a peace agreement for the Basque people , and I hope the European institutions will offer sincere support in this matter .
Thank you very much , Mr Imaz San Miguel .
Welcome
It is my pleasure today to welcome a delegation from the Australian Parliament , made up of members of the Senate and the House of Representatives , led by Mrs West , the Vice-President of the Senate .
Our Australian colleagues are in Brussels to take part in the twenty-third interparliamentary meeting between the Australian Parliament and our institution , co-chaired by Mr Nicholson .

Madam Vice-President , ladies and gentlemen of the Australian delegation , on behalf of the Members of our institution , I welcome you to the European Parliament .
Northern Ireland
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the recent peace agreement in Northern Ireland .
It is a great honour to welcome to the European Parliament today Dr Marjory Mowlam , the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , Mr David Andrews , the Irish Foreign Affairs Minister , and Mr Santer , the President of the European Commission .

It gives us all great pleasure to welcome them here today .
During my talks in London , Belfast and Dublin , I was able to understand and observe the enormous determination with which both governments committed themselves to the peace and reconciliation process .
Today we have the opportunity to show our unfailing solidarity with them and with the people of Northern Ireland .
Like you all , I cherish great hopes that it may now be possible to turn this sad and bloodstained page of modern history once and for all .
Mrs Mowlam , you have the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a great pleasure and honour to be with you today to talk about the agreement that was reached on Good Friday and to have a chance to thank people here for the help they have given us in moving the peace talks in Northern Ireland forward to what I hope is a stable and lasting settlement .
Part of that has been the economic help that has very kindly been given by the European Union but just as important is the support given to us by individual Members of Parliament , individual Commissioners , and the Presidents of both Parliament and the Commission over the past year .
The money is most welcome ; it makes a big difference .
But it also makes a difference when individuals give of their time and their energy to support what is happening in Northern Ireland .
That makes a real difference .
So I thank everyone who brought with them some hope , some belief in the future , some vision of where we could go and their assistance .
I also acknowledge the help that the three Members of the European Parliament from Northern Ireland - John Hume , Jim Nicholson and Ian Paisley - have given by working together in Europe to get support for Northern Ireland .
I know it is potentially unfair but may I thank John Hume in particular for the work he has put in .
( Applause ) It has to be said that the work he did over the years when this was not a popular issue has made a difference today .
I am also very pleased to be speaking alongside my colleague , David Andrews , from the Republic of Ireland .
It is when the two governments have worked together , as people do in the European Parliament , that we have managed to make progress .
We must never forget that .
( Applause ) Finally , I acknowledge the work of the Commissioners and not just Jacques Santer .
I say a special thank you to Monica Wulf-Mathies .
I will refer later to the work she has done for us in Northern Ireland .
I would also mention Padraig Flynn and our good friend and comrade Neil Kinnock for their support .
( Applause and laughter ) I mean comrade in the ' comradely ' way .
We are all comrades in a certain sense and that is how I mean it .
I also , in a ' comradely ' way , thank the Council for the endorsement they gave to the historic agreement setting out what we hope is a new beginning , the chance to achieve what we hope will be a lasting peace settlement .
As the Council acknowledged , it is the courage and the determination of the party leaders and the people of Northern Ireland which has been central in making this opportunity for peace happen .
We have been aided by the courage and determination of those party leaders and by the economic help that the EU programmes have given us .
The agreement reached is one that is based on the principles - which were very crucial in the agreement - of consent , cooperation , fairness and justice .
They are the underlying principles that guide the agreement .
It is a unique agreement .
It is unique in the sense that it is the result of talks between Nationalists , Unionists , Loyalists and Republicans .
It is the first time for 70 years that they have been round the table reaching an accommodation .
There is no doubt , as many in Parliament know , that we still face difficulties in the weeks , months and years ahead .
In the immediate future we still have some splinter groups on both sides of the divide that have not signed up to a ceasefire and to the talks .
In fact , they are out to destroy it .
That is a continuing problem with the violence that it entails .
Many of you will have seen last weekend the most recent murder victim was a young 22-year-old student on his way home .
Those are the difficulties we may still continue to see in the future but our response must be , as the President of this Parliament on his recent visit to Belfast said , there will always be attempts to stop the process reaching a peaceful settlement .
It is necessary to be prepared for that and to have a strong determination not to let things be spoiled by them .
I echo your President 's words on that .
I do not want to go into a lot of detail about the agreement but just let me say that none of the parties get 100 % of what they want .
But there are gains there for everyone .
It both respects everyone 's cultural and political identity and paves the way for a fair , workable and lasting accommodation .
It has been reached because everyone was willing to compromise .
Everybody has moved a little and as a result everyone - and I mean everyone - can be a winner as a result of this agreement .
It includes cooperation within Northern Ireland , within the communities in the North , between the North and the South and between the UK and the Republic .
I want to mention briefly some aspects of the agreement which refer specifically to Europe .
As part of the overall settlement there will be a North-South ministerial council which will seek to build greater cooperation than already exists .
It will bring together members of the Irish Government and members of the new Northern Ireland administration provided the referendum goes through on 22 May , with bodies below the ministerial council to implement decisions .
One of those will be related to the European issues .
EU decisions of a cross-border nature will fall under that implementing body .
There will also be a new body bringing together the British and Irish governments with new devolved institutions in Northern Ireland , Scotland and Wales to consider matters of mutual interest , including European Union matters .
They will also take advantage of what I believe are the radical constitutional changes taking place within the United Kingdom where we have greater cooperation for trade and EU cooperation between Scotland , Wales , Northern Ireland and England .
I will not go into the detail but everybody in this Parliament knows the amount of economic help you have given Northern Ireland over the previous years through various programmes .
Over the last six years we have received well over £ 1.3 billion .
It has made an enormous difference and we thank you for it .
At times when things have been very tough it has been of great help to know that the European Union has always been there .
Some people come late to success and I want to acknowledge very clearly today that when things were tough the European Union was there with us .
I can remember times when , after a particularly horrific weekend , when Monica was due to come over , I would think : ' Will she come , will she cancel ? '
And she came . And it shows that if you keep going with confidence and determination you can get to where we are today .
So I thank those who came in person and the help they gave .
( Applause ) The Structural Funds have been , and will continue to be , an important aspect of funding to Northern Ireland .
Objective 1 status was given to Northern Ireland because of the special political and economic circumstances that we found ourselves in .
It has made a tremendous difference to us .
Under the proposed post-1999 reforms we recognize that qualifying for Objective 1 status is going to be harder but I want to stress to you today what a difference it has made across Northern Ireland in helping to build the opportunities for peace .
I would also take this opportunity to thank people for the special money in the Peace and Reconciliation Fund which is there to help develop socio-economic policies underpinned by working with Community groups .
It has made an incredible impact in Northern Ireland and one of the reasons it has made an impact is because projects have to be either cross-community or cross-border .
There have been 19 000 applications to benefit from that fund .
The fund has managed to meet 11 500 of them .
What that means on the ground is that many people have benefited from help from Europe .
There is a trauma centre in Belfast where people who have lost loved ones can go when the pain is very real to talk and discuss and come to terms with the pain that has been created .
There is a women 's centre in Ballybeen .
That has meant that women can get retraining , can have a future after the children have gone and can also have a voice .
Their voice is not always heard in Northern Ireland .
There is the Ballymena Business Development Centre which allows small businesses the chance to grow and provide what is so crucial to the peace working , namely jobs .
There are some like the Greysteel Community Centre - people will remember the shooting in 1994 in the Rising Sun Pub where six people were shot at random .
Thanks to the European Peace and Reconciliation money we now have a community centre there where both sides of the divide go and we are beginning to rebuild after that hurt .
That is the kind of difference that programme has made and I thank all who made it possible .
I also want to touch on one other aspect of that Peace and Reconciliation Fund which is so innovative and so constructive .
It developed in Northern Ireland but has an impact across many European countries .
The money was not handed out by us in central government , not given by Ministers or departments .
Monica Wulf-Mathies created an environment where partnerships developed - 20 of them across Northern Ireland - bodies made up of community representatives , local politicians , trade unionists , business people who sat round the table and decided for their local community where the money should be spent .
The difference that made was that when we went through very tough times in the talks and people were not playing and not talking , there were 26 tables across Northern Ireland around which people were talking , people from both extremes and regardless of what had happened they kept going .
It will not be up to me but up to the parties after the referendum to decide , but I hope that structure is kept and provides a model for others of what is possible .
We thank you very much for creating that .
( Applause ) Finally , I would just mention the International Fund which the European Union has contributed to over the years : the recent ECU 17 m per annum for 1998 will enable the fund to continue its important work .
So the message today really is , thank you for the support .
We would not have got to where we are in Northern Ireland without the help from the European Parliament .
You have been there for long enough that enough people have benefited from the programmes that have been put in place that they have been willing to support and encourage people to reach the agreement we reached on Good Friday .
Europe has been an inspiration to people in Northern Ireland .
You have supported us on a practical level which makes a difference to people and which is what our EU presidency is about : jobs , crime , education ; but you have also given us a hope and a belief that we can build a future , that if we work collectively in Northern Ireland we can do so much better than we can as individuals .
You have shown that if we look to the future and believe and trust in a vision we can get there .
You have made a difference in the past .
I know we will continue to work together in the future .
Thank you one and all for your support .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very honoured by your invitation today to join with my British colleague , the Secretary of State Mo Mowlam , in marking the agreement reached in the multiparty negotiations in Belfast on Good Friday , 10 April .
It is fair to say , as expressed by Mo Mowlam , that the immense welcome the agreement has received from our friends across the world and in particular from within the European Union underlines its truly historic and momentous nature .
Like Mo , I would like to express my deep gratitude for your solidarity and for your encouragement .
Both qualities are deeply appreciated and not taken for granted .
It is fair to say that the agreement itself is the culmination not just of two years of difficult negotiation but of decades of shared endeavours by the British and Irish governments and by political leaders of vision and courage .
I must in particular salute a distinguished Member of Parliament already mentioned by my friend and colleague , and ' comrade ' from time to time , Mo Mowlam , namely John Hume .
I would like to place on record the pivotal and crucial role at all stages of the process from beginning to end of my friend and colleague John Hume .
Throughout the negotiations the Irish Government has been inspired both by the European ideal and by the real and concrete achievements of the Union .
We are deeply appreciative of the crucial role the Union has played in preparing the groundwork for the agreement .
Europe , in particular , has shown how age-old rivalries and bloody conflicts can be transcended through new partnership structures .
We have also learned the lesson that , to adapt the words of the Treaty establishing the Coal and Steel Community , a new Ireland can be built neither through coercion nor through rhetoric .
It can only come about through practical achievements which will first of all create real solidarity .
Our experience as a small country within the Union has shown that there are many sectors in which there is a true commonality of interest between the two parts of the island of Ireland .
In this Parliament , too , the three Members for Northern Ireland - John Hume , Ian Paisley and Jim Nicholson - despite acute differences between them on political issues have been able to work together on many matters of importance to those they represent .
The EU structures have themselves been a guide to us in the negotiations on arrangements for cooperation and joint action within Ireland , the North and the South .
The European Union 's economic support through , for example , the Peace and Reconciliation Programme and its contributions to the International Fund for Ireland has been vital and critical in making the peace process a tangible reality for many individuals and communities , both in Northern Ireland and the border counties in the south of the island .
We are deeply grateful to our partners , the Commission and the European Parliament for their consistent and generous assistance .
I wish to re-echo the expression of gratitude by Mo Mowlam to the President of the Commission , Jacques Santer , to Commissioners Wulf-Mathies , Kinnock and Flynn .
And to all colleagues who , one way or another , assisted and supported the peace process .
We welcomed the presence of the President of Parliament in Belfast and we particularly welcomed the presence of Jacques Santer .
As a member of the General Affairs Council of the Foreign Ministers , let me say that his support on Monday was critical to the magnificent declaration which emanated from that meeting .
It is deeply appreciated .
The European Union 's economic support for the programmes has been tremendous .
The European example has also been of great moral significance .
The conflict in Northern Ireland which has led to so many terrible and needless deaths and injuries has been an affront to the values of our shared European civilization .
But Europe has shown that no society is condemned by some iron law of history to pace the treadmill of its past .
Just before the agreement was signed the Ulster Unionist leader David Trimble spoke about how the accord could represent an epoch-making end to our internal Cold War which would be enormously liberating for the people of the island as a whole .
Within the past decade we have seen the end of the Cold War in Europe and its replacement by an new era of partnership .
We have seen the Berlin Wall torn down and the Iron Curtain collapse .
There are physical barriers between communities in Belfast still .
There is a border between North and South but the true frontier is that which runs through the hearts and minds of people .
The real difference lies between those who look to the future , to new ways of peace and cooperation and those who cling to the past , to the old ways of violence and division .
That is the divide we wish to break down .
The agreement does not pretend to be a final and definitive settlement but it creates institutions within which a new relationship of trust can be developed and offers guarantees both individual and collective of the fundamental interests and rights of all .
As Mo has said , the agreement is complex and complicated and contains many elements which must in their practical operation be synchronized and meshed together .
The transition to the working of the structures and policies contained in it will be a challenging and continual process .
In that sense the agreement is an opportunity as much as an achievement .
The continuing support of the European Union will be critical if we are to meet the new challenges presented by the agreement .
My government , together with the British Government , looks forward to working with the Commission , the European Parliament and our partners and meeting the challenges of peace and reconciliation .
I therefore welcome Monday 's agreement at the General Affairs Council that the Union should continue to play an active part in promoting lasting peace and prosperity in Northern Ireland .
As you know , there will be simultaneous referendums North and South on 22 May .
When they come to the ballot box the people of Ireland will be asked above all else to vote for peace .
They should have on their minds the profound example , the triumph offered by Europe 's transformation of itself .
I am confident that the people will together and concurrently endorse the agreement and allow its immense potential to be realized .
Again , I extend my deep gratitude on my own behalf and that of my government for the invitation by the President of Parliament to be here and thank you and your colleagues once again .
( Loud applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am very honoured to address the European Parliament today in this debate of importance and significance for all of us in the European Union .
Barely two weeks ago agreement was reached in the multi-party negotiations on the future of Northern Ireland in Belfast .
This agreement required considerable political courage and great determination .
Today before this House , on behalf of the European Commission , I would like to pay tribute to all those who are playing a part in this peace process : to the governments of the United Kingdom and Ireland , to the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , Dr Mo Mowlam , and to Ireland 's Minister for Foreign Affairs , David Andrews , both of whom we particularly welcome here this afternoon ; to the parties in the talks ; to the outstanding chairmanship of Senator George Mitchell and his fellow independent chairmen - former Prime Minister Harri Holkeri and General John de Chastelain .
We welcome the Agreement although it is not our role to pass judgment on it .
That is a matter for the people in the North and South of Ireland to decide in the referendums on 22 May .
But we can - as we always have done - continue to support wholeheartedly the peace and reconciliation process .
Surely in political life there is no more noble a cause than trying to bring people together inclusively in the pursuit of peace and reconciliation - from whatever their backgrounds , rich or poor ; from whatever their religious or ethnic origins , and to bridge the gaps of intolerance and hatred , to break down fear and insecurity , to build confidence and a belief in a new future and to offer hope , opportunity , freedom , the chance for happiness , the chance for a decent future for future generations .
There is no more noble cause than that .
To try and try again in this task and to be determined to succeed in the end : that is what we applaud today .
Indeed , does this not mirror the spirit that symbolises the whole history of the European Union itself ?
As committed and dedicated Europeans is this not the credo of our daily lives - to bring all European peoples together in friendship , peace and reconciliation , in a spirit of tolerance and mutual respect , fulfilling the guiding principles of our Treaty .
Yes , this is our raison d 'être and our lasting success .
So , today , in this House we rejoice in the progress that is being made .
During the talks leading to the agreement I believe the European Union has played an important role in three major ways .
Firstly , the European Union has provided a stable political reference point for both communities , a reference point that has shown how formerly divided communities and divided European countries can work together , trust each other and grow together successfully in the modern world .
Secondly , because our institutions - this Parliament , the Council of Ministers , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions - have all provided important political venues where members of the United Kingdom and Irish governments and politicians from Ireland , North and South , have been able to meet and work constructively together on many subjects .
But the European political process has shown that these disagreements can be resolved amicably without resulting in malice or recrimination .
So our institutions themselves have played their part .
Thirdly , I believe we have played a generous part in a deep and continued European involvement to underpin , practically , the efforts of both governments to bring about peace and reconciliation .
We have done this by a twin-track approach of assistance for economic and social regeneration and direct support for cross-community reconciliation .
In 1988 we became a major contributor to the International Fund for Ireland .
Overall we have contributed ECU 135 million .
25 000 jobs have been created .
After the cease-fire in 1994 we launched the Special Programme for Peace and Reconciliation in Northern Ireland and the border counties of Ireland , a programme that has been unequivocally supported by the MEPs from the Province .
This has been a big success .
On my recent visit to Northern Ireland I saw at first hand some of the cross-community and cross-border projects - such as my visit to the Shankill Women 's Centre or when I listened to the Ray of Hope Choir .
They were moving experiences .
Few people know that the special programme is financing no fewer than 11 000 projects - bringing together more than 2 000 people , one-seventh of Northern Ireland 's population !
So I am very pleased to announce before this House today that the Commission has agreed this morning in the provisional draft budget to propose a further ECU 100 million for the Peace and Reconciliation Programme for 1999 .
This brings the total for this programme to ECU 500 million over five years .
I am sure this will be supported by the European Parliament .
Let us not forget either the role other Community funds have played : the general Northern Ireland programme under the Structural Funds , INTERREG , URBAN and other Community programmes .
Over ECU 1.3 billion has been earmarked under Objective 1 of the Structural Funds for Northern Ireland .
Our practical assistance to Northern Ireland has been constant , committed and additional .
We have provided sustained support for all the communities over a long period of time - and rightly so .
Let me add that the Peace and Reconciliation Programme has been a laboratory for new forms of cooperation and implementation of our Structural Fund programmes and a source of inspiration for more decentralized implementation in the next programming period .
In the future the European Union will continue to support social and economic regeneration in Northern Ireland as we have in the past .
Community funding will be present in the initial phase in 1999 with our proposal to extend our contribution to the Peace Programme , and its effects will be felt for longer still .
And , in addition , I am confident that by working with both governments , all the political parties and all strands of opinion we will be able to find new , creative ways of supporting the fresh opportunities which an agreement will bring .
I can assure you of our commitment in that respect .
Let me conclude my remarks this afternoon by saying that we salute the great courage of the people of Ireland , North and South and all of those who are involved in the peace process .
We support the huge efforts that have been made on the road to peace and reconciliation .
And we continue to pledge our support to underpin this bold and courageous process - now and in the future .
Václav Havel provides me with the words and thoughts I need to express my feelings and conclude my remarks this afternoon .
He said ' Je crois profondément en la coexistence de communautés régionales au sein d 'une communauté globale de tous les hommes ' .
So do I.
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Santer .
Mr Hume has the floor , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
Mr President , I have to say that I am very pleased that the leadership of my own group has asked me to speak for the group today because I am quite sure that the vast majority of the people of Northern Ireland would want me to speak for them today to express their deep gratitude to all of the European institutions for the powerful strength and support that they have given to the peace movement on our streets .
Could I begin by expressing their gratitude , and my thanks , to you for representing this Parliament and coming to our streets and thereby strengthening the will for peace and the mood for peace by showing the people on the streets , who have been neglected for so long , that Europe and the outside world really did care .
That strengthened enormously the will for peace among the people .
In so doing you are building on the strong foundations , already laid by the European Commission , and let nobody underestimate the strength of those foundations .
When the cease-fires were called , Jacques Delors approached us immediately to ask what he could do to help and he initiated the special programme for peace and reconciliation .
His successor , President Santer , came to our streets to meet with people at local level and , of course , the fact that the President of the European Commission came to the streets was an enormous statement , not only of goodwill but of positive support for the peace process and of strength for that process .
The fact that his colleague the Commissioner for regional policy with major responsibility for Northern Ireland , Monica Wulf-Mathies , has come to our streets many times and has gone to the areas of highest unemployment and has brought together people from both sides on their common ground - economic regeneration - has been a very important factor in the healing process that we believe is now under way .
Of course , the two governments who are represented here today and in particular the two people who are representing them who have been involved in very detailed work during the talks leading to the agreement have put enormous efforts into it , together with previous governments who have also made very strong moves towards peace in our country .
We have , I believe , an historic opportunity now for a new beginning in which we can leave behind us our terrible and tragic past .
It is a new beginning in which there will be no victory for either section of our people because in divided societies victories are not solutions .
What we have is an agreement that underlines and proposes accommodation and respect for the identities of both sections of our people and for the ethos of both sections of our people and creates the circumstances in which both sections of our people can work together in their common interests and by so doing can break down the barriers of the past .
There again , we see the enormous influence of the European Union because , as I have often said the European Union has been a major inspiration to the philosophy of creating peace .
People often talk of European Union as economic this and economic that , but fundamentally , as I have often said on my streets , it is the finest example in the history of the world of conflict resolution .
Just imagine fifty years ago : for the second time in a century , after millions has been slaughtered , who could have forecast we would be altogether today ?
But we are .
How was it done ?
How it was done involves the philosophy I am talking about , not just in Northern Ireland but in every area of conflict in the world because at the end of the day all conflict is about the same thing - it is about seeing difference as a threat .
( Applause ) The peoples of Europe decided that difference - whether it is your race , your religion , your nationality or your ethnicity - is an accident of birth and not something that you should fight about ; it is something you should respect .
Looking at the philosophical principles that create peace , what the peoples of Europe did was to build institutions - and those three institutions are represented here today - which fully respect the differences of their peoples .
No one in Europe has lost their identity but , and this is the important point , make them work together in their substantial common interests which are social and economic , as I often say ' spilling their sweat and not their blood ' , and by doing that we can breakdown the barriers and centuries and the new Europe will have evolved .
Those are the principles that go to the heart of this new agreement if you read it .
They are creating institutions within Northern Ireland and between North and South and between Britain and Ireland that respect our differences but which allow us to work together in our common interests based on partnership , on equality , on mutual respect , on consent and agreement .
As we lay those foundations now , as the two governments have laid those foundations for us by their work for this agreement , let us hope that by working together the real healing process in Ireland will begin and we will break down the barriers of prejudice of centuries and the new Ireland will evolve in the way the new Europe has but with no victory for either side but based on agreement and respect for diversity .
Indeed , Mr President , as that is happening I have no doubt that the continued support from the European Union and from the European Commission and Council of Ministers in particular , through economic regeneration , will play a major role in strengthening the common ground enormously and in expressing to our people at grass-roots level the massive international goodwill that exists for peace in the offshore island of the European Union .
The representatives of all sections of our people face the challenge of harnessing that massive international goodwill and translating it into real benefits for our people and in doing it together to break down the barriers of centuries .
We look forward in Northern Ireland to continuing support from our friends in the European Union and we thank you for it .
We are very confident , and I know I am speaking for the vast majority of our people from both sectors of our community when I say we are looking forward to laying our past permanently behind us .
As we move into the next century let it be the first century in our island history in which we will have no killing on our streets and no emigration of our young people to other lands to earn a living .
( Loud and sustained applause )
Mr President , this is a time of great hope and gratitude in Ireland : hope for the future of the two referendums we are facing shortly , gratitude to all our friends and colleagues who throughout the years have given us such wonderful support .
Congratulations also for those who were directly involved over the last few years and particularly in the last few months in bringing this process to what we hope will be a good conclusion .
And particular congratulations to those who chose the long and consistent and patient path ; notwithstanding the many disappointments and great griefs that they encountered along the way : Thank you , John .
Throughout this process Europe was there with us .
It was there not just with the financial aid but also with the human and political aid that we have gained from colleagues who visited us and the very real and genuine concern across all political groups in Parliament .
This agreement is one great step but we have a long process ahead of us as has already been said by both our ministers and the big process I believe we have to face in the next few years is how we bring the plain people of Northern Ireland in both communities together .
Not just the communities within Northern Ireland but the communities in the North and the South , between whom there still exists unfortunately a great void .
It was not just a physical boundary but it was also the boundary of the minds that divided us and that will be our most challenging job for the next few years .
There is so much we can do together ; there are so many great opportunities ; let us seize them .
Finally , I would like in addition to pay tribute to all those concerned , to make a special reference to the contribution the women of Northern Ireland have made , both between themselves and also with the South .
The Women 's Coalition made a significant contribution to this process and I believe they should be recognized as well .
Thank you all , colleagues and thank you everybody , particularly the Commission and those who worked so hard for this great day for us all .
Mr President , like the other groups in Parliament , my group has followed with great emotion the agreement signed in Belfast on 10 April by the British and Irish Governments and the parties representing the communities of Northern Ireland .
We are very pleased to see Mrs Mowlam and Mr Andrews here together today , sharing the same philosophy and the same commitment .
Their understanding , toughness and commitment mean that the European Parliament can feel proud today .
Our group showed its commitment to peace in Northern Ireland , during the previous parliamentary term , through the members of the Irish Democratic Left , and also through the work of Vice-President Gutiérrez Díaz in his capacity as rapporteur for the International Fund for peace in Northern Ireland and as member and chairman of the Committee on Regional Policy .
His work was a sign of our group 's commitment , because we are convinced that in Ireland there are many men and women of good will , many men and women who believe in democracy , many men and women who also think of themselves as Europeans .
So it is easy for them not to fear peace or democracy today .
As the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , said here : there is no need to be frightened of peace .
The dangers of peace are always far less than the dangers of violence .
So , as the European Parliament , we want to make a firm commitment .
We want to encourage the Commission and the Council to develop all these programmes and plans for solidarity because we want to share the fruits of peace .
In a few years ' time , we want there to be Irish Members of the European Parliament who can greet each other warmly , who are committed to the same political project of democracy for Europe and the European peoples .
For every problem , in every country , there are different solutions .
But the philosophy of renouncing violence in Ireland and making a commitment to peace and dialogue applies to everybody .
We cannot draw any other conclusion .
We cannot confuse one problem with another and propose a single , general solution , but what is clear is that European commitment , democratic commitment , and the renunciation of violence are applicable to everybody . That is why we are pleased today with this agreement and the fact that all the Irish people , from the North and from the South , can be fully European , by regaining peace and democracy for their children and for the future .
For too long in Britain and Ireland we have been united only by grief and therefore with all my heart I welcome the Good Friday Agreement and I warmly welcome here today Dr Mo Mowlam , the Northern Ireland Secretary , and David Andrews , our own Minister .
The Agreement is a development of deep historical significance and must be supported by all those who wish for an end to this ancient conflict .
Those who continue to say ' no ' have no solution other than continued violence .
There can be no doubt that ' yes ' vote in the two referendums is a vote to end violence and that is something we must all wish for .
The two Governments , together with most of the political parties of the region , have agreed a set of proposals which transcend the narrow confines of nationalism - whether of the British or the Irish variety .
I hope that in time we can develop a set of political arrangements where identity and territory are no longer the defining ideologies of state-building .
The political darkness in the North was in a large part due to its standing in the long dark shadows of both British and Irish nationalism locked in a struggle to the death .
Only movement by the two Governments on the key underlying constitutional issues could move that shadow and lift some of the darkness .
The Agreements on police reform , prisoner release , victim support , human rights and equality legislation are vital and need to be acted upon with generosity and imagination .
We are all equal citizens of the European Union and , as my colleague John Hume has said , we must learn to treat each other with equal respect .
Just one note of caution .
As currently structured , the decision-making systems of the new assembly tend to reinforce and institutionalize the current divide .
There is something distasteful about public representatives who , after all , are intended to represent the whole of the Community following rules rooted more in ethnic labelling than in democracy .
I hope that over time these elements can be ironed out of the arrangement as reconciliation builds , trust grows and a true democratic consensus begins to develop .
I know that this is an ideal , that the painful move away from conflict has not at present been accommodated but in particular we must not allow the women who have done so much to keep and create cross-community action during the years of conflict to be excluded from building the peace .
In this context I would like to give a particular thanks to Commissioner Wulf-Mathies for the way she has structured the programme for Peace and Reconciliation that has been deeply embedded in the Community as we have heard from Dr Mowlam today .
That is a vital and important part of the resolution of this conflict and I could recommend it to anybody , anywhere .
Mr President , I want to thank my group for giving me the opportunity to speak on their behalf in what is a truly historic occasion .
Perhaps it is because I represent the nation of Scotland which is near in geography but also in culture .
We once shared the same language and culture as Ireland and we care deeply for all parts of that noble island .
We praise those who found the words .
I once read the words of a British ambassador to Dublin who said : ' This is a land where words can turn into weapons ' .
Throughout the hard talking that took place I noticed how carefully Mo Mowlam had to choose her words and yet every word was spoken from her heart .
She had an enormous part to play .
I have to praise also my longstanding friend from the 1960s , John Hume , who has given his lifetime to the process of patient , peaceful talking .
All the others , the Prime Ministers past and present , the politicians like David Andrews here today and David Trimble for holding the line when many Unionists panicked .
War-weariness set in .
3 600 people dead , most of them civilians .
I read what an IRA man said : ' I joined the IRA when I was 20 .
I am now in my 40s and I have been to too many funerals ' . As the war-weariness set in there began to be a total realization in the minds of everybody that violence was getting nowhere .
All sides have yielded cherished positions and shed traditional attitudes .
In the words of John Hume they have drawn and shaped new relationships .
These magnificent politicians have built a bridge of hope and the optimists have beaten the pessimists .
Real concessions were made .
Ireland gave up the claim to the North and Nationalists in the North accepted that there could be a solution for Northern Ireland short of a united Ireland .
So we praise them all and the European Union .
British tabloid newspapers are always criticizing the European Union .
When faced with this , I have to say that if the only thing we achieved was peace in Northern Ireland , the European Union would have been worthwhile .
We have provided a meeting place for all the parts of Ireland to get together informally and to work together for the benefit of the whole island .
The silent majority of Ireland want peace ; let them now vote for it !
Mr President , I should firstly like to identify myself with the tributes paid to yourself , President Santer , Monica Wulf-Mathies and others who have been involved .
For thirty years the people of Northern Ireland have not been able to enjoy or benefit from a normal society .
They have suffered grievously over that time from countless evil and wicked acts by terrorists .
It does not matter what letters of the alphabet the terrorists use to camouflage their atrocities .
We still have a long way to go for there are still those who wish to keep the people of Northern Ireland at each other 's throats .
I would like today to put on record my admiration for the people of Northern Ireland who have withstood the pressure and managed to remain in control and calm in the face of adversity .
I would also like to put on record the immense debt we the people of Northern Ireland owe to the security forces and the Royal Ulster Constabulary , the Royal Irish Regiment , formerly the Ulster Defence Regiment and the army which on many occasions in the past 30 years stood between sanity and oblivion .
I have to say that on many occasions they never received the credit they deserved .
There is still a long way to go .
Please do not believe that all our problems are over .
There are many deep scars in both communities which will take a long time to heal .
Many families will never be able to forget their own personal loss and I hope we can understand that .
We should not believe that this agreement will be accepted by everyone .
Many of the people I represent are extremely concerned that those who murdered and bombed for the last 30 years have not decommissioned one bullet nor one ounce of Semtex .
There are many people who are extremely sceptical of these unreconstructed terrorists ' long-term motives and have doubts about their intentions to follow the democratic path .
The European Union has been very constructive in the support it has provided in recent years .
It will require sustained and positive action by the European Union to ensure that we can rebuild our divided communities and restore that confidence .
The future of Northern Ireland and its ultimate destiny lie firmly in the hands of those who live and reside within Northern Ireland .
This settlement is not and cannot be considered interim ; it is permanent .
I know there will be difficult days ahead .
The road to peace will not be easy , it never is .
But there comes a time when one must grasp the opportunity .
The easy way is always to say ' No ' , to demolish and destroy .
The difficult way forward is to say ' Yes ' and to pick up the challenge and build a new future for all the people of Northern Ireland .
The people of Northern Ireland are a warm and generous people .
They deserve better than they have had .
The future is in their hands .
They will decide , they will vote and I trust they will choose wisely .
I tried very hard earlier today to obtain consensus on a joint resolution .
Unfortunately , because of the Socialist Group 's attitude , I was unable to achieve it .
It is a bad start .
I hope it reconsiders and adopts a better attitude in the future .
If we cannot have consensus on a joint resolution in this Parliament , we will have difficulties ahead of us .
Mr President , I rise to speak on behalf of people who have no voice now in Northern Ireland .
They had a voice when they elected me top of the poll - the position I have occupied at every election for this Parliament with the largest number of voters taking part in the election .
And why can these people not speak ?
It is because they have been butchered and killed by the IRA and other so-called Loyalist groups .
I do not know how many people in this House today have read the Agreement or know what it contains but it does not contain some of the things that have been attributed to it by some speakers today .
They cannot have read it .
It is proposed that all unreformed terrorists will be released inside 24 months .
The Secretary of State says that it is based on justice and everyone is a winner .
Who is winning and what sort of justice is that ?
I have not time today to talk about some of the people but let me give you one example .
In 1993 - which is not long ago - Paul Magee from Belfast was convicted of killing Special Constable Glen Goodman in Tadcaster , North Yorkshire .
He was also a member of the IRA active service unit , nicknamed the M60 Gang after they killed five security force members in Belfast .
That is the type of unreformed terrorist who is going to be loosed onto the streets of Northern Ireland .
I have before me copies of a paper with every police officer they murdered during their campaign .
Here we have all these young men who gave their lives in defence of both Roman Catholic and Protestant people in Northern Ireland , all murdered by the IRA .
And those who are serving time for their murders are to be released within 24 months .
But there is one exception .
In the South of Ireland where a garda was shot , the government has made it clear that those responsible will not join in the amnesty .
I say : What is the difference between him and the Royal Ulster Constabulary men who fought and died to guard the people of Northern Ireland ?
What is the difference ?
Someone in this House said that this is peace .
These gunmen , once released , will have access to the greatest terrorist arsenal in the whole of the western world - not one gun surrendered , not one ounce of Semtex surrendered - and when they do not get what they want , they will take it out not on this Parliament , not on the people of Europe , but on the long-suffering people of Northern Ireland .
Someone said : Do not be afraid of peace .
Go and tell the widows .
Go and tell the orphans .
Go and tell the slaughtered in Northern Ireland that .
How can they lie in their beds when they know that those who murdered their kith and kin are to be released on to the streets with access to the weapons of murder .
This is a serious matter .
Let the people of Northern Ireland speak .
The government is spending £ 3 million in order to win this referendum .
But the Ulster people will not be bullied and they will not be bribed .
And when they speak we will hear the real Ulster .
Mr President , at the outset I want to thank my colleagues for giving me the opportunity to say a few brief words on this historic day for the European Parliament .
I want to congratulate all of those involved in bringing about peace and the peace accord of Good Friday .
In particular , I want to welcome to the European Parliament our own Foreign Minister , David Andrews , and Secretary of State Mo Mowlam , both of whom have played an integral role and both of whom have spent long and arduous hours in negotiations , culminating in this accord .
Parliament , the Commission and in particular the President of the Commission and his Commissioners Wulf-Mathies , Flynn and Kinnock continually lent their support and goodwill to the efforts to reach a peace agreement , responding at all times in a positive and practical manner through the International Fund , through Peace and Reconciliation and I am confident that Parliament will warmly approve the Commission 's recommendation of another £ 100 million before this year 's budget .
I know that the Union will continue to support the process and it is absolutely essential .
But they should do so now by granting Objective 1 status on a cross-border basis .
This would ensure priority access to European funding for regional , social , agricultural and fisheries development - on a cross-border basis , I emphasize .
This will bring much needed jobs to the many unemployed in the region .
In conclusion as a representative of the border region , I want to pledge myself to assisting the peace process in a positive and practical way .
I , too , in the short period that I have want to welcome the Agreement and to say that I sincerely hope it will be supported by the vast majority of the people of Ireland , North and South .
I want to congratulate , of course , especially John Hume for the immense investment he has made in time and sacrifice in this Agreement .
I want also to recognize the leadership of David Trimble in bringing the majority of the Unionists of Northern Ireland alongside and I want to thank Jim Nicholson , too , a Member of this House also , for giving his considerable assistance and influence in support of David Trimble 's effort .
I want also to remember all the Prime Ministers of Britain and Northern Ireland in the past who made an immense effort and their contribution is , I believe , part of the success of this agreement .
I want also to recognize the efforts of the American President in this .
He gave a lot up to the very last minute and I believe what America has done here is an example for Europe as well of what a major power , through its influence and good diplomacy , can achieve throughout the world .
We would like to especially thank the EU for its quiet and unintrusive role in Northern Ireland , the framework of the European Union which helped Irish and British Ministers to work together the common agricultural policy , the common policies that created the single market where the people North and South cooperate together now without any border to prevent them from growing together and cooperating and trading together .
Europe has done that for us and it is a big effort .
I would like to thank Mr Santer and Mrs Wulf-Mathies for being the visible face of the European Community in Northern Ireland and I want to say that I hope we can continue with the assistance we are giving which has meant so much .
Mr President , having served as a politician in both parts of Ireland I am only too well aware of the difficulties in trying to negotiate an agreement which will be acceptable to all parties to the conflict .
The Good Friday Agreement is an historic achievement and I wholeheartedly congratulate all those who contributed to it , both Governments and the party leaders , particularly John Hume who has been praised here today , John Alderdice and especially David Trimble who has had the courage to lead Unionism to an honourable deal with their fellow citizens in Northern Ireland .
Let me say to Dr Paisley , when he talked about the votes he received , one vote for peace and reconciliation and an end of conflict is worth more than a thousand votes for a continuation of the conflict .
It is inevitable , given the complexity of the problem , that everyone will have some significant reservations about some part of the package .
However , it is a package and there can be no cherrypicking by anyone - the choice is either to accept the package in total or to reject it .
If the worst were to happen , and this package were rejected , another 20 years of negotiations would take place , resulting in a similar package and resulting in the same reservations that have been expressed .
A similar deal was on offer in 1974 , 25 years past , and thousands needlessly died and suffered and we must not condemn the peoples of Britain and Ireland and especially Northern Ireland to another prolonged period of violence .
I passionately support this Agreement , it is a fair and honourable one and should be wholeheartedly endorsed through both parts of Ireland .
It is appropriate that the European Parliament should have the opportunity of endorsing it ; this Parliament symbolically represents the conflict over two World Wars and many other European quarrels and let us hope we can show the way to the people of Northern Ireland .
( Applause )
I am delighted to have the opportunity to express my wholehearted support for this historic Agreement which puts relationships within Northern Ireland , between the two parts of Ireland and between Ireland and Britain on a completely new footing , based on partnership , consent and mutual respect .
Since the signing of the Treaty of Rome , the European Union has succeeded in providing a forum in which EU members sit around a table to debate their differences without resorting to violence .
Hence the signing of this Agreement .
I welcome the historic opportunity for the people of Northern Ireland to resolve their difficulties by exclusively democratic and peaceful means .
I firmly oppose the use or threat of force to achieve any political objective .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank all the politicians involved throughout this long and painful process , which has involved successive governments on both islands , and in particular to commend the courage of those Northern Ireland politicians who have taken that extra step which has got us where we are today .
Furthermore , I wish to acknowledge and to thank the European Union for its constant support and its encouragement .
I would hope that this support will be continued in practical terms .
In my capacity as an elected representative , I join with the signatories in commending this Agreement to the people of Ireland , North and South , for their approval .
I have received 8 motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mrs Mowlam now has the floor .
Thank you very much , Mrs Mowlam .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
European Group on ethics , science and new technologies
The next item is the Commission communication on questions relating to the work of the European Group on ethics , science and new technologies .
Mr Santer has the floor .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to be able to present to you today the new European Group on ethics , science and new technologies , which takes over from the advisory body on the ethics of biotechnology .
The origins of this initiative are to be found in the Commission 's commitment to all matters relating to science and technology which bring up issues of an ethical nature .
The end of this century has been marked by the spectacular emergence of science and new technologies , mainly in two areas , those of biology and information .
These developments are bringing about profound changes , both at the level of society in general and in our daily lives .
The prospects for progress are huge in areas such as employment , growth and improvement of quality of life .
Nevertheless , these advances create fears due to the speed at which progress has been achieved and the global dimension of these technologies .
This is why an ethical accompaniment is more than ever necessary to ensure that the progress achieved is in harmony with basic values and human dignity .
The European Parliament soon set out to provide an ethical dimension to scientific progress in this field and to the scientific application which has accompanied this progress .
I am convinced that the creation of an ethical group is in line with the concerns of your institution .
I would like to explain to you the new characteristics of the European Group on ethics , which provides continuity to the work of the previous advisory body .
I would also like to take this opportunity to highlight the role and competence of the members of the previous body , particularly its chairperson , Mrs Noëlle Lenoir , who undertook their responsibilities in a remarkable way , in particular encouraging dialogue between our institutions .
Firstly , I would like to mention the characteristics which the former body and the new group have in common .
These are the characteristics of a classic ethics committee .
The new group , like its predecessor , is consultative , independent , multidisciplinary and multinational .
It is consultative in that its main task is to draw up non-binding opinions for the Commission and to prepare the ground usefully for decisions to be taken .
It is , of course , independent : it represents no particular economic or political power .
That is why each one of its members is appointed on a personal basis , according to their reputation and competence , and why it is made up of 12 experts , a number which does not correspond to the number of Member States .
The group is able to organize its work freely .
Thanks to a new rule , the group will also be able to agree on its own internal regulations next May .
Finally , the group is multidisciplinary and multinational .
Each member has a different approach depending on his or her specialization : science , law or humanities .
This pluralism is a source of wealth for ethical reflection .
So , what are the main characteristics of the new group ?
It seems to me that there are three : the first innovation is the broadening of the scope of activity of the group .
Indeed , historically , the preceding group had been deeply anchored in the sphere of biotechnology .
This one remains at the centre of scientific development , and thus at the centre of our concerns .
Cloning is the most obvious example . However , that is not all .
How can we not be concerned by the development of the information society and the protection of human dignity on the Internet ? How can we not respond to the fears that are caused by access to personal genetic information , or human tissue banks ?
We wanted to reply to these new challenges by giving the group the task of dealing additionally with scientific developments in general , including research and the information society .
These new responsibilities will require sufficient expertise .
This is the second new characteristic of this group , which has been strengthened and whose membership has been increased from 9 to 12 members , appointed for three-year terms .
Finally , and this third innovation is a considerable one , the group must base its work on closer cooperation with the other institutions .
The group is certainly closely linked to the Commission and presents it recommendations to that body .
Nevertheless , I understand the wish of the other institutions to have access to the reflections of the group , even to be involved in them .
The European Parliament expressed this desire in its resolution of June 1977 .
Personally , I want the group to follow the path of dialogue and transparency begun by its predecessor .
Many debates were organized on its initiative , with active participation from the House , which encouraged the establishment of a climate of fruitful collaboration .
I also attach great importance to the fact that every opinion should immediately be passed on to both yourselves and the Council .
In this spirit , and on my request , the Commission has invited Parliament and the Council to specify the different themes which should be the subject of an examination by the group , or even of an opinion from it .
I would like to underline that this new possibility of referral is an unprecedented innovation .
Mr President , we need a European Group on ethics .
Its opinions will be important in the formulation and implementation of Community legislation .
In this context , I would like to remind you that , since 1991 , the previous group enabled a widening of the debate at European level by involving all parties concerned , including the general public .
It was able to reconcile scientific expertise with the general public 's understanding of these issues , which is not easy when it comes to ethics .
I am convinced that the European Group on ethics will continue this important mission .
Mr President , may I thank President Santer for personally presenting this European Group on ethics to us , which is , furthermore , attached to the Presidency of the Commission .
Before moving on to my question , I would also like to thank the advisory body on the ethics of biotechnology , chaired by Mrs Lenoir , for its good work , particularly in the assistance it provided to institutions in order to guide the directive on the patentability of biotechnological inventions to a successful conclusion , through precise , concrete and motivated advice .
The new group which you have just introduced to us , Mr President , is an enlarged group with extended responsibilities .
You are aware that Parliament would have preferred a committee with an interinstitutional vocation , in order to guide our overall work more precisely , not regarding individual demands for patents - we never requested this - but in order that this institution would be of a nature that went beyond simply advising the Commission .
You raised some legal objections to this , which I understand , and which I accept .
My question is , nevertheless , the following : how , in practice , will Parliament be able to submit questions to this new group ? Will they , in some way , be filtered by the Commission , which would , I have to say , hinder the collaboration we would hope for from it ?
I thank Mr Cot for his question .
Indeed , we feel it extremely important that Parliament should have every possibility of contacting this group and we thus consider that it can , of course , put questions to the group .
It is clearly for Parliament to draw up the practical application of this procedure but , from our side , no filter - as you have called it - will oppose requests for referral made by Parliament .
It is for Parliament alone to decide in what way it wants to submit to the group .
We will not interfere in this regard .
But it is for you to formulate a procedure ; it is up to you , for I would not want to interfere in your internal procedures .
In any case , the group is open , and its members have agreed to collaborate as actively as possible with the other institutions , especially with Parliament .
Mr President , I would like to offer an immediate response to the matter just raised .
Last week at the request of Parliament and its President we formed a working group on bioethics in the Committee on Research .
I would like to ask how you envisage cooperation between the Commission 's Group on ethics and this ethics group which has now been formally set up in the Committee on Research .
Of course , Mr President , this European Group on ethics is ready to collaborate fully with all the groups which are active here .
As I said , it is an independent group , a neutral one , which is attached to the Commission , but it will of course be open , in order to assure close collaboration with all other bodies created through other initiatives and other legislative procedures .
That seems clear to me .
Coordination efforts must also be ensured in the various groups .
It will thus certainly examine all of these questions , insofar as it is requested to do so by the more particular and specific groups that have been created .
At first reading of the patent directive the European Parliament called for the setting up of an ethics committee to assess all aspects of biotechnology and in particular with regard to patents .
The response of the Commission is not what Parliament demanded ; we asked you to submit proposals to the European Parliament but your response has been to expand your previous committee .
Evaluating biotechnology is not the same as evaluating the ethical implications of patent applications .
An example is that biotech produces therapeutic treatments which are intended to benefit patients .
Patenting such treatment may not , however , be in the patients ' best interests or may be prohibited on public policy grounds , preserving doctors ' rights of treatment without depending on a monopoly supplier or researchers ' rights to produce alternative treatments from the same genetic material .
I would like to ask President Santer : how can the committee act as an ethical scrutiny body on biotechnological inventions as Parliament wants , when its remit is only to look at basic ethical principles and not at individual issues raised by patent applications ?
How much time and resources will be committed to detailed scrutiny of biotech inventions ?
What resources will be made available for widespread public consultations on key ethical issues ?
We have heard about access but access is not what Parliament wanted ; we want to request the committee to give a direct opinion to Parliament on specific issues .
Will the Members have that direct access to the committee to give an opinion on any specific issue , not through the Commission ?
Thank you .
Firstly , I would like to emphasize that the group is a consultative body with the task of examining general questions on fundamental ethical principles .
Thus , it is not intended to systematically give opinions on individual cases such as , for example , the ethical dimension of a patent request or the authorization for marketing of a specific product .
The group is there to examine all questions , as I said , on fundamental ethical principles .
Nevertheless , it could also be asked to examine other issues .
It is therefore possible to give the European Group on ethics responsibility for evaluating all ethical aspects of biotechnology .
It is already clearly a delimitation of its powers , but we have to ensure that the group is not overloaded with tasks .
Mr President , I am a little afraid that the task of this new committee may be somewhat vague because its mandate has been expanded .
I would therefore like to ask whether we could also conceive of the group giving general advice to others , in other words , a fiche d 'impact d 'éthique , which could be considered in the assessment of all political questions .
I hope , for example , that we would be able to avoid a situation in which economic arguments are used in assessing human dignity , as has sometimes happened in earlier periods here in Europe .
How does the Commission intend to ensure that the work is well defined and that ethical opinions are included in other areas , such as through this assessment ?
Finally , I would like to say that it was gratifying to hear that we will get these opinions from the group immediately and do not have to be satisfied with three-year reports .
I would like to make sure that we will get the opinions from the group immediately .
I do not share the Member 's concerns at all .
This group has already proved its experience in the past , under the leadership of Mrs Lenoir , and its work has been much appreciated .
We have now widened it to deal with other issues and its membership has been increased .
Its members are independent , of high quality and well known . The expertise of its new members will enable it to cope with the broadening of its remit .
Furthermore , the pluralism of the group , which is essential , will most certainly enable it to ensure ethical reflection adapted to the range of questions likely to be put to it .
All opinions are passed on immediately , not just in four-monthly reports .
The question you are raising regarding closer relations with the European Parliament can be raised at the next meeting to be held between the chairman of the group and the President of the European Parliament . I believe this will be held on 29 April , that is , tomorrow , and it will then also be possible to discuss all of these issues , if you still have concerns as to how this group will function .
Terminator crops are those crops which when planted are genetically pre-programmed to probably last only one season , at the end of which they die and the farmer in question has to buy new foods from the supplier .
I believe that raises an ethical issue , President , and can I therefore ask you how I , as a Parliamentarian , can obtain the opinion of this new committee ?
President Santer , you are aware of my concern about this because of course on Monday of this week I sent you a fax asking you how as a Parliamentarian I could obtain the opinion of the new committee .
I would like to do that and I am aware that there are no current rules in existence and therefore the situation may be somewhat difficult .
Nevertheless , your advice would be very welcome .
I can confirm that you did indeed submit a question on this subject to me and I immediately passed your letter on to the group to give an opinion .
It is now for the group to organize its work in order to give you a response .
What I want to ensure is that the procedure is not an overly complex one and that Members of this Parliament may have direct access to the group .
This is why I replied earlier , in answer to a question from Mr Cot , that it is for the European Parliament to agree on a procedure to enable its Members to contact the group directly .
We have no problem in accepting such a procedure .
Mr President , I would like to thank President Santer for his personal involvement in this issue .
President Santer , we were not entirely happy with the work done by the original group .
The debate here over the last year provided evidence of this .
However , I think that by appointing new members and with the increased plurality of the group we will find the work more satisfactory .
In my view , one problem which was particularly evident in the position on human cloning was that there was insufficient time for consultation with the scientific institutes which work in the areas of ethics and science in Europe .
My question is this : in future how will the group integrate the work which is done in Europe and is in part supported by the Commission with the work done by this advisory group - will there be a first reading followed by a report from the institutes which operate in this field , and then a second reading ?
Mr President , from a scientific point of view , the work of this group , like that of the previous group , can certainly be compared to work which has been undertaken by groups on ethics in other countries .
I hope that it will be comparable to the work undertaken at a national level .
So we must not demand more from this group than from those at a national level .
Frankly speaking , some criticism could also be made of those groups but we do not live in a perfect world , so let us limit ourselves to having a procedure and let us allow this group to work in full independence .
We want an independent group , so let us work to ensure that members of the group have this independence .
We nominated and selected them .
I believe there are highly valuable personalities in the group , each specializing in a particular field .
Let us leave the group to work independently without interference , as otherwise they cannot be independent .
On the other hand , there is no doubt that the group will avail itself of as much scientific advice as possible , and it will certainly get in touch with foreign scientific institutes .
Consultation will clearly take place in this respect , and I hope that the results of the work of this group will be useful in enlightening not only the work of the Commission but also that of the other institutions , including the European Parliament .
But please , do not ask about the group 's precise procedures , for it will get bogged down in this and will lose its necessary independence .
The value of this group lies precisely in the fact , and I will repeat this because it is important , that it will be able to work completely independently , without being subjected to any internal influence on the part of the Commission , or external influence due to pressure from economic or other groups .
Mr President , President Santer , you are full of praise for the new ethics advisory group in the way that a good father speaks well of his children , even if they have failed .
Bravo !
The range of tasks accorded to the advisory group is impressive .
It now covers communication technology , information technology and biotechology .
But there has been no increase in the work to be done .
Instead , top-class experts have had a muzzle put on them .
It may look fine , but it remains a muzzle which prevents the advisory group using its teeth .
Or do you really believe that twelve top-class scientists , men and women , who are used to being very thorough in their work , will be able to carry on working in the same way if the range of their assignments is extended ad infinitum ?
I do not think we have muzzled this advisory group .
I disagree .
It is not a matter either of my being proud of the individuals we appointed .
We believe we have selected those individuals in various organizations who have a reputation that is good , is scientifically justified and can certainly stand comparison with the various scientific institutes and bodies elsewhere .
That much is clear from the work they have done .
Although I am no scientist , recently over the past two to three years I have had to accept various scientific reports .
Mind you , I must admit that even those scientific reports were not always drawn up in the way I , as a legal expert , would have imagined .
So let us show some humility , even before great scientists .
I believe that this group is doing its work .
Allow it complete independence to get on with its work , allow the individuals to develop fully . I am convinced that then in retrospect you will not only applaud the appointment of this group , but will also appreciate properly the work it has done .
In any case , I deny that we have in any way put a muzzle on this group !
Mr President , of course it has everything to do with the patenting directive .
We will return to it at length when we discuss it .
I have made a note of the fact that it will be an advisory and consultative body and that its remit will encompass more than biotechnology alone .
But because we in this Parliament wish to see a strict and strong advisory group , I would like to argue for the remit to be not too broad , but in fact as specific as possible . If its remit is too broad , the force of the group will be lessened .
I would be grateful if Mr Santer could give his response to this .
Furthermore , science is never free from value judgments .
Has any provision been made for the European Parliament 's input into the composition of this advisory , consultative body ?
Thank you , Mr President .
Your comments thus bring this question and answer session to a close .
Convergence and the single currency
The next item on the agenda is the report ( A4-0130 / 98 ) by Mr von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the opinion of the European Parliament on the Convergence Report of the European Monetary Institute ( C4-0201 / 98 ) and the document from the Commission entitled " EURO 1999-25 March 1998 - Report on progress towards convergence and its recommendation with a view to the transition to the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union ' ( COM ( 98 ) 1999 - C4-0200 / 98 ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in December 1991 it was agreed in the Maastricht Treaty to introduce a single European currency .
In this Treaty the latest date for implementation was set at 1 January 1999 .
However , only those Member States with an already stable currency would be members of the inner circle of monetary union .
To ensure that this would be the case , firm criteria for stability were anchored in the Treaty .
Right from the beginning , these criteria were the subject of vigorous debate .
To some they appeared too weak and ineffective to achieve sufficient stability . To others , however , they were much too harsh and restrictive .
As events have unfolded in the years since Maastricht , the criteria have proved to have fulfilled their role superbly .
There is a culture of stability developing in the whole European Union which is of fundamental significance to the success of the single currency .
On the recommendation of the European Commission , 11 countries have qualified for entry into monetary union on 1 January 1999 .
In the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy we have looked at this recommendation in great depth .
The report by the European Monetary Institute provided us with a very important basis for our work .
I have aimed to produce as balanced a report as possible , one in which indisputable successes are acknowledged .
However , in doing this , critical points were not neglected .
The actual measurement for the stability of a currency is the rate of inflation .
Even the most strongly stability-orientated central banks assume that inflation rates of less than 2 % actually mean currency stability .
I believe that the public is not yet sufficiently aware that all 11 candidate countries have rates of inflation below 2 % , and therefore have stable currencies .
In 1997 , four of the candidate countries had an inflation rate of 1.9 % : these were Italy , the Netherlands , Portugal and Spain .
Two countries had a rate of 1.5 % : Belgium and Germany .
One country , Luxembourg , had an inflation rate of 1.4 % ; another , France , had an inflation rate of 1.3 % ; and three countries reached 1.2 % : Finland , Ireland and Austria .
The average inflation rate for the 11 candidate countries in 1997 stood at 1.5 % .
This shows that , with a view to monetary union in the entire European Union , a culture of monetary stability is already developing .
Long-term interest rates show clearly that the markets are reckoning on the continuation of this trend .
Interest rates in all 11 candidate countries are markedly below the reference value of 7.8 % .
A year ago , the European Mortgage Federation still held that 10-year fixed mortgage rates would increase around the time of the introduction of the euro .
Its assertion has not been borne out .
This , too , indicates that the financial markets are counting on a stable start for the euro . Consequently the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy believes that , for its launch in January 1999 , the stability of the euro is guaranteed .
However , to ensure that the stability of the euro is sustainable , it is very important that the Member States provide a stable environment in terms of their budget deficits and levels of debt .
We were particularly careful to check that these criteria had been met .
In all the candidate countries , budget deficits are below 3 % of GDP , and budget plans and forecasts would suggest that a further reduction is likely .
The level of public debt is not so easy to evaluate .
This view is also held by the European Monetary Institute .
Here we should assess whether the reference value of 60 % of GDP has been observed , or whether the total debt of a given country is moving towards this quickly enough .
We must also ask the important question of whether debts are largely financed from within the country itself , or whether it is a matter of short or longer-term debt financing .
It is worth noting here that in the two countries which are most heavily indebted there is also an above-average savings ratio and that debts are largely internally financed .
This was important for our assessment .
Furthermore , it is possible to distinguish an improvement in structural debt with the result that maturity periods are slowly but surely increasing .
The report which I am presenting to you calls for firm undertakings from the governments of these countries to continue the process of consolidation .
The proposal presented to Parliament also requires all participants in European monetary union to observe strictly the Stability and Growth Pact .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has taken these facts into consideration and has come to the conclusion that the European Commission 's positive assessment of the ability of all 11 countries to meet the debt criterion should be approved .
One further formal criterion for participation in monetary union is the independence of each country 's central bank .
The legislative procedures required for this have not yet been completed in all the candidate countries .
However , I am confident that the necessary measures will be in place by 1 July 1998 in time for the establishment of the European Central Bank .
Unemployment trends may not be a formal criterion of the Maastricht Treaty . However , this is the greatest challenge facing the countries of the European Union today .
For this reason we included questions about employment in our total assessment and we call for consistent implementation of the resolutions adopted at the Luxembourg Summit .
After careful consideration of all these trends , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy agreed by a large majority that all 11 candidate countries should take their places at the starting line for monetary union on 1 January 1999 .
On 1 January 1999 the European Central Bank will take over sole responsibility for monetary policy .
However given a single monetary policy , it will be all the more important to increase cooperation in economic policy .
The budgetary policies of the Member States , the shaping of fiscal policy , the decisions of tariff partners on wages and earnings , labour market policies and decisions taken on certain social and ecological conditions will have ever greater effects on growth and employment in all the Member States of the Union .
The European Parliament is the appropriate and democratically legitimate forum for a public discussion on the formulation of European economic policy .
We feel , therefore , that it is our most important challenge to deepen the existing dialogue on these issues with the European Commission , the Council of Ministers and the Economic and Finance Ministers of the Member States , and to develop a dialogue with the President of the European Central Bank .
The European Parliament has already submitted our proposals on this issue .
Now we await this weekend the Council 's appointment of a candidate for the Presidency of the European Central Bank , and we hope that the candidate will be appointed for the full eight years of office , as stipulated in the Treaty .
The introduction of the single currency is a milestone in recent European history .
The resolution which we are debating today will prepare for the opinion of the European Parliament on this epoch-making decision , as stipulated in the Treaty .
Appropriately for a decision of this significance , broad Parliamentary agreement must be reached , for only then can we make it clear that the directly elected European Parliament is equal to its responsibility for the future of the European Union .
( Applause )
Mr President , the resolution in the name of Karl von Wogau represents a package and paragraphs 24 to 33 in that resolution form an integral part of that package .
It is a mark of the good working relationship between our two committees , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , that the opinion from my committee has been incorporated as a whole into this resolution .
That shows our joint concern and our concern as an institution to stress the importance of linking sound macroeconomic policies on the one hand with greater coordination of economic and structural policies on the other .
Clearly that needs to be reflected in the overall management of monetary union .
I see the recognition of the importance of growth and employment alongside stability in the resolutions of the Council , and the incorporation of an employment chapter and a new employment guideline procedure in the Treaty of Amsterdam , as good clear signals that the importance of this overall linkage has been recognized for the management of the Union 's affairs as we move into monetary union .
In our own opinion we call on the Member States to intensify coordination between economic policy and active labour market policies and to speed up the implementation of the provisions of the employment chapter and the initiatives agreed at the special employment summit in Luxembourg last November .
In particular , we see the need to create a favourable framework for conditions for the strengthening of internal demand and investment as being of paramount importance .
Monetary union cannot be achieved or sustained at the cost of continuing high levels of unemployment .
This Union is founded on the principles of sustainable development and a high level of employment .
The central importance of these principles is clearly recognized in this resolution and , as chairman of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I am happy to recommend its acceptance to the House .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank the rapporteur for his report and for the work he has done in committee .
The vote in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and also the negotiations we have been able to engage in ensure that when we vote on this report tomorrow we can get a commanding majority across the House .
This is a very important time for the European Parliament .
Over the next two or three days the European Parliament will be the only democratic body to be able to express opinions on the very important subject of economic and monetary union .
On behalf of the Socialist group , I should say at the very beginning that we warmly welcome the recommendations by the European Monetary Institute and by the Commission that 11 countries should join the first wave of EMU on 1 January 1999 .
When you look at the convergence criteria set down in the Maastricht Treaty , it is a remarkable success story for the European Union .
Many people who saw the convergence criteria within the Maastricht Treaty supported it because they believed it would be impossible for the countries of the European Union to achieve this level of convergence .
The 15 Member States , and certainly the 11 that will join the single currency , have proved the doubters wrong and it is a testimony to what can be achieved in the European Union when the political will exists for us to work together as a Community .
We now have a historically low level of inflation and we have price stability .
That means that when the single currency is created we will have opportunities to address a wider agenda .
My group wants to ensure that when the European Central Bank is established and when the 11 countries create the euro zone , without prejudice to that price stability , we begin , with some urgency , to address the wider issues within the European Union , not least the question of growth and unemployment .
It is essential as a means of convincing the citizens of the European Union that this has been a worthwhile project , the project of consolidation in terms of our economies , that we can demonstrate that the EMU project is not just a monetary union but an economic union and a social union that will bring about reductions in long-term , structural and cyclical unemployment throughout the European Union .
We also have legislation for a balanced budget - the Pact for Stability and Growth .
I would say to Commissioner de Silguy that we achieved our balanced budget legislation with far less hype and excitement than the United States of America .
That means that we will have sustainability in convergence .
We will maintain price stability and we will maintain budget deficits within containable levels and I hope a balanced budget over the economic cycle .
However , on behalf of my group I give a warning that in accepting the strict application of the Pact for Stability and Growth , we accept the pact that was first proposed during the Irish presidency .
We will not accept new terms and conditions that emerge from any particular Member State either on Friday night when the Ecofin Council meets or at any subsequent point .
We have a Pact for Stability and Growth and we will accept the strict application of that pact but no further measures to place the economies of the European Union in a straitjacket .
That would be unacceptable .
Finally , in relation to the presidency of the European Central Bank , the Socialist Group expects that this weekend a president for the European Central Bank and an executive board will be nominated .
We expect that president will operate for eight years and no less .
I give notice that if a candidate is presented to us next week who cannot give a commitment to serve a full eight-year term , then there will be a question mark over whether or not my group would wish to support that nomination .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr von Wogau , we all know that in the long term only a stable currency can guarantee prosperity and jobs .
The European Parliament , therefore , must state unequivocally today that it takes seriously all the provisions and criteria set out in the Treaty and that these must be strictly and closely observed .
The requirement in the von Wogau report that two Member States consolidate their total debt in accordance with the Treaty is , therefore , correct and necessary .
Close observance of the Treaty should equally be one of the requirements for the appointment of the President of the Central Bank .
If the Treaty states that the period of office is eight years , then this must be the case .
To construe the requirements of the Treaty differently or to manipulate them is wrong and must be utterly rejected by the European Parliament .
The undignified tug-of-war concerning the new President must also stop immediately .
Europe needs confidence , Europe needs clarity , particularly in the sensitive questions about monetary policy .
We know that these days the whole world is watching to see how Europe is dealing with these very issues .
Strict observance of the Treaty is the best visiting card the euro could have .
Not only has the euro earned an excellent start , but it has also earned the right to serve as a long-term global anchor of stability for everyone , first and foremost for Europeans .
This will be possible if we adopt the von Wogau report today with as few amendments as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Karl von Wogau has known since 15 April that our group supported his excellent report and that consequently we approve of the Commission 's recommendation which provides for the beginning of the third stage of EMU on 1 January 1999 with 11 Member States .
Thus , without dwelling on this extremely interesting report , and after offering well-deserved congratulations to President Jacques Santer , Commissioner Yves Thibault de Silguy and all of the Commission , on behalf of the Union for Europe Group , I would like to return to the issue of the absolute necessity for the European Parliament to be closely involved in the European Central Bank 's process of democratic accountability .
The euro is the culmination of efforts undertaken since the appointment , by Antoine Pinay on 21 July 1952 , of Jean Monnet as the first President of the European Coal and Steel Community , the embryo of a Europe which has constantly improved over the years and whose culmination can be seen in the introduction of the single currency .
But the end of this cycle is also a beginning .
The single currency opens a new era in the monetary , economic and social policies of Europe .
That is why our group has been requesting a new European economic order for a number of years , because with regard to overall economic and budgetary balances , nothing will be the same again .
For this reason , I would like to highlight two extremely important facts regarding French policy towards the euro .
Firstly , for twenty years there has been great continuity in this policy , which has always overshadowed partisan differences .
Thus , whether by the adoption , in October 1986 , of the Single European Act or by the plea for ratification of the Treaty on European Union , through the referendum in September 1992 , the President of the French Republic , Jacques Chirac , has firmly committed France to the process of implementation of the single currency and , from my point of view , he will have given as much to Europe on this issue as many politicians who have now passed into posterity .
This is why I am happy to propose that the House should make the French National Assembly 's recommendation , made on 21 April of this year , its own . This recommendation was made at the request of Valéry Giscard-d 'Estaing , himself a great European , for in June and July 1978 he played an essential role which is at the root of our reality today .
He proposed , in fact , providing the Community authorities with a parliamentary committee on the euro , half of which would be composed of Members of the European Parliament and the other half composed of members of national parliaments , members of the finance committees in the member countries of the euro , appointed through proportional representation .
This committee would give regular opinions on the directions of the European Central Bank 's monetary policy and would thus successfully complement the triptych which has been behind the success of the construction of Europe . By this I mean : firstly , a high-level technical team responsible for implementing the common policy initiated by the Council of Ministers ; secondly , the specific case of Ecofin in its improved form , known as " Euro X ' and whose composition is currently being formulated ; and thirdly , parliamentary control which , since the creation of the ECSC , has always enabled those elected by Europe 's nations to be involved in European policy .
This measure is essential in order that parliamentary representatives of the eleven European nations participating in the euro , along with their representatives - in Strasbourg as in Brussels - elected via universal suffrage to defend the point of view of the people of Europe , may be deeply involved in this historic act of the introduction of the euro .
Mr President , I must say that I cannot help being somewhat bemused by the suggestion from Mr Giansily about what Mr Giscard d 'Estaing would like .
I have heard precious little from him since having presided over the Liberal group he got political asylum in the EPP Group some years ago .
I am glad to hear that he is alive and well .
On the issue we are debating here today , I would like to say that we face a weekend that is immensely important for the Union .
We stand on the threshold of realizing a shared strategic political goal in the form of launching EMU .
I agree with Mr Donnelly that the convergence achieved is a powerful recognition of what political will and shared political will can bring about .
As we stand on the threshold of launching this irreversible project , it is important to take stock of some of the unresolved issues .
I want to state , in the clearest possible way , that the Liberal group not only notes with regret but with growing irritation the failure of the Council to resolve the controversy surrounding the nomination of a president for a future European Central Bank .
The Treaty is clear .
The terms of the appointment are clear .
The length of the appointment at eight years is clear .
To interfere with this for political reasons would be an appalling start to this major irreversible strategic project .
We expect the Council to build confidence into this system and not undermine it .
The way to demonstrate that is by making a clear strategic choice this weekend in line with the rule of law and the Treaty in terms of the length of appointment .
What is not at stake is the question of national pride .
What clearly is at stake is the successful launch of the currency .
We have had an interesting debate in producing this report in committee .
My own group has studied with great interest the work of the European Monetary Institute .
It has signalled politically that we need to be concerned in the medium term about some of the pension systems and we share that concern politically .
It has signalled that the need for budget consolidation has not ceased but rather that now , on the threshold of this new system , it has deepened .
We in the Liberal group share that view .
Politically we cannot avoid taking strategic responsibilities .
I like the current shape of the von Wogau report .
I salute the balance and leadership that Karl von Wogau has brought to it .
When we come to vote on this report tomorrow , we will support the candidature of the 11 candidate states .
We want to have a deal that has everyone on board but not at any price .
Mr President , this weekend the ruling powers of the European Union are entering the final strait in the realization of the most important choice of the Maastricht Treaty , the introduction of the euro , the common currency , from 1 January 1999 .
Unaware of the dramatic , harmful repercussions - unemployment , poverty , social exclusion - on working people and on the broad strata of the population , the European Commission report and the report by the European Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy alike celebrate and welcome a convergence that has been achieved in name only .
They are aware , however , that the people and the workers are not celebrating , and that they are not even applauding .
Perhaps from Monday the celebrations will be taken up by others - financial market speculators , international stock markets and those representing large financial institutions , who will see that , by sacrificing the people and their rights , they have gained a strong new currency with which to play their speculative games .
Working people cannot but be worried , especially about the next steps .
The spokespersons of financial institutions , encouraged by the visibly imminent inception of EMU , demand further hardening of fiscal policy , the immediate implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact , and measures for the immediate adjustment of the labour market and the commodities market , in order to further strengthen the euro .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament is reserving this role for itself by adopting many of the proposals of the von Wogau report , a report which insists on placing stricter conditions on EMU than not only those of the European Commission but also those of the Treaty itself .
Under these conditions , Mr President , our group cannot vote for the von Wogau report .
We are all sure about one thing however : the people of Europe will not sit with their arms folded . They will fight back , they will overturn this course of events and they will open the way for a different Europe , a democratic and socially prosperous Europe .
Mr President , the vast majority of the Green group agree with the basic view of the Commission that 11 countries can now start the formulation of a common currency .
This view excludes the idea that some kind of European nucleus is going to be created that will keep an important section of the Union on the outside .
We have never supported that and we are happy to see that the euro is starting off on a very broad base .
We do realize just how huge this project before is .
We do not want to create illusions .
There will certainly be problems , but we also recognize the opportunities that a single currency will provide .
We want Europe to grow , socially and ecologically , and we would like to see the euro used to enhance monetary stability on a global scale .
Mr von Wogau 's report is a very positive one , particularly with regard to employment and the economy .
It appears that the extreme neo-liberalist economic ideas have become somewhat mollified , and this brings with it the hope that we really can create a social Europe .
It is vital to tighten economic cooperation , to act as a counterweight to convergence .
There are , however , problems with the report .
We cannot accept that new demands are suddenly to be made on countries adopting the euro .
Nor do we think it wise or at all acceptable that some should be saying that the Stability and Growth Pact must be strictly applied .
Either it is applied or it is not , but we should like to enquire as to what " strictly applied ' actually means .
We do not think these are the sort of signals we should be sending out .
Furthermore , we do not see that the trend in Belgian and Italian public debt is a matter for concern in itself , as the report suggests .
We believe the trend is in the right direction and we trust that things will continue that way for Belgium and Italy .
Another problem is that the report fails to mention the fact that economic development can happen on quite different time scales among the various regions of the Union .
Shock waves occur from time to time that put Member States in difficult situations .
For this reason , it is vital to install mechanisms whereby Union action can ease the burden on Member States in situations such as these .
And finally , monetary policy can in no way be entirely separated from economic policy .
We wish to stress that we need dialogue on these both , and the European Parliament has a very important role to play here .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , provided with two reports on convergence , that of the EMI and that of the Commission , the main task of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy was to give its opinion on the outline of the first circle of euro participants , and with regard to this central question , the committee 's analysis is completely unambiguous .
There is broad agreement in noting , firstly , the Member States ' performance in relation to the convergence criteria and , secondly , in approving the immediate introduction of the euro in 11 countries which want it and which satisfy in general the criteria established by the Treaty on European Union .
Mr von Wogau 's report expresses clearly this broad agreement on the fundamentals and this is already a sufficient reason for us to approve it .
The discussions which have consequently arisen have only dealt with incidental elements , which have perhaps been overemphasized due to the fact that agreement had been reached on the essentials .
In any case , it seems vital to us that , by tomorrow , all efforts should have been made to ensure a clear position on the part of the House on what is , once again , the most fundamental issue : the introduction of the euro in 11 countries .
Apart from this , on the occasion of this debate , we would like to note a few concerns .
The first relates to what is called the democratic accountability of the European Central Bank , a subject which was mentioned during the debate on the report presented by Mrs Randzio-Plath .
We had the opportunity of saying that the European Parliament was the appropriate body to undertake this supervision , which should be exercised while respecting the principle of the Bank 's independence .
On the other hand , we are worried by the prospect of a multiplication of the places and control procedures which transpired on reading a number of the amendments to be submitted to us tomorrow and which state that the European Central Bank must be answerable to national parliaments .
Such a levelling down of democratic accountability , apart from being impractical , would change that principle itself and threaten , in reality , the construction of a single and independent monetary policy .
It is perfectly desirable that the national central banks should fulfill their duties of informing the national parliaments .
But it seems essential to us that the democratic control of the European Central Bank should remain a matter for the European Parliament .
Our second concern , which I will speak on only briefly since it has already been mentioned , is the issue of the presidency of that Central Bank .
All we would say is that , in order to be a legitimate and effective instrument of a common European future , the European Central Bank must not appear to be something shared between only a few right from the very start .
This is something we hope will be taken into consideration on Saturday .
Other concerns are mentioned by Mr von Wogau in his report .
It is a question of counterbalancing the single monetary policy with other instruments for economic action .
In this respect , we hope that our Parliament and the Commission go a little further than the stage at which common reflection has arrived today and will envisage that , alongside the introduction of a common monetary policy , instruments for joint economic action other than purely monetary ones should , in the near future , be made available to the Union . These must involve taxation and budgetary measures .
Mr President , in the whole of its history , France has never entered into a coalition where it found itself in this minority position .
To claim that Europe is increasing France 's power in the world is nothing but a miserable attempt to dress up as politics the outpourings of vanity and the need for personal glorification .
This illegitimate and artificial construction which is known as the European Union is a planned attack against France , against the sovereignty of the people , the state structures and the society .
But all is not lost , for sooner or later , when the revolutionary forces come to power , a referendum will give a voice back to the people to confirm the superiority of French law over the European treaties .
And justice will be served , for we know the disregard for , or even scorn of , the treaties with which Eurocrats from all quarters claim that the convergence criteria are being satisfied .
Little importance is therefore given to applying the criterion relating to overall debt to Belgium and Italy , or applying the criterion relating to annual budget deficit to Italy , which would have fallen from 6.7 % to 3 % in one year , with a growth rate of only 1.5 % .
Unbelievable , is it not ?
French people are still unaware of this plot , which is the biggest hold-up of the century , and the fact that the franc could disappear completely in 2002 has been completely hidden from them .
This is an accident of the calendar , in the middle of a presidential election !
The French will thus sanction this President who , instead of raising France up , will belittle her , thus betraying the mission confided in him by universal suffrage .
This will be true unless , in a sudden burst of dignity , he puts to a referendum the issue of the concrete introduction of a currency which , until that date , will essentially be only the unit of the external accounts of the State .
Mr President , the possibility that monetary union will begin on 1 January 1999 is the realization of a dream : the people of Europe have said yes to more Community spirit and to a degree of cooperation which goes beyond that of previous structures .
Following the promised strict examination of the prerequisites for participation in monetary union , and after checking the convergence reports from the European Monetary Institute and the European Commission , the European Parliament will quite rightly proceed on the basis of the report by Mr von Wogau to follow the recommendations of the European Commission in supporting a broad monetary union .
With 11 Member States , this will be a broad union which will facilitate the smooth running of the internal market ; 300 million people are bound together in a strong economic force with considerable economic output which will make up 20 % of global trade and 20 % of the global GNP .
It is important that it is a broad union ; this European Parliament has always been in favour of European Economic and Monetary Union starting with a large number of Member States .
Mind you , on occasion we doubted that so many countries in European monetary union could achieve the stability required to join .
Fortunately , the European concept of progress within the framework of European integration proved its worth again : we lay down conditions and set a timetable for meeting them .
This concept has ensured that many Member States can meet the convergence criteria , and we can check this .
This means that the European Parliament can tell Europeans today with optimism and on the basis of a reliable assessment that this European monetary union will be a stable community . The historically low inflation rates are not a nine-day wonder .
Their development over a number of years can be demonstrated . The acceptance of this process by the markets can be seen in the low long-term interest rates ; the exchange-rate stability emphasizes how seriously the Member States are taking their commitments and how great have been the political , economic , financial and monetary efforts in recent years to achieve a result culminating in this broad monetary union .
This process was not fixed on 31 December 1997 , but this date became the obvious one at the first convergence check , when we had to say that monetary union could not start on 1 January 1997 .
Even then we knew that Europe would pull together , that Europe knew it would be a challenge , that we are a small area of the world and that only a united effort , the combination of all our efforts will lead to success and render us fit for the coming century , for the coming millennium .
So today we can confidently say that the European Community will be a stable community , and it is clear that processes which were started in the past are justified in the present .
In particular , those Member States which had to make special efforts because their monetary policy was not as stable as others have undertaken to prove once again through medium-term financial planning that they take not only monetary but also fiscal convergence criteria seriously .
In this way , the European monetary union is uniting us in a community of solidarity with a common destiny .
The success we have achieved so far must be continued .
Mr President , I would like to concentrate on the subject of the public debt : this is an important subject as its level is directly linked to the aim of ensuring that the euro area allows the financial markets to operate well , particularly with regard to the public component .
This is essential to give the euro stability and credibility to ensure that the single currency has the positive effects we are all hoping for .
The question should therefore be seen from two aspects : the fact that the debt should not interfere with the requirements of euro in terms of stability and credibility ; and the fact that it allows the euro area to be characterized by great development .
I therefore believe that we should assess the overall financial balance of the various countries and the prospects in question , which , in addition to the public debt , comprise the financial situation of the private sector , the trends in saving , the net external debt position and the recent performance of their financial markets .
I therefore believe that the single currency does not require a static and purely accounting , almost Manichaean , vision of public finance , but the ability to combine fiscal rigour with prospects for development , which is still the basic reason for Economic and Monetary Union .
Moreover , with high rates of growth and a trend towards reducing debt , the criteria for reducing the ratio between debt and GDP will soon be met .
I wanted to illustrate these concepts because I have proposed three amendments , included in the von Wogau report , to paragraphs 13 , 14 and 15 .
To conclude , Mr President , I wish to insist on the fact that the most important challenge we are faced with at the moment is that of proving that the fiscal rigour and stability that will characterize the euro area will form the basis for establishing a development policy which continues to be the main purpose of Economic and Monetary Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am one of those who have supported Mr von Wogau 's report from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , and I believe that , despite the narrow vote , this report deserves full consent on all the fundamental points .
I support the formal confirmation that the European Parliament is preparing to give to the choice of the euro to 11 countries as from 1 January 1999 , not only because this includes Italy but also because I believe in the political significance of this very broad participation in monetary union .
Today 's Herald Tribune maintains that , by taking this step , the European Union is now something of a federal state : perhaps it is exaggerating , but the political message is clear .
The political impulse of monetary union should now spur on the governments of the states to faster structural reforms , to a reduction in public expenditure , to a lightening of the tax burden , to a reduction in the excessive rigidity of employment and to an effort to make services efficient , and here I am thinking of the banking system in particular .
If these guidelines adopted by the Member States complement the objective of price and currency stability set by the Central Bank , companies will begin to invest again and so create jobs .
Preparation for monetary union has benefited from the virtuous cycle of lower interest rates , which it began itself .
I think that , even without definite orders , all countries , particularly those that have benefited most from the fall in rates , should continue to operate strictly .
Finally , it seems to me that , while expressing satisfaction over this historic stage for Europe , we should not forget the need to strengthen democratic control in the balance of the European institutions , by reviving the Union 's institutional reforms and policy .
Mr President , I share in the joy expressed here that Economic and Monetary Union will now be created on an extremely large scale , but there are three issues I would like to mention that are necessary for EMU to be a success .
First of all it is important that the EMU project brings with it a considerable increase in prosperity and employment .
This is something the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs stressed in its report .
The guidelines from the Luxembourg Employment Summit cannot be allowed just to stew : they must be put into action .
Secondly , it is essential that the role of Parliament as a democratic body that will monitor the actions of the Central Bank is given weight , and that we maintain that stance and ensure that the Central Bank justifies its decisions publicly .
Thirdly , it is vital that EMU does not merely remain a tool for EU Member States alone but that it should extend to other nations including those who are at present negotiating membership .
We have to be flexible on this point .
But I would like to express my concern regarding the talks over what sort of new conditions are going to be imposed in respect of the Stability and Growth Pact .
Parliament is unfortunately out in the cold when it comes to these discussions , and we know that the Council will incorporate into their own recommendations the declaration stressing the serious problem of public debt , while we should be talking about growth and employment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the labour pains have started , the birth of the euro is unstoppable .
This undeniable assertion should not blind us to the fact that the single currency is still an infant at risk . It urgently needs time if not in the incubator , then in the beneficial environment of a socio-ecological reorientation of European economic policy , instead of growing up into a neoliberal , monetarist monster of a supposedly unpolitical currency whose real and exclusive interests are those of the financial asset holders .
This is a highly political decision .
But we need to differentiate politically between two very different questions , that is , the plan to complete the European internal market using European monetary union , and the monetarist , neoliberal plan of the dictates of the financial markets .
Fortunately , we can see that the first phase of the neoliberal monetarist project has largely begun to flag .
The social struggles which in different Member States have produced new governments with new European agendas and sparked off a new debate in Europe had a lot to do with this .
The reforming French government should be given special credit for having placed the debate on an entirely new basis .
The original monetarist convergence criteria are actually being implemented with a great deal more sensitivity .
Tietmeyer thinking has not been setting the tone in Europe .
The idea of a core Europe has foundered in reality .
That is the good news .
It makes it possible for us to agree to launching the euro with 11 Member States .
But we must counter all attempts to say what a wrong-headed German Deutsche Mark-nationalism wants to hear by playing an eleventh hour European poker game .
Belgium and Italy should have no further requirements to meet , and the crazy proposal to reserve the windfall profits to reorganize debts and to forbid the French and others their employment policy must also be thrown out . To act otherwise would mean the euro was really being introduced on the backs of the unemployed , and that is something we cannot tolerate !
As we all know , some corrections must be made . We need an employment policy and effective coordination of macroeconomic policy .
The European Central Bank must have a democratic foundation , and this will probably require the Treaty to be revised .
We must speak plainly , Mr Friedrich .
The Treaty must be applied , and no arguments !
And no qualifying amendments !
Pacta sunt servanda does not provide carte blanche for a late game of poker !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to thank the rapporteur , Mr von Wogau , for this report , and at the same time express just one criticism and one recommendation to him and to those of you listening to me .
I have allowed myself this small criticism , although I am aware of the difficulties of the work of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
We have obviously reached an historic point in the building of Europe .
We are faced with a transition which seemed impossible and inconceivable a few years ago , even a few months ago . We are faced with an effort made by many countries to try and catch this train , to try and give life and substance to this hope that Economic and Monetary Union might - necessarily for those who believe in us , for those who think that this is the plan for the future - lead to the political union of Europe .
From this point of view , some countries have had to make greater efforts , while others , and here I am also talking about Mr von Wogau 's country , have had to deal with a 3 % ceiling that suddenly became difficult , even for the countries that seemed to be the champions of monetary virtuosity .
At a time when the European family is faced with this fact , and there will certainly be opportunities for insisting on this point , we should not spoil this opportunity , disregarding and maintaining criticisms , doubts and uncertainties that may give rise to difficulties , in respect of one country or another .
I believe we should make an assessment - which we can do better than the European Council because we can give an opinion independently - for all countries , taking into consideration those countries that may not have acted in an entirely crystal-clear manner to arrive at the 3 % .
However , this cannot be done in a document that rightly or wrongly has to give a feeling of strong acceptance and also of recognition of the efforts made by the Eleven , for two countries - and one in particular , it would seem - to be more fiscal-orientated than others : not because it is wrong to say this but because there may be other ways .
Moreover , we want this Parliament to be the arbitrator , or at all events the privileged judge or interlocutor of the Central Bank on the policy to be implemented .
To conclude , I believe that the recommendation , or the hope , that I give with my amendment , that will lead Parliament to ask the Council to appoint the President during this European Council , a President in office for eight years , is the recommendation to be made and the request we can make to the people we represent .
Well , now that we have heard Mr Martinez ' prayer - sorry , speech - it is time for Mr Metten to speak .
He has the floor for three minutes .
Mr President , today , as all the speakers have said , is a solemn occasion ; somebody said it is almost religious .
And the von Wogau report underlines that solemnity with elegance and simplicity .
But above all , the von Wogau report highlights the fact that the euro is a leap forward , a big bang , in this process of continental political integration which began 40 years ago .
The von Wogau report thus invites us to preserve the culture of stability , to engage in institutional dialogue - centred on this Parliament - , to coordinate economic policies , to reduce fiscal differences and - more importantly - to do whatever may be necessary to preserve the welfare state , creating jobs and maintaining the social security benefits which are the trademark of the European social model .
But , Mr President , if I believe and hope in religious terms , I also want to say - and I am sure you will let me make a special comment here , since I am the first Spaniard to speak - that for our country , for my country , today is an extraordinarily important moment .
Historically , when Spain stopped looking towards Europe , she turned in upon herself and became selfabsorbed , and a long process of civil conflicts began , creating the image of the two Spains in the eyes of the world .
When Spain once more looked towards Europe - following the teachings of Ortega , among others - , we were able to achieve a peaceful transition , a national reconciliation , culminating in our incorporation into a democratic Europe .
Less than two years ago nobody expected to see Spain in this small family of the single currency , but today our country has made the religious effort to join , because if you believe , you can do anything .
I am glad about that and I will conclude by saying that as a Spaniard I believe in what we are doing and I hope and I pray .
And as a Christian by religion , I know just as much as Mr Martinez .
Mr President , only eight or nine years ago , anyone thinking of a week like this would have been taken for a day-dreamer .
Today we have managed to guide the ship carrying all the essential products for a single currency into port : trust , stability , common commitment and a collective logic that goes beyond the individual .
As on all ships that have made a long voyage , a few germs have got on board , such as uncertainty and scepticism , which we are overcoming with the great medicine of hope .
To paraphrase slightly the words of Mr von Wogau , whom we thank for all his work , who states in his report , " For the first time since the Roman Empire , Europeans from the Irish Sea ... ' - and today Ireland was fortunate enough to be congratulated in this Parliament for the peace achieved - " ... to the Mediterranean will be using the same currency ' , to my Mediterranean . The praise for all this , although much remains to be done , does not just belong to us , but belongs in particular to those who have believed in us and who have worked from the outset .
Like the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , our group will support Mr von Wogau 's report , recognizing in the work of the chairman of the committee the sum total of the work carried out over all these years by all the European institutions but also , and above all , by thousands of unknown people in our daily lives .
The summary of Commissioner de Silguy 's thoughts , whom we thank for his hard work and his patience , is as follows : we have made the euro and now we have to make Europe .
We obviously agree with him , but we also have to take all possible measures to combat the major problems faced by the Community ; we have to make the citizens understand that Europe today is about the single currency but tomorrow it will be about political union .
Finally , we have to set up the Bureau of the European Central Bank , in the most logical and complete form possible , to ensure that all the necessary preconditions for granting the ECB total and independent supremacy on economic policy as from 10 January 1999 are created as soon as possible .
Today we have achieved the single currency . This is a lot , a great deal , but it is not everything .
European citizens are now expecting great and urgent things from us .
They are asking us to fight to achieve these victories we are winning in the economic field , as well as in the social field , so as to help solve the major everyday problems .
But today , for now , we can calmly quote what Gandhi said : " One step at a time is enough for me ' .
Mr President , the von Wogau report examines the capacity of the Member States to fulfil the various criteria .
However , there is one criteria which is not mentioned , but which should be the most important , the main reason why my homeland , Sweden , is not joining EMU , that is , democratic support .
The citizens ' scepticism towards EMU should make every politician and every member of parliament , finance minister and head of government wonder what they are in the process of doing .
The report says that EMU is perhaps the biggest step since the signing of the Treaty of Rome .
It is a step which is being taken without the support of the citizens .
I do not think this is a test of political will , but rather a simple demonstration of power .
A change in the Member States as radical as that entailed by EMU should only be possible if there is strong support from the citizens .
In Germany at least 60 % of the population is opposed to the euro and EMU .
In Sweden the percentage is even higher than in Germany .
The citizens are afraid that the centralization of economic and political decision-making will lead to a policy with increased unemployment and increased difficulty in developing a fair , publicly-financed welfare system .
The report also says we should not forget the political significance of EMU and that it is the first time since the Roman Empire that Europeans from the Irish Sea to the Aegean will use the same currency .
But , ladies and gentlemen , you cannot have forgotten what happened to the Roman Empire , its rise and fall ?
EMU is a very risky political prestige project which could create great tensions in Europe .
The fact that 11 countries appear to be joining EMU is said to guarantee that there will not be a division of the Union , but will we not get that in any case ?
What will happen with the enlargement towards the east ?
Does the single currency not create new tensions , just when negotiations have started ?
Dreams of the Roman Empire or the ' EU dollar ' which will make Europe big and strong are being placed above democracy , the will of the people , the demand for jobs , welfare and a good environment .
That is why , amongst others , we Greens are going to vote against EMU .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the reports from the Commission and the European Monetary Institute on the transition to the single currency are prisoners of the financial criteria defined by the Maastricht Treaty and for this reason they present a completely superficial analysis on convergence between European countries .
We need to examine more closely the underlying national realities in order to distinguish , over and above financial convergence criteria , three great criteria for divergence .
Firstly , there is the divergence in the economic needs of the different countries . Levels of unemployment , labour costs , levels of tax and social security deductions , social and tax structures and the phases of economic cycles all differ greatly from one country to the next .
At the beginning of next year , for example , the future Central Bank is to apply the same universal interest rate to economies which are about to overheat and to others which are in a state of slow growth .
This seem completely impossible to us .
Secondly , there is the divergence of political conceptions .
On the eve of the launch of the single currency , essential questions regarding the management of the future monetary union have still not been resolved , such as those regarding its democratic supervision .
Some want very little control , as stipulated in the Maastricht Treaty , under the pretext of the independence and even the sovereignty of the Central Bank , according to the extraordinary statement in the von Wogau report .
Others want to put in place a form of control which was not anticipated in the Treaty , at the level of the European Parliament , others still would like that control to be carried out by national parliaments .
Which view will prevail ?
We are jumping into monetary unification with our eyes closed .
Finally , and above all , there is the divergence of public opinion .
The single currency project does not enjoy massive consensus within Europe , something which would be absolutely essential in order for it to succeed .
Even in some crucial countries , public opinion is clearly hostile .
That is why the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations is calling on the Council to take a global view of the situation and not to be limited by financial criteria , as stipulated in Article 109j of the Treaty .
We call on the Council to realize that today monetary unification is not possible in an area such as Europe , where a number of different peoples co-exist , without running major risks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Karl von Wogau 's report comes within the perspective of a forced march towards the euro which has been imposed on the people of Europe .
You congratulate yourselves on the success of convergence , but you have to consider at what cost , in terms of unemployment , these results have been achieved .
Monetary union between countries disparate in terms of productivity will cause an increase in unemployment in the less productive countries and will oblige the other countries to pay considerable sums of financial solidarity , thus causing an increase in fiscal pressures .
This model has already been historically observed in Germany : unemployment in the East and an increase in taxes in the West in order to subsidize the East : that was the result of German monetary unification .
In its report of 25 March 1998 , the Commission was forced to recognize this .
I quote : " the exceptional costs linked to German monetary reunification continue to be widely felt ' .
Thus , monetary reunification was desired , for political reasons which I will not judge , in the knowledge that it was having perverse effects on the economy .
Similarly , in Europe , the euro is the result of a political desire to remove anything that is national , without consulting the people in a referendum , and regardless of the economic cost of the move .
This will create a political situation which will be difficult to handle .
When French citizens understand that the power to create unemployment in their country will be situated in Frankfurt , it will be detrimental to the cohesion of our peoples .
What is more , we are playing with democracy .
Our colleague 's report says clearly that monetary sovereignty - he uses the word sovereignty - will reside in Frankfurt .
Fiscal and budgetary sovereignty will be curbed by the Stability Pact put in place elsewhere .
Unemployment and technocratic power , that is what this gives us .
I doubt that people will accept such a policy .
You are proclaiming prosperity and democracy , but you are going to exacerbate the injustice of unemployment and maintain the fiction of a democracy , which increasingly hides the real power of stateless technocrats .
The great Greek orator , Demosthenes , once said that no unjust and untruthful power can last for long .
This is what I foresee for the current governments , who want to force the hand of the peoples of Europe by taking their national sovereignty away from them .
Mr President , I think we are in a good condition to embark on this great adventure which the people of Europe have been waiting for .
However , there remains much work ahead of us .
This is the task that we must commence today .
We are in a good condition , firstly , because we are introducing the euro in 11 countries .
Who would have thought such a thing possible a few years ago ?
It could have been more countries , if some had not requested the possibility of an opt-out clause , or if others had not put themselves in a situation which made it impossible for them to participate .
My second observation is this : I note that , in the end , these famous criteria have been interpreted as they should be and , as the von Wogau report quite rightly states , not in a strictly quantifiable manner but in trends , although I am a little surprised that some of them have , on occasions , been able to change in the hierarchy of values .
My third observation is that we have modified the direction of our economic policy .
It is true that everyone recognizes today that monetary policy has an effect on the real economy and that the success of the third phase of Economic and monetary union assumes economic and social cohesion and respect for the objectives set out in Article 2 of the Treaty .
This is undoubtedly where the building site of tomorrow commences .
I would like to insist on two points .
The first is harmonization in the fiscal , social and environmental domains .
If we want this harmonization to be an upwards one , there must be a will for it , guided by political power .
If not , it will take place via the market and we know that it will be a downwards harmonization .
Without threatening the capacity of Member States to pursue budgetary policies for labour and employment which correspond to the democratic options chosen by their citizens , such a harmonization must be initiated .
In this respect , I am naturally thinking of the policy initiated in my country regarding a reduction in working hours .
But it is also and above all the coordination of economic policies that is important so that , in the future , we may have greater growth in Europe , greater domestic demand , investment and jobs .
For this , and I come to my fourth observation , Mr von Wogau 's report rightly states that the procedures and tools which we now have available must be improved and strengthened .
A first stage has already been initiated with the establishment of the euro Council , the forerunner to an economic government , but this is still in the future .
There is then , of course , the role of our Parliament .
I am one of those who thinks that a federal authority - as the Central Bank will be - and a European policy - as monetary policy will be - can only effectively be controlled by a European authority .
If those who want to establish other forms of control wish to cause the death of this authority , the European Parliament , then they should say so .
Under certain conditions , which will have to be developed , there are parallel forms .
It is here that democratic responsibility regarding Economic and Monetary Union must be exercised .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before it is even achieved , monetary union has already produced two spectacular results .
It has forced Member States to put their public finances in order .
This was not so easy to begin with .
It has also protected the European Monetary System from the financial disturbances that have affected the countries of the Far East .
It is the first time that a crisis on such a scale has not resulted in an attack on weak currencies such as the pound or the French or Belgian franc , or in a rise in the Deutsche Mark , a currency of refuge on such occasions .
Besides the numerous arguments which are regularly repeated in favour of the euro , there is one that is rarely mentioned , and I have not yet heard it today . It is the recovery of the use of the monetary instrument which is now completely frozen due to the need to maintain stability of intra-Community exchange rates under the punctilious supervision of the markets .
The impact of these rates currently affects half of Europe 's GDP .
After monetary union , it will only affect 10 % .
That which has been the unique privilege of the United States will also become that of the Europeans , if they want it .
The best way of facing up to the challenge of globalization is to give the political powers the means to escape the tyranny of the markets .
That the communists and the National Front find themselves united today in a nostalgia which turns its back on the state of the world should not surprise us .
Our gifted public entertainer , the political satirist Martinez , deserved the line given to him and which I draw on now , from an editorial by Claude Humbert , " the old enemy accomplices now find themselves amongst the nationalist odds and ends under the overturned effigies of Marx and Déroulède .
Red and white , it is the time for cherries and the old France of borders and the bugle ' .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the report we are asked to give our opinions on , irrespective of the aspect of greater or lesser rigour in respect of one Member State or another , involves the approval of the forthcoming intergovernmental decision on the entry into force of Economic and Monetary Union .
The electorate I represent have shown that they are against this Europe that is about to be born and believe that is a real swindle for manufacturing in Padania .
At the time , the establishment of convergence criteria gave rise to a race to balance the books , which was often more apparent than real within the individual states .
Italy , in particular , managed to make its fairly contrived accounts credible , thanks to a marked growth in tax revenue , brought about by increasing the tax burden to the detriment of manufacturing industries .
Staying in Europe will now require further belt-tightening and this will weaken the competitiveness of the system even further .
Our competitors , both outside and within the European Union , are rubbing their hands at the thought that businessmen in Padania will be forced to fight in an increasingly competitive market , with the burden of the welfare state , the Italian national political class and the South on their shoulders .
Obviously , in Padania , that is within a self-confident community , tensions will arise with unforeseeable consequences and it is no secret that Padania has already started on an institutional path that will lead it to independence .
I therefore believe that these peoples , who no-one consulted on this monetary union , will soon make the weight of their own opinion felt .
Mr President , we are about to take an historic step in the true sense of the word , that clearly separates the " before ' from the " after ' .
It is also a step that is beset by problems , not those that a certain type of bigotry sees in the debt of countries that have for several years undertaken a credible , irreversible financial recovery with no miracles - Italy achieved its miracle when , from being a poor , backward country , it became the fifth economic power in the world - , but rather the problems of a political vacuum between the transfer of monetary supremacy and the strict conservation of national fiscal and political supremacy . We will have to fill this vacuum .
Following the adoption of a single currency , nothing in Europe will be the same again .
Today we can measure the dramatic rift that would open in the Union between core countries , which virtually coincide with the Deutsche Mark area , and countries driven back into an anxious and unstable periphery .
Now they all have to move along the lines of development indicated by monetary union : the consolidation of stability , the guarantee of democratic responsibility taken by the European Central Bank , the construction of a Union macroeconomic policy , the democratic strengthening of its political institutions .
One eminent American economist , known for his mistaken predictions , has seen in the future of the euro the threat of civil war between the European countries .
While preparing to vote for the euro , we see a future of solidarity between the nations of Europe and a more reasonable balance in relation to the domination of the dollar .
I congratulate Herr von Wogau on the efforts he has made in this report .
British Members of the Group of the European People 's Party greatly admire his chairmanship of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee .
It is with regret , therefore , that we will abstain on his report .
We do so in the first instance because the United Kingdom is not going to be a founder member of the monetary union . That is a fact , as Members know , which I personally very deeply regret .
But I believe it right to demonstrate that the hope of the British Government that it is possible to be both at the heart of European affairs and evade the resolution of British Membership of EMU is a dangerous illusion .
We also wish to demonstrate that while we understand the desire in this Parliament to achieve the broadest possible political support for this report , that has been achieved at the cost of denying the serious future difficulties that participating governments will have in running their public finances in line with the stability pact .
Let there be no doubt , British Members of the Group of the European People 's Party want monetary union to succeed .
I personally have devoted a large part of my time in this Parliament to the creation of the euro .
It is from this standpoint that we support the efforts of Finance Minister Waigel in wishing further undertakings from all Member Governments to run balanced budgets over the cycle and reducing historic debt to 60 % of GDP .
I wish the Parliament had supported Mr Waigel more .
It is a pity that there are those in the Socialist Group and elsewhere who have attacked the absolute independence of the Central Bank which was the cornerstone of the Maastricht Treaty but who are reluctant to enhance our overview of Member States ' budgetary arrangements .
This is a particular pity since it would open up the possibility of serious cooperation between the European Parliament and national Parliaments .
Therein lies the best chance of correcting the democratic deficit .
I myself am absolutely convinced that the euro of eleven will succeed in the long run .
That success may be a rougher ride in the markets because we have chosen softer words today than we should have done .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this debate is taking place at the end of a process which has engaged the greater part of the European Union 's energies throughout this whole decade . The road has been long .
It began with the signing of the Treaty on European Union , or even earlier , with the preparatory work of the Delors Committee . The efforts on the part of the Union 's institutions and Member States , in order to create the right conditions for entry into the third stage of monetary union , have been considerable .
Today we are witnessing the moment when success will be announced .
Eleven Member States , comprising about 300 million people , will participate in the single currency from 1 January next year .
Thus a broad and balanced monetary union is born , which will allow a solid and stable single currency to be launched , to be joined over the next few years by the other four Member States . That is a complete certainty .
At the moment , votes are being taken and resolutions passed in the parliaments of the various Member States , and tomorrow we will vote on this report here in the European Parliament , as a sort of prologue to the solemn vote on 2 May .
As regards the present vote , I want to stress the following aspects .
Firstly , this vote , like the one on Saturday , has the value of taking place in the only institution of the Union whose legitimacy arises directly out of universal suffrage .
Secondly , as a consequence of what I just said , this vote will allow people to see which of the European political forces support this momentous step in the building of Europe .
As a Socialist , I want to say that I am glad our group is voting positively . And as a Spanish Socialist , I would like to add how pleased I am with the Socialist Party 's contribution to Spain 's incorporation into the third stage of union , first in government and then in opposition .
Thirdly , I want to emphasize that the resolution we are voting on today is a balanced text , which sums up the fundamental reasons behind Parliament 's support for the introduction of the single currency .
I will conclude now , Mr President .
I started my speech talking about the end of a process .
I want to end by saying that we are also at the start of a new epoch , in which the role of this Parliament - as the monetary authority 's partner for dialogue , and the guarantor of control over its performance - will undoubtedly be strengthened .
Mr President , the single currency has had many critics , not least in my own country .
Some have said that it is an impossible project which can never be carried out .
Others have said that only a few countries are going to be in at the start .
These critics have been proved wrong .
In fact , 11 countries are going to be in at the start .
Everything now points to this being a successful project .
My own country , Sweden , is not going to join from the beginning , which I personally regret .
However , that does not mean that we are not going to work actively to ensure that this is a successful project .
Nor does it mean that my country is not going to join in the future .
I myself am going to work actively for that .
In addition , if you participated in the first two stages of EMU , that was important too .
When Sweden became a member of the European Union just under three years ago , we had a large budget deficit and high interest rates .
Today we have a balanced budget , low interest rates and a stable economy .
That gives us opportunities for the future .
It was therefore important to have participated in the first two stages .
However , I would like to say that we need more than EMU .
The fight against unemployment also needs to be coordinated .
In that respect the Amsterdam Treaty and the Luxembourg Summit are a success .
I can also reveal to you that the Swedish parliament has just voted for the Amsterdam Treaty with 226 votes in favour and 40 against .
But even that is not enough .
We need greater coordination of macroeconomic policies , greater coordination of tax policies and more investment in infrastructure .
The fact is that if we are to make EMU and other aspects of economic policy a project of the people , we must see results .
So far , the people have not seen these results .
Finally , I think the Bank should be independent , but at the same time be under democratic supervision .
The natural place for this democratic control is the European Parliament .
Mr President , Mr von Wogau , ladies and gentlemen , as I was travelling from Strasbourg to Austria following the last sitting in Strasbourg , I was delighted to note that the frontier barrier between Germany and Austria had been removed .
This time , when I return from Brussels to Austria , there will be a fixed exchange rate between the Deutsche Mark , the schilling and the Belgian franc , and in fact throughout all the 11 states .
This brings great immediate advantages for our companies .
The risks of the exchange rate are removed , and we can make more precise calculations more easily ; we will be able to enjoy these advantages next week .
On January 1 , we will have a single currency .
That too will bring with it huge advantages , not only for company balance sheets , but also in the comparability of the various deals on offer . As a result , Europe will become more competitive .
Who would have thought back at the beginning , when discussions about the euro started , that 11 countries would be involved right from the start ?
The more pessimistic among us thought there would be 6 or 7 countries .
Today there are 11 , and I forecast that by 2002 , there will be 15 !
It is my belief that countries will not be able to afford to stay outside , and we must think about how we can help those countries who are willing to join .
We have many tasks ahead of us , and I am proud that Europe is able to cope with them !
Mr President , on entering Brussels at the moment , you can see a large poster with the slogan , " Let us be concrete and positive ' , with regard to a Belgian political party .
I like this slogan because it is reasonable and moderate .
It is , I think , the spirit that we should have with regard to monetary union , in the face of the nationalist demagogy and the gloom-mongering of the extreme Left who rant and rave against monetary union .
I , too , would like to take up this slogan .
Yes , let us be positive with regard to monetary union .
As you know , the Socialists voted against Mr von Wogau 's report in committee , not because of the work of the rapporteur , which was excellent , but because of certain amendments which were voted for in committee and which have weighed the issue down .
I do not think that the European Parliament should be more orthodox than the most orthodox of central bank presidents .
The Stability and Growth Pact must be respected ; we add " rigorously ' to this in our report .
I could propose any number of adverbs to you : formally , absolutely , clearly , sincerely , exactly , and so on .
These are just differences in style , nuances which add nothing .
The socialists want to be positive and want to vote for Mr von Wogau 's report , on condition that a serious and reasonable approach with regard to respect for stability is approved .
I think this has finally been achieved .
We also want to be concrete .
On a financial and monetary level , the current situation is full of potential .
This is due to the movement towards the euro . The euro has already created , and will create , new potential to respond to the hazards of the economic situation and to create jobs .
It will also deepen political union and curb warlike nationalism .
Mr President , let us therefore have a firm desire to put this potential to good use .
Let us be positive and concrete in the face of the enormous opportunities with which the euro presents us .
May I rebut John Stevens ' suggestion that the Socialist Group is soft on the independence of the ECB .
We are not but we are equally passionate on ensuring that bank 's democratic accountability .
On the brink of historic decisions for Europe and the introduction of the euro , we should step back and contemplate and celebrate the remarkable achievement of eleven Member States qualifying for EMU .
The benign scenario of low inflation and low interest rates is a resounding tribute to the countries entering EMU .
Sometimes commentators do not see the wood for the trees - two countries in particular have been singled out for fevered attention on the sole question of the viability of their public debt to GDP ratios .
A strict reading of the Maastricht Treaty does permit them to qualify , as verified by the Commission , EMI and by the German Federal Court , an August body indebted to no one .
Moreover , we have the back-stop of the Stability and Growth Pact which will ensure sustainability of this fiscal rectitude and the promise of Belgium and Italy themselves to continue to consolidate their public debt ratios .
Now is the time for us to raise our heads from the minutiae of the convergence criteria .
Let us gaze on the sunlit uplands of the euro which beckon ever more strongly .
The golden prize which is ours for the taking is a dynamic single European market , quickened by the introduction of the single currency .
It is that market , the world 's biggest market , which will offer jobs and prosperity for our people and let us never forget we have the market to create the currency for the benefit of the people of Europe and not the other way around .
In the not too distant future , when Britain is emerged from the slough of despond of the Thatcher and Major years , the United Kingdom too will join the long march of Everyman to the city on the hill .
We , too , will apply a single currency in a single market in our singular Europe .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for his competent , if brief , extract .
I wish to move the European Economic and Monetary Union in a direction which is more socially just .
A common single currency will strengthen our position in the world , economically and politically .
The euro will become a major currency , but from a major currency like this I urge that we get the opposite of what we did from currency speculation and from certain banks .
Unemployment is our greatest problem , as the report states , and the European Central Bank simply cannot ignore it .
The Bank will be independent , and no one will be able to dismiss its management , no matter what mistakes it makes .
No organization with so much power can be exempt from responsibility .
We in Parliament have fortunately taken a decision to get the ECB to accept democratic responsibility and agree to open negotiations .
It is absolutely vital that common European solutions are applied to any country in economic difficulties .
Hopefully , it will aid the struggle for a worldwide economy based on social fairness .
The single currency of democratic countries will make demands on democracy .
It is not enough for markets to have confidence in the euro : our nations must share that confidence , and that will come about by seeing to the needs of our citizens .
The tone of Mr von Wogau 's report is very monetarist .
He takes a harder and less flexible line than many Member States do .
Mr von Wogau does , however , deserve to be praised for the optimism he expresses in his report regarding employment .
That is precisely why an inflexible position on following the Stability and Growth Pact to the letter seems gratuitous in a report that deals with the introduction of a common currency .
Mr President , as we have seen , the decisions which will be made in Brussels in the next few days will be observed by many of us with excitement , and by some with enthusiasm .
However , a great number of citizens of the union are sceptical and concerned about the introduction of the euro .
The fact that in figures for total debt , only three candidate countries were under 60 % and two were over 120 % is in fact deeply worrying .
This makes it all the more important to stress , as does Mr von Wogau 's report , that the strict observance of the Stability and Growth Pact by all participants in the European currency union is imperative .
The European Parliament must call for a guarantee that the euro will be as stable as the most stable of those currencies which it will replace .
I would like to use the brief minute I have at my disposal to express in all objectivity my personal congratulations to Mr von Wogau on his well-balanced report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the eve of an historic European Council , given that the Heads of State or Government are going to take a decision on the launch of Economic and Monetary Union , Mr von Wogau 's excellent report enables us to measure the distance covered .
For once we can be delighted with this , and I am pleased with the extremely favourable response that the Commission 's recommendation for the 11 Member States has received .
Indeed , throughout this long debate , in which some 40 of you have spoken , I have heard no criticism of the quality of the Commission 's work , nor of the actual content of its proposals , even if the debate on economic policy is a wide and open one , as is normal in a democracy .


I agree with Mr Giansily , Mrs Randzio-Plath , Mr Rübig , Mr Harrison and Mrs Berès , who have put the debate into perspective , an historic perspective I believe , since in effect it concerns the culmination of the great achievement which Europe has now been working towards for more than 40 years .
It gives me great satisfaction to see what work has been accomplished .
Who could have imagined such an achievement even a year ago , perhaps even in this distinguished House itself ?
This is not the result of chance , or even of the Member States ' remarkable efforts regarding convergence . This success is the result of a common political will to respect the conditions and the timetable laid out in the Treaty on European Union .
On this subject , and since the debate has been a general one , allow me to reflect for a few moments on the method which has led us to this success and which is worthy of some consideration , before I make a few comments and provide some information on the no less important task ahead of us .
Indeed , we should not now be concentrating on 2 May , but on what lies ahead after that date .
The euro must not be a problem child , but tomorrow it will be a new-born baby , and we must take responsibility for its harmonious and balanced development .
First of all , the arrival of the euro is the success of a method based firstly on political will .
Without this political will , such a venture could never have succeeded .
It has been the essential guarantee of an achievement unique in European history .
Every European Council since 1995 has , in spite of everything , expressed this unshakeable will on the part of the Heads of State or Government .
They have been able to use the political and practical consequences for each of them in order to proceed , for example , - and this is important - towards improving their public finances , and to reducing their deficits to less than 3 % .
I believe it is this very political will which enables me to inform you today that the statutes of the national central banks , mentioned less than a month ago in the convergence report as still not fully in conformity , are so today .
The four countries in question , Austria , Spain , Luxembourg and France , have completed or , in the case of France , should complete this evening , the parliamentary legislative procedures enabling compatibility of all of the central banks ' statutes .
With regard to the European Central Bank , since many of you have mentioned this , and in order to dispel any misunderstanding , I would like to say that it is the Commission 's position that the Treaty should be strictly enforced .
The Council cannot cut a mandate in two , they must appoint a President for the length of the mandate provided for in the Treaty .
Nevertheless , the less said for the moment regarding the problem of the European Central Bank , the better .
Let us leave it to the Heads of State or Government to do their job since it is they who must decide .
Mr Friedrich earlier said on this subject , " Europe needs confidence ' .
Well , I believe that this will come naturally in the meeting , when the Heads of State or Government unanimously appoint the President of the Central Bank and members of the Executive Board .
The second important factor in the method is convergence .
Since you know the figures as well as I do , I will give only one example : improvements in public deficits .
Let me nevertheless remind you that in 1993 , the average public deficit recommended for the 11 countries was 5.5 % . This was reduced to 2.5 % in 1997 .
I really have to say , especially to those Members situated on the extreme right of this House , that these figures have not been fiddled . They have been verified , they are correct .
As a representative of the Commission , I cannot accept the slightest suspicion regarding the quality of work that has been carried out , particularly with regard to statistics and with regard to the information which has been made available to you to enable you to make a judgement .
This result , which is all the more impressive given the unfavourable economic climate , thus means that improvements in public finances have essentially been achieved through an effective reduction in expenditure : given an overall reduction of 3.7 % for the 15 countries , the reduction in expenditure has been 2.8 % .
You can thus see that it is largely a reduction in expenditure which has enabled the reduction in public deficit to be achieved , rather than the economic climate or one-off measures which have become long term measures , or an increase in revenue .
It is this which leads us to say that the improvements in public finances are lasting ones , and the markets have recognized the lasting nature of convergence .
I have heard little mention of the durability of convergence during the debate , and this seems to me to be an essential factor in the transition to the single currency .
The markets have noted it , since interest rates are today at an historically low level .
This permits me to say that from now on there exists a true culture of stability in Europe which now needs to be consolidated , meaning that the commitments undertaken , in particular in Amsterdam , must now be implemented without delay , and without taking on new commitments , I can assure you , Mr Donnelly .
The third element of the method is a systematic preparation for the introduction of the euro .
I would , however , like to remind you , as we have worked closely together for three and a half years now , of the wonderful work that we have accomplished together with regard to technical legal regulations ; meticulous work , essential for the proper functioning of Economic and Monetary Union .
Indeed , to ensure a good currency from the start , a good legal framework was required , a good regulatory framework .
This was an essential factor in its credibility and to do this we needed to ensure , with necessary prior warning , the visibility and readability which companies needed in order to prepare themselves in good time .
This is now an established fact , and the House contributed greatly to this .
Within this preparatory work I must also mention the remarkable work carried out by the European Monetary Institute , which will become a reality in a few days from now as a result of the decisions to be taken by the European Central Bank .
Finally , the fourth element of the method , and I am surprised to have heard so little about this this evening , is the mobilization of the life blood of Europe .
Would we have achieved such a mobilization without the initiative taken - primarily by this House - to develop informative action within all the Member States as from 1996 , without further delay ?
Today , if the European , national , regional and local public administrations , banks , companies and social partners are mobilized , it is largely due to this initiative which was jointly undertaken by Parliament and the Commission .
I say all of this because I believe that we should be proud of ourselves .
And why not , for once ?
The achievement of the euro has been a model of interinstitutional cooperation .
This must continue as soon as the European Council has come to an end , in order to ensure the democratic accountability which many of you mentioned earlier , and to bring about growth and employment as effectively as possible , for that is indeed the objective of EMU , but also of the Union , on the eve of the birth of the euro .
It is on this second point that I would now like to concentrate a little , to share with you my thoughts on what I think our plan of action , our agenda , must be for the coming months .
Firstly , there is the continuation of budgetary improvements .
The return to a balance in public finances in the medium term is the only way to free up savings for job-creating investment and to find budgetary leeway once again .
That is why this is the central objective of the Stability and Growth Pact , although you should be aware that , in relation to the current level of deficit in the European Union as a whole - 2.5 % - , to find a balance once again means freeing up nearly 150 billion euros for investment .
I believe that the current period of economic growth must thus be put to good use in order to speed up budgetary consolidation .
We must not spend the money before we have it ; efforts at budgetary improvements must be maintained .
The hardest part has been achieved and Europe is already reaping the benefits , so we must not relax our efforts now .
Similarly , within this framework and in answer to Mrs Berès , I want to emphasize the importance of coordinating of economic policies , not only with relation to budgets but also in the fields of employment and competitiveness .
We have the tools : the broad outlines of economic policy , the stability programmes .
We have the bodies : Parliament , the Ecofin Council , the euro Council .
It is now important for our governments to prove their political will by implementing all of this .
The second absolute priority for economic policy is the challenge of employment .
To Mr Hughes and Mr Paasilinna , I would say that EMU does not necessarily mean more unemployment .
On the contrary , EMU should signify more jobs .
This is why , through the Luxembourg Council - Mr Thomas Mann mentioned this - the Union made employment an issue of common interest , a priority for our economic policy . Beyond the development of a healthy macroeconomic policy , only adequate and concerted structural reforms will be able to reduce unemployment in Europe in the long term .
In this respect , the euro must be the catalyst in the fight against unemployment .
Tomorrow , we will be discussing the broad outlines of economic policy .
This year , a common strategy for employment will be at the heart of the Commission 's overall work .
Similarly , the Commission is currently examining national plans which have just been presented and will give its conclusions in Cardiff .
There are two other issues which are important for the future .
I will only mention them in passing , given the lack of time to go into any depth . One is the international dimension of the euro , on which we have said little this evening .
How , with the euro , will Europe be able to speak with one voice ?
This is also a major challenge to be taken up , if we want to derive all the advantages and benefits that the introduction of its own currency will give to the number one economic and trading power in the world .
Finally , the last challenge is that of ensuring acceptance of the currency by all .
On one point , at least , I am in agreement with Mrs Schörling , that is , the importance of people .
We cannot ignore them , and within this framework each person must be able to familiarize himself rapidly with the new currency and use it comfortably and with confidence .
That is the reason why communication strategies must be accelerated in all Member States .
In conclusion , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me once again to say how pleased I am with the excellent collaboration we have had over the past three and a half years , which has been one of the keys to the success of this historic project .
I would personally like to thank Mr von Wogau , in particular , as well as Mrs Randzio-Plath , for their tireless commitment and their support of the euro throughout these last months , which have not always been easy .
I now believe that the European Parliament is going to see its role extended , whether in relation to the process of coordination of economic policy , in relation to the democratic accountability of Economic and Monetary Union or in relation to efforts to convince public opinion .
I am very happy with our collaboration .
I am also very happy with your sense of responsibility and since Mr Garosci said earlier , " We have made the euro and now we have to make Europe ' , I would say that this is a fine ambition to have .
Mr Fayot said , " Let us be positive and concrete ' . This , too , is a fine attitude .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
1998 annual economic report
The next item is the report ( A4-0133 / 98 ) by Mr Gasòliba I Böhm , on behalf of the Committee on Economic Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the communication from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions on " Growth and Employment in the Stability-Oriented Framework of EMU - Economic policy reflections in view of the forthcoming 1998 Broad Guidelines ' ( COM ( 98 ) 0103 - C40135 / 98 ) ( Annual Economic Report )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I wanted to say thank you for all the collaboration I received while working on this report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and for the fact that it was approved almost unanimously in committee .
So the report was produced not by me but by the committee . It reflects a series of points which were mentioned during the previous debate , but focusing on what must be done - and I stress that - after the euro .
I also want to point out that when my report was being discussed in committee we already had the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and their main proposals have been included in the report .
That was not the case with the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , which arrived later .
But as rapporteur , I would have no objection to that committee 's proposals being incorporated into the report 's conclusions under the Hughes procedure .
To make sure that Commissioner de Silguy does not complain that we have taken no notice of the Commission 's report , I shall point out that , obviously , the report I am defending here refers to the Commission 's Annual Economic Report . This annual report is slightly special because it does not conform to the normal structure of that institution 's annual economic reports , but is a response to the specific situation of what we could call " the year of the euro 's constitution ' .
So it focuses on two aspects - growth and employment - and uses a methodology we have accepted .
However , our report points out that it should be different in future .
It should consider and offer a different type of analysis from that used in this year 's report , introducing , for example , a medium-term analysis a methodology - which exists in economics - based on scenarios ; it should not just envisage a linear development of the European economy , but take account of the effects of what we call " asymmetric shocks ' , not just at Member State level but also at regional level .
Having made those points to show the Commissioner that we have paid attention to the European Commission report , I want to use the few minutes left to reflect on two aspects .
The first of these is growth .
Growth is a basis - not the only one - for progress , and also for employment .
The present report mentions some aspects which have perhaps been marginalized by the very line of stability and solvency demanded by monetary union and the euro , but which need to be taken up again .
For example , we have to bear in mind the need to boost public and private investment for productive purposes - an essential aspect of increasing the productivity and competitiveness of the European economy ; we must pay attention to and strengthen essential aspects of research and development , education and professional training ; and , obviously , we must take account of all those aspects which can make this Europe , strengthened by the euro , competitive at an internal level - or in other words , see that it offers more opportunities for the economies which can adapt to the new demands . This is also true at international level , because I agree with Mr de Silguy 's statement about the importance of the euro 's international dimension .
The second aspect I want to mention concerns employment .
In our report we have been very conscious , based on the European Commission 's report , of the euro as a driving force for employment .
We have also talked about the need to make the labour markets more flexible , decrease the indirect costs bearing on the creation of a new job , and take account of the fiscal climate . Obviously , this whole process needs to result in renewal within the business sector , and we especially stress the role of small and medium-sized enterprises as an engine for development , progress and job creation .
Mr President , this is in fact the first annual report since the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Luxembourg Summit .
In itself it is understandable that the employment guidelines envisaged there receive little or no attention in this report .
I hope that in future reports they will always form an integral part of the report , as well as benchmarking in the sphere of labour market strategy .
One of the important objectives of the Amsterdam Summit and also of the Luxembourg Summit was to create coordination , a balance , between macroeconomic policy and employment policies .
I must confess that I do not really understand why scarcely any attention has been paid to this balance , this coordination , in the annual report before us .
You will see in our report that we urge that proposals for coordination are made as soon as possible .
The Ecofin and Social Council should discuss this subject together - I am not saying how often , but it should be at least a few times a year - and not stay put in separate camps .
An article in the European Voice shocked me . In it , a statement to be put to the Summit this weekend was leaked in which government leaders are asked to say that reducing public debt levels rather than reducing unemployment is their main priority .
The argument often used is that this leaves more room to do something about unemployment in future .
I wonder if you could tell me , Commissioner , when this future will start ?
Recently , last weekend , appalling elections took place in Germany , in which the right had an unexpectedly huge result .
If you do not link this to the unbridled unemployment there , than you must be wilfully blind .
I would like to stress this emphatically so that you will finally understand that for many people the future must start now . I would like to stress emphatically that it is madness to expect the euro to mean something if we do not start to take concrete measures which will allow people to gauge whether the authorities are addressing unemployment .
This report does not meet these criteria at all , and in this regard I think that what I have read about the proposals for the end of this weekend is a disgrace .
Mr President , I welcome the report of Mr Gasòliba and congratulate him on the content .
As he has said , it is the result of collaborative work and we in the Socialist Group are largely very happy with the content .
Perhaps even more important today , can I also thank the Commissioner and his services because we in the Socialist Group have long been calling for a better type of annual economic report from the Commission which addresses the real problems facing our citizens .
I am glad to say that for the first time in recent years we now have a report which can not only be read sensibly by people outside the European institutions but which also reflects their concerns .
I would like to thank the civil servants in the Commission for the work that they have done on this .
In particular , I want to draw attention to a number of points that have been highlighted by the Commission and which Mr Gasòliba has taken up in his own text .
The first question is in relation to investment .
The Commission have recognized in the Annual Economic Report the fact that during this period of consolidation we have seen a very serious fall in the level of investment , and in particular public investment , within the European Union and the Commission themselves recommend that Member States must be very cautious that during the period of consolidation not to completely undermine public investment .
We should seek ways to boost that , in particular , by public-private partnerships .
I hope that Commissioner de Silguy will press this point when he meets the Finance Ministers to discuss the conclusions of the European Parliament 's report and the Commission 's text .
In particular , in relation to monetary policy , we made the point earlier in the debate on economic and monetary union , that under Article 105 of the Treaty when price stability is guaranteed then the monetary authority can address the wider objectives of the European Union .
We want a monetary policy that will help to promote employment and growth within the European Union .
The Commission have mentioned this in their text in a very clear way and we want to make sure that the monetary authorities in Europe , particularly the European Central Bank , address this point too .
In addition , for the first time in the Commission 's report they also highlight the fact that the European Union is largely an internal trading community .
90 % of our GDP is generated by internal trade within the European Union .
For the first time the Commission have said that the macroeconomic policy of the European Union must be based upon stimulating internal demand within the fifteen Member States .
In the broad economic guidelines we want specific proposals from the Commission on how we stimulate internal demand within the European Union .
It is not a question of international trade , it is a question of internal demand .
Let me say , finally , I particularly welcome the fact that we have held these two debates today .
I believe we are not only looking at a monetary union but we are looking at an economic union and it is right today that we should address the process of establishing a monetary union at the same time as we deal with the Annual Economic Report of the European Union .
First I would like to welcome the Gasòliba Report on the Annual Economic Report from which I believe it is clear that within the European Union there has been stable economic growth since 1996 .
Investment growth is estimated to be about 4.7 % in 1998 and , hopefully , 5.5 % in 1999 .
2.5 % , of course , of the domestic demand is forecast for the next two years .
A small but stable growth in unemployment has been registered and 1997 is at a new level .
The macroeconomic pillars for the future coordination of national economic policies would , of course , be based on a monetary policy for the stability of prices and reduction of public debt .
What is important about all this is that we can be assured of low inflation and interest rates and in my own country , Ireland , the public deficit has been reduced by 11 % of GNP since the 1980s and the public debt has been reduced from 115 % to 65 % in the same period .
But it is also true , thankfully , that the situation is improving elsewhere within the Union .
It is clear for Ireland that EMU will result in continued growth , job creation , low inflation , low interest rates and elimination of transaction costs .
It is good for mortgage-holders , businesses and a country like Ireland exporting a substantial percentage of our goods to other parts of Europe that we will now have the same currency .
It will be helpful , of course , for tourism which is also so important for our country .
It will stifle , of course , currency speculators and we recall only too vividly the situation which we had a few years ago .
In conclusion , congratulations to Mr Gasòliba on the presentation of a fine report in the Annual Economic Report .
Mr President , the Annual Economic Report for 1998 should have been an opportunity to evaluate the roads we have travelled along and to correct strategies and policies .
Those opportunities have been missed , because the road to the euro has acquired such real and symbolic significance that it has dented , if not destroyed , our ability to evaluate , and , a fortiori , to correct and retrace our steps .
The Gasòliba report adopts the stance that has virtually become dogma , namely that the euro and the Stability Pact are essential tools for growth and job creation , and that the obstacles preventing these tools from doing their work are non-labour costs , lack of adaptability on the part of workers , and over-regulation .
If we could dispose of those obstacles , uncouple the ECB from the economic situation and co-ordinate economic policies under the iron collar of the budget , we would be in ' euro-Eldorado ' .
That is not the way we see it .
We are worried about the emphasis placed on wage differentiation in this scenario , in the way it is in the United States .
There is a clear tendency for gaps to widen - and the American ' model ' would accelerate that tendency .
That is why we are pleased to note that the rapporteur considers the American case too extreme to be used as a model .
We also want to draw attention to our amendments : a tax on speculative capital profits , a reduction in working hours without loss of pay and an evaluation of how the development of EMU will affect unemployment .
Mr President , this is a question not only of economic growth , but of economic growth which makes sense .
A European economic policy means a socio-ecological market economy .
This requires not only the rapid introduction of the energy tax - and here I would thank Mr Monti for his energetic work - but also a social and environmental situation and also a Union .
What has the annual report to do with the frightening percentages achieved by a right-wing party in Germany ?
A great deal .
Unemployment and youth unemployment create helplessness , and the right wing parties in Germany and throughout Europe benefit from that .
On 2 May we will celebrate the historic creation of a single European currency here in the European Parliament .
This is good and I am delighted about it .
In conclusion , I would like to say that I am happy because it will be an historic fact and because monetary union , which in ten years ' time will be taken for granted , will be rid of its doom and gloom merchants , including those in my own group !
Mr President , I congratulate you on the Gasòliba report on the Annual Economic Report because it showed clearly , on the basis of the Commission 's information , major obstacles to European economic growth and employment . Excessive tax and administrative burdens borne in particular by SMEs in the face of increasingly fierce international competition , inadequate vocational training , excessive rigidity of the labour market , preventing the development of new job opportunities and high non-wage labour costs reduce companies ' capacity to invest and grow .
I cannot entirely agree with several points made in the report , however , particularly the assessment of the reduction in working hours , dealt with in paragraphs 39 and 40 of the report .
While in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity paragraph 39 confirms the inadvisability of a compulsory reduction in working time throughout the European Union , the following paragraph 40 provides a series of reflections .
In the first part of the text of paragraph 40 , we read that Parliament " is in favour of reductions in the working time ... when suitable ' .
Obviously , such a definition lends itself to more than one interpretation .
In fact , the general and abstract formulation of a principle of a need to reduce working hours seems destined to generate misunderstandings and ambiguities , for not only is it absolutely general but there is no specific reference in the report to the assumption of a reduction in working hours as a matter of necessity .
In short , paragraph 40 can be read as meaning it is the prerogative of each individual state to identify a general principle of need to impose an indiscriminate reduction in working hours over the entire national territory .
This latter assumption contradicts the considerations expressed in the Commission 's report which , indicating the risks of the so-called statutory 35hour week , limited itself to admitting reductions in working hours only at microeconomic level or through negotiations between the social partners .
To conclude , owing to its general nature , paragraph 40 seems to be the result of a confused political agreement .
Consequently , on the basis of the considerations listed , I call on Parliament to vote against paragraph 40 of the Gasòliba report .
In addition to this , I would like to hear Commissioner de Silguy 's assessment .
Mr President , those who believe that the euro and the uniform monetary policy which we will have from 1 January next year will automatically yield all sorts of benefits , are seriously mistaken .
A monetary policy requires a coordinated and intelligent economic policy .
Without this a great deal can go wrong .
In short , the lack of commitment to a coordinated economic policy really must be brought to an end .
I would like to give you an example . The European Central Bank will in practice direct its monetary policy at the average rate of inflation within the euro area .
For each individual country this means that internal low inflation coupled with rising inflation elsewhere could lead to higher interest rates , and could act as a brake on economic development .
In short , every country taking part in EMU has an interest in other euro countries keeping their inflation down , otherwise the independent ECB will punish them unrelentingly , with negative consequences for the low inflation countries as well .
Fortunately , the Member States have sufficient instruments at their disposal to keep inflation down , for example by taking specific tax measures when the economy threatens to overheat .
Sometimes pressure will be needed to take these undoubtedly unpopular measures in good time , in the interest of the others as well .
The global guidelines for economic policy covering the policy mix at European level and within the Member States will thus be given overriding importance .
If this is to become successful it must have political support .
This means that parliaments must be able to exert genuine influence .
In order to close the existing democratic gap , an interinstitutional agreement , as requested by this Parliament two weeks ago , is urgently needed .
An important characteristic of the Europe of the single currency is that it is dependent on a mere 10 % of external trade .
This means that we can determine our own prosperity or lack of it .
The policy mix at European level should take into account that the euro area must take care of its own growth impulses .
Export growth will make a contribution , but in a very limited way , and this year it is actually zero .
The core recommendations of the global guidelines of recent years , namely continuous cutbacks , strict monetary policy , and wage restraint whereby the wage increase remains 1 % behind productivity increase , cannot continue unchanged .
A time schedule must be set for the cutbacks , or the monetary policy or wage restraints must be relaxed .
Without suddenly breaking with the existing policy , the political message should be that growth and employment are now being given priority .
This will mean in practice that every country must be recommended its own particular policy mix , so that Europe as a whole is able to pursue a policy aimed at growth and job creation which does not jeopardize inflation .
Mr President , I wish to say that the economic policy of 1998 has been sealed by the introduction of the euro and I think that the move towards the euro is pervaded by a broad conflict .
On the one hand , we have the unilateral adherence of the leaders of the Member States and of the European Union to the financial criteria , the public debt .
This is now reaching gigantic proportions . We are talking of stability agreements that will last ten years .
On the other hand , we have the anguish of the European communities concerning employment , which , I believe , was expressed with a very strong warning during the elections in Saxony , and we have to take account of the fact that one out of four young people voted for the extreme right .
From this viewpoint , we are in total disagreement with the position of the Commission .
In the report by Mr Gasòliba I Böhm I can see that there is an orientation towards issues of development and employment , but I fear that this positive orientation of the rapporteur is being sacrificed in the name of consensus .
In this sense , there are blatant contradictions : in paragraph 40 we are for the reduction of working hours ; in paragraph 39 we are against ; in paragraph 25 we do not want a reduction in the wage of unskilled workers ; in paragraph 26 we do .
I think that a clearer orientation is called for , that this unilateral policy should be broken and that we should endeavour to make the euro popular rather than detested by the citizens of Europe .
Mr President , the report from the European Commission and the report by Mr Gasòliba I Böhm clearly emphasize that we are making preparations for using the opportunities of globalization and of European integration to favour growth , investment and employment , and to contribute to an increase in prosperity and social justice in the European Union .
It is clear both in this Annual Economic Report and in the report by Mr Gasòliba I Böhm that we have come through the period of confrontation , with supply-side policy on the one hand and demand-orientated measures on the other .
We believe that in the European Union we need measures both in the areas of macro and micro policy , and also supply-side and demand-orientated policies .
A range of measures is on the table which ought to be used . We know that we can only follow this approach through to ensure a high level of employment , as is rightly required and emphasized by Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union - as well as through the employment chapter in the Treaty of Amsterdam , the resolutions of the Employment Summit and the strategies during the British Presidency of the Council and the forthcoming Austrian Presidency which we hope will point the way - if , together with structural policy and measures in the labour market , education and training policies , a further basket of measures makes economic growth of 3 % to 3.5 % possible .
The introduction of monetary union on time is certainly indispensable , since exchange-rate fluctuations in the internal market which are economically damaging will then cease , a better policy mix will be possible and it will also be possible to avoid conflicts between budget and monetary policies .
However , above all , and I would again like to express my support for this , at last it will be possible to devise coordinated economic policies worthy of their name .
Up to now , the fundamentals of economic policy have required nothing from any Member State .
I hope in the wake of this Annual Economic Report and this debate in the European Parliament that the coordination of economic policies in the European Union will finally make it plain that political union also means joint economic policy which is in the common interest and which stimulates growth , investment and employment .
I would like once more to stress that the extent of the reduction in public investment is irresponsible !
We must , therefore , take more account of the stimulant of public investments for private investments and move forward in this area ; otherwise , it will be impossible to achieve the growth in employment which we urgently need in the European Union .
Mr President , even before it has come into force , monetary union is a success .
It accelerated necessary debt rescheduling which is now leading to increased growth in the European economy , and which has also increased self-confidence in the EU .
In order to take full advantage of EMU and to strengthen our competitiveness and the conditions for prosperity in Europe , policies must be directed at structural reform .
Budget reorganization has affected the everyday lives of the citizens .
Now a correctly designed structural policy can create better conditions for the EU and its inhabitants .
The remarkable thing is that structural reforms which cost nothing appear to be more difficult to accept than budget reorganization , probably because they challenge strong special interests .
That is why I would like to congratulate the Commissioner on a courageous document which discusses the importance of reformed labour markets which work better .
I am pleased about this and would also like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Gasòliba I Böhm , whose report shows that we in Parliament are prepared to accept and make a constructive contribution to the essential debate and to accelerate the decisions which need to be taken in order for people to be able to reform inflexible markets with far too many left over monopolies .
I also think that the Commission 's report is worth drawing attention to as far as the annexes of statistical information are concerned .
The aim of the report is not to assess the development of individual countries , but the columns speak clearly .
We can see how countries whose political leadership has neglected and delayed modernization of the labour market in particular have increased the tax burden and thus reduced levels of employment and reduced common resources .
On the other hand , we can see how other countries which make proper use of the new conditions are able to increase growth , employment and prosperity .
Let these figures and the Commission 's reasoning represent both alarm bells and carrots when the work on the economic guidelines is completed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking Mr Gasòliba for listening when he prepared his report .
Despite our differences , even our divergences , he has made great efforts to bring Parliament largely together on a position , a common and strong economic analysis .
This is also what I am trying to do with my report on European industrial competitiveness , which will be considered in Strasbourg in a couple of weeks ' time .
I would also like to thank the Commission and to say how pleased I am with the development of our institutions , the Council , the Commission and Parliament , in this field .
In effect , our institutions are now reflecting and working together to bring a strong European economy out of the multiple conditions , avoiding simple but entrenched confrontations , and limited to two or three solid points .
Today , finally , the strengths of the European economy are recognized , the weaknesses are clearly analysed and , consequently , everyone is making an effort to search for solutions to strengthen the former and reduce the latter .
I therefore largely recognize my own views in the Gasòliba report , as amended by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
I participated in these amendments , and I voted for the final report .
I would this evening therefore simply like to highlight five points .
Firstly , I would mention the importance of European research .
It is a basic condition and sufficient appropriations must therefore be given to the Fifth Framework Programme , in any case , more than ECU 16 billion should be set aside .
Secondly , there is the social dimension of Europe , which is not a brake on growth , whatever some may say .
It is , on the contrary , an asset .
A worker who feels good is more competitive and makes his company more competitive .
In any case , if social aspects are devalued , Europe will always lose in terms of world competitiveness .
The third aspect concerns initial and ongoing training , which must be ever more closely linked to technical , technological and economic developments .
The fourth point involves our necessary adaptation to technical developments , to developments in the market , in needs and in society as a whole , which does not boil down to the flexibility of labour .
Finally and fifthly , I must mention job sharing and the reduction of working time which are necessary in order to give more time for life and so that the increase in productivity is not translated into further unemployment .
This is why , as a socialist , I am in favour of a reduction of working time in France , and I hope that our positive results in terms of jobs will lead to its rapid extension to the rest of Europe .
This is why , personally , I am prepared to support Amendment No 5 tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is all I wanted to say on Mr Gasòliba 's report , which I support .
I hope that , in the wake of this report , in the wake of the euro , which is a fantastic vector for federalist integration , we will now be able to develop a political Europe and a social Europe .
Some will say : that is another story .
For me , a diehard federalist campaigner , it is at the heart of today 's debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the fact that the Commission 's 1998 report is entitled for the first time " Growth and Employment in the Stability-Oriented Framework of EMU ' is very important . I also want to underline , as some of my colleagues have already done , the historical importance to all European citizens of the momentous decision we the representatives of the European people are going to adopt in this Parliament on 2 May to introduce the new currency .
It is also true that the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Luxembourg Summit marked a " before ' and " after ' in the employment policies of each Member State .
But we have to realize that the people of Europe are hoping that our political debates will materialize into concrete deeds , so that our young people , our women , our long-term unemployed and disabled - the sectors suffering the worst unemployment - see a fulfilment of their logical hopes of being able to work and develop personally and socially in the new Europe we are all building .
It is also important , ladies and gentlemen , that we have almost achieved a general consensus on the measures to adopt to improve the worrying unemployment figures suffered by the European Union as a whole .
But along with the nominal economic convergence already achieved , we also need much more progress in the social convergence which facilitates the strengthening of the internal market , the breaking down of language and cultural barriers which hinder worker mobility and the harmonization of social security systems . These , together with a far-reaching reform of education and training systems , can allow our citizens to adapt to the demands not just of the national job markets but of the whole European market .
At the same time , the new European society also has to adapt with almost breathtaking speed to the new technologies which surprise us daily and which call for a radical change in the traditional concept of work and business .
For example , teleworking , electronic commerce , telemedicine or the development of the Internet itself call for a major effort on the part of the Member States so that our young people in particular can adapt to this mutation within society .
In short , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us ensure that the Europe of the euro is the Europe of work , solidarity and wellbeing .
If these objectives fail , it will be the failure of we who on Saturday will be turning European history on its head .
Mr President , the Commission 's annual report states that a long-term economic revival has begun .
Exports are increasing and the euro will have a favourable exchange rate with the US dollar .
It is now up to us to shape a European Economic and Monetary Union which is based on employment , public investment and increased competitiveness in Europe .
Although the Commission 's annual report ignores the difficulties the crisis in Asia is causing for the European economy , the Commission has succeeded in compiling a very competent and comprehensive document .
It is , however , rather rash to discuss the five-year economic situation without , for example , carrying out detailed cost analyses .
I only hope the future proves as rosy .
The rapporteur says it is important to create a means of making comparisons in investment and employment throughout the Union .
I think the level of public investment at present in the Union is totally insufficient to improve European competitiveness .
Actually , it is quite obvious that public investment gives encouragement to private investment , for example in infrastructure financing .
The Commission 's proposal to reduce VAT in labour-intensive sectors is most worthwhile .
I myself have often spoken of a transaction tax on currency trading , which is a very lucrative business .
Furthermore , Jacques Delors and many others have proposed this .
In this way we could introduce tax relief systems for sectors that employ large numbers of workers .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to add my congratulations to those being expressed generally to my colleague and good friend Carles-Alfred Gasòliba I Böhm for his report and for the flexibility with which he has incorporated the amendments .
This is a balanced report , which properly identifies the main lines of action in economic policy at Union level and makes well-placed comments or clarifications in relation to the Commission 's report .
I want to add a few comments to back up what I have just said .
Firstly , there is the reference to employment , which is treated at length , with the accent placed on growth , investment and structural reforms , including an interesting reference to the concept of employability which was popularized by New Labour - Tony Blair 's Labour Party - and is becoming a keyword in the employment debate .
Secondly , the report insists on the need to coordinate the economic policy of the Member States within the monetary union .
We would like to deepen that coordination to the point of having a real economic government of the Union , to serve as a counterweight to the monetary authority .
However , it is not just a question of a counterweight , but also a matter of achieving an economic government able to extract the full potential of the new panorama being created with the introduction of the single currency .
Thirdly , I think it is important to stress the insistence on investment as an essential element for growth and to improve competitiveness .
On this point , I completely agree with what Alan Donnelly said a little while ago .
Fourthly , another point in the Gasòliba report which deserves mention is its strong support for maintaining the European social model , as set out in paragraph 25 .
Finally , although I could add more , I will conclude by saying that I am pleased with the realistic approach to the question of reduced working hours , that is , the 35-hour week .
Mr President , I congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report .
The Commission report was extremely optimistic .
It talked about a renewed upturn in the spring of 1996 which is gathering momentum and is expected to turn into a self-sustained expansion .
I would like to err on the side of caution .
The Commission talks about this being driven by demand from outside the EU and clearly it has taken into consideration the recent developments in Asia .
The developments in Asia have not stopped and Japan , in particular , is in difficulty and I predict its difficulties will increase .
I do not know exactly how much the Commission has revised its growth figures as a result of what has happened in Asia but the potential for catastrophe has not gone .
The Commission also claims a virtuous circle in terms of the economy for three reasons : the favourable monetary conditions , strengthened internal demand and improved confidence .
My criticism of the report from the Commission is that it does little in the form of positive policy support for the strengthening of internal demand .
How can we tackle unemployment if we do not create the conditions for internal demand , in particular at a time when external demand from Asia may be significantly reduced .
The Commission is relying on endogenous growth and it is a leap of faith which I fear many European citizens will not make .
I was elected to this Parliament in 1994 when the Delors report was all the rage and we had a quest to reduce unemployment by 15 million by the year 2000 .
We are not being totally honest with the European public because unemployment in the European Union has not been reduced by anywhere near that amount .
People have memories and while we accept that 2 to 3 % growth will take place , it is not near enough to the 4 % that the US has consistently experienced to create the millions of jobs that it has to .
I want to see Europe create millions of jobs , too .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all my congratulations go to Mr Gasòliba I Böhm on his excellent report inviting us to reflect on the options to be considered for the broad guidelines of 1998 economic policy , which the Commission will present on 13 May this year .
The broad guidelines of economic policy will be the first post-euro guidelines and for this reason they are important .
They are also the first to fall within the framework of the Luxembourg European Council 's conclusions on employment .
Thus , the Commission 's Annual Economic Report is presented this year as a first stage in the formulation of these broad guidelines .
It is an important exercise and I am glad that you organized a meeting with economic experts on 17 March to prepare this report .
I can assure you that the Commission will take your observations and suggestions duly into account when drawing up its proposal .
Since it is getting late , I would like to reply very rapidly to the questions which have been raised and say a few words on the state of the European economy before reminding you of , or outlining , the Commission 's principle recommendations .
With regard to the state of the European economy , the recovery which commenced in the spring of 1996 is gaining momentum and should lead to a process of self-sustained growth .
This will have a favourable impact on employment which , nevertheless , remains one of our main concerns , as you know .
Mr Hendrick , I could say to you that we are not over optimistic .
Our growth forecasts correspond in general to those laid down by the large international institutions .
Last March we revised them downwards slightly , to 0.2 points for 1998 and 0.1 points for 1999 , in order to take into account the effects of the Asian crisis .
Having said this , growth will nevertheless be 2.7 % in 1997 and 2.8 % in 1998 . This is already an improvement .
The Commission is following the situation in Asia closely , particularly with regard to Japan , international trade and sectoral aspects of the crisis , where we have identified eight sectors in particular which seem to be the most exposed .
We are following this closely .
I would like to echo here one of your rapporteur 's requests , in collaboration moreover , with what I believe Mr Paasilinna mentioned .
You must not believe that the Commission does not consider the risks which could threaten its central scenario .
On the contrary , the Commission has taken serious note of your suggestion for an alternative scenario and a medium-term analysis .
I can assure you that it will make an effort to reply to this over the coming years .
But today , Europe 's growth is based increasingly on its own strengths , on internal demand .
This issue was raised by Mrs Randzio-Plath , Mr Paasilinna , Mr Pérez Royo , Mr Donnelly and Mr Metten amongst others .
Private consumption is increasing , from 2 % in 1996 to 2.6 % in 1998 and 1999 .
It is reassuring for the development of domestic demand .
Similarly , investment levels have been supported above what was forecast and capital investment will increase from 6.4 % in 1998 to 7 % in 1999 .
This is compared with 4.4 % in 1997 .
These figures are the result of a return of confidence .
On this point , I would like to clarify to Mr Donnelly that it is true that public investment as a percentage of GDP has fallen from 2.9 % in 1990 to 2.2 % in 1997 , and that this trend must not continue .
The Commission has taken every opportunity of stating this and , in particular , we will insist on this point in the new broad guidelines for 1998 economic policy .
This said , do not underestimate the impact of investment because of the cofinancing of certain investments in the private sector , which can give a slightly distorted view of the figures .
Finally , on this aspect of demand , I will say to Mr Metten that demand must not , all the same , be artificially stimulated by new budget deficits or overly rapid increases in salaries .
This would pose a threat to the recovery which our economy has benefited from over a number of years , and we would lapse into a situation of deficit , with the consequence of higher interest rates and the ensuing negative effects on growth and employment .
Thus , the economic strategy advocated by the Commission , which is also advocated by the monitoring which Member States have been carrying out for a number of years , is beginning to bear fruit , particularly in terms of job creation .
In reply to Mr van Velzen : look at the figures .
Europe created 600 000 jobs in 1997 .
On the basis of our forecasts , another 2 800 000 should be created in 1998 and 1999 meaning that , in total , we will have created 3 400 000 jobs over three years .
It is encouraging , even though I am aware that it will not compensate for the 4 500 000 job losses registered throughout the 1990s .
These figures illustrate the need to promote more sustainable , employment-creating growth .
Mr Gasòliba suggests using benchmarks for this .
Allow me to remind you that the Commission 's recommendation for the first guidelines on employment contained quantifiable objectives , and it was the Council which did not accept them and which did not follow the Commission in this matter .
But to promote growth which provides more jobs remains the essential objective of the broad guidelines of economic policy and it is the second point I would like to touch upon very rapidly with you now .
At the request of the Amsterdam European Council , the broad guidelines for economic policy for 1998 will emphasize the need for better coordination of macroeconomic policies and structural measures .
These two policies are inseparable if you want to promote growth and employment , as the rapporteur rightly pointed out .
With regard to macroeconomic policy , we had the opportunity of discussing this in the previous report and so I will not go into the details .
Mrs Randzio-Plath is right . We must avoid confrontation between a supply policy and a demand policy .
The Commission has always tried to do this .
I have noted over the past few years that the broad guidelines of economic policy advocate a stable macroeconomic framework within Economic and Monetary Union , of which the three pillars are , naturally , a monetary policy based on price stability , the durable consolidation of public finances and a salary policy compatible with price stability and a return on investment .
EMU and the euro will strengthen this stable economic framework for all the Member States .
In this respect , I am glad the European Parliament supports that strategy .
But beyond this macroeconomic policy , in order to produce the maximum effect in terms of jobs , this framework must be complemented by structural reforms , reforms firstly at the level of the market for goods and services .
In order to invest , businessmen must not be discouraged from the start by overly bureaucratic regulations .
Similarly , greater growth should also bring about greater demand for labour .
There still exist too many administrative rigidities , too many administrative formalities , access to the capital markets is still too difficult for small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe , as the rapporteur noted .
I remember , nevertheless , that on 31 March the Commission proposed an action plan on access to capital investment on the part of small and medium-sized enterprises .
This action plan will be implemented as from autumn 1998 if , of course , the Heads of State or Government approve it in Cardiff .
Reforms are also necessary in the labour market .
A number of options must be examined including the reduction of non-wage labour costs , it being understood that , for budgetary reasons , only a reduction in non-wage labour costs targeted at the bottom of the salary scale is possible .
In any case , this is only realistic if accompanied by a containment of social expenditure .
The second option is salary differentiation . Is it right that the unemployment rate in 25 regions of the European Union should be less than 5 % whilst in 25 others it is more than 22 % ?
This leads us to consider the problem of salary differentiation depending on productivity levels and according to regional skills , even sectors of activity .
The final option which has been mentioned , and I must say a word about it , is the reduction of working time .
I believe it was Mrs Angelilli who particularly questioned me on this matter .
We must beware of ready-made slogans and ideas on this issue .
A reduction in working time could have complex and contradictory effects on employment for , contrary to a generally accepted idea , employment is not a fixed quantity .
It is , on the contrary , an endogenous variable in the economic system , which fluctuates according to all the other variables .
We therefore have to be careful and to weigh up all the consequences of the measures to be taken .
A reduction in working time may encourage employment , but only under certain conditions .
Here , too , we must remember that it must not have consequences for the recovery of public finances and it must be neutral from the point of view of the cost borne by companies .
We must , in fact , avoid a reduction in company profitability , as this could cause a reduction in investment , with negative effects on employment in the long run . It should also be avoided if such a reduction implies a lowering of salaries within the companies concerned .
In any case , with regard to a reduction in working time , I would say that this subject cannot be dealt with in a general manner nor out of context .
It must be assessed within the overall context of work organization .
This issue is for negotiation between the social partners at a microeconomic level - the branch or the company - as I think the rapporteur mentioned .
But beyond a particular interest in specific measures , a reduction in unemployment can only be achieved through the steady continuation over a period of time of global , coherent and specific policies which , as Mr Caudron highlighted , cover aspects of research , education and training .
In conclusion , I would say that this exercise of drawing up broad guidelines for economic policy is set within the structure of the issue of employment , and the objective is clearly to define a framework which is propitious to growth and employment , whilst assuring the smooth running of Economic and Monetary Union .
All of this is not contradictory .
Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission thanks the House for its contribution to these reflections and I can assure you that it will take your recommendations into account in drawing up the broad guidelines for economic policy .
Mr President , Commissioner , the link has been made twice or even three times here between unemployment , lack of hope and right-wing voters , to the applause of the House .
May I ask you kindly what your response to this is , for I believe that you are just as frightened and troubled as we are at the German result of 13.6 % for the German People 's Union , financed by one person , a right-wing party without an agenda .
I would like to hear your opinion on this subject .
I can answer very clearly that unemployment is the scourge of Europe .
The problem of unemployment will not be solved by increasing deficits , indeed past experience has demonstrated the complete opposite .
The greatest growth has been experienced in those countries which have reduced their deficit , thus enabling the creation of more jobs .
Take the example of the Netherlands or Ireland .
But this is not sufficient to solve the unemployment problem . The very roots of the problem also have to be tackled .
That is why coherent structural policies must be pursued .
On a political level , it seems to me rather easy , for populist aims , for the aims of politicians , to look for scapegoats , to look for people responsible where there are none .
Let us not try to lay the blame on Europe when , at the moment , it is through Europe , through greater Europeanism , and through more concerted actions at European level that we will manage to conquer the scourge of unemployment .
But it will take time .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Textiles and the clothing industry
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Council and to the Commission on textiles and the clothing industry , by the following Members :
Soltwedel-Schäfer , Hautala and Wolf ( B4-0273 / 98 and B4-0274 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament ; -Puerta and Ribeiro ( B4-0275 / 98 and B4-0276 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left ; -Ferrer ( B4-0277 / 98 and B4-0278 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ; -Gasòliba i Böhm ( B4-0284 / 98 and B4-0285 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party ; -Pasty , Azzolini , Kaklamanis , Podestà , Donnay , Girão Pereira , Viceconte , Arroni , Gallagher , Garosci , Mezzaroma and Guinebertière ( B4-0386 / 98 and B4-0387 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Groupe Forza Europa ; -Sainjon ( B4-0462 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance .
Mr President , this will now go forward to the Council and the Commission .
You have before you my motions for an amendment .
Briefly , they concern increasing the ecological awareness of the whole textile industry .
This is not the first time that I have raised this topic .
There are detailed debates and discussions on this subject , including some with Commissioner Bangemann .
So I would ask what plans the Commission has and what procedure the Council intends to implement in terms of urgently increasing the ecological orientation of the textile industry , for example , in relation to the removal of pollutants in textiles themselves which can lead to allergies , and in relation to the danger to employees in manufacturing these products , as well as the danger to the environment through air , soil and water pollution ?
Mr Bangemann told me here a year ago that there was a working group dealing with this issue .
Guidelines were being drawn up .
That is one thing .
My various inquiries to the Commission - in writing , too - have produced no response , in other words , there is no answer to them .
I would like to hear what you have to say about this .
I have one final point about child labour .
As you know , child labour in the clothing and textile industries , particularly in Portugal , is mentioned in a wide range of opinions by the European Parliament .
This is a dreadful phenomenon in Europe , and I would ask you to clarify your position on this too .
Mr President , representatives of the Council and the Commission , the oral questions , and the resolution that has come from them , are an attempt to send a clear signal from this House to the Industry Council on 7 May , which , we hope , will be assessing the Commission 's proposal on a ' plan of action to increase the competitiveness of the European textile and clothing industry ' .
The purpose of this regulation formula is to tell you that neither by omission nor by mere observance of a ritual abandon will Parliament abandon its duty to state its opinion on the competitiveness of a major industry like textiles and clothing , which is of vital importance to the economy and jobs in some Member States .
It is also intended to express our dissatisfaction with what the Commission has called a ' plan of action ' , which it is not .
It may be a strategic reflection document , but if it is to be a plan of action it needs projects , timetables , and the allocation of funds .
Furthermore , it would have been sufficient to give it that status , and allow it to be debated as such , if some of the recommendations expressed by our social partners in their reports had been approved .
Then again , it amounts to a declaration of those things Parliament regards as necessary and urgent .
For our part , we want an approach that is neither fragmented nor unbalanced , one that covers the industry as a whole , as a production line , with special attention to labour-intensive activities .
We want competitiveness in the industry in order to fight against unfair and unbalanced competition , especially where social conditions are concerned , and that means we have to adopt ILO-based social clauses in our bilateral and multilateral planning .
We want certification of social and environmental conditions , and we want national certificates recognized at European Union level .
To make the industry competitive we also want incentives for new products and technology , better access to foreign markets , especially for small and medium-sized enterprises , more training , particularly for female workers , but the list and details of these matters , and others , will be found in the report we are in the course of preparing .
Finally , this regulation formula is intended to tell you that we in Parliament are drawing up a report based on the Commission 's document .
This is being taken seriously because it has the weight of an institutional statement demanding the right to participate in processes of this kind and have its work taken into account ; if only because this ' construction of Europe ' would be a poor thing if a matter as important as the competitiveness of the textile and clothing industry went no further than the document the Commission has submitted .
The process must go on , and the European Parliament must take part in it . That is Parliament 's duty and it is what the industry demands and needs .
Mr President , I want to begin by saying that I regret the fact that the Industry Council planned to make a statement on the Commission communication about measures to favour competitiveness in the textiles and clothing sector without waiting to hear Parliament 's position on that communication .
So the purpose of this debate is very clear : to indicate the main lines of action that Parliament thinks should be proposed to increase competitiveness and thereby guarantee the survival of the European textile and clothing sector .
In contrast to what some people might think , this sector is neither in crisis nor headed towards extinction .
In fact , thanks to the reorganizations which have taken place , the quality of its products and designs and its ability to respond rapidly , the textile and clothing sector is today ready to confront the great challenge of international competitiveness and face the future with optimism .
Therefore , the Group of the European People 's Party thinks that the Commission and the Council should place more emphasis on effective reciprocal access to third-country markets .
The accompanying action plan does not go far enough in this respect . Do the Commission and the Council realize that in total it is estimated that there are 600 tariff barriers hindering the free export of Community textile products ?
If the Council and the Commission really want to favour the competitiveness of the textile and clothing sector , they should demand that third countries respect the rules and disciplines of GATT , propose effective and flexible coordinated measures to combat fraud and the falsification of certificates of origin , protect industrial property , and get third countries to respect basic social and environmental rules .
It is true that many other measures are needed - in the area of research and development , for example , and in training - but no measure will be effective if there is not real access to the international markets and respect by everybody for the same rules of play .
To conclude , Mr President , I want to say how frustrated my group is at the draft conclusions prepared by the Council , which absolutely fail to respond to the needs of a key sector . So I beg the Council to think again and take account of the opinions of this Parliament .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is significant that the whole political spectrum represented within this Parliament is worried about the future of the European textile and clothing industry .
I believe that the fact that different political views are united in expressing this concern shows the importance of this sector which , on the one hand , has a very long tradition in European industrial development and , on the other hand , is characterized by something so important at the moment that it has not escaped anybody 's attention - something we have addressed in our earlier debates this afternoon : the ability to generate employment .
So the social dimension of the textile and clothing industry should also be taken into consideration .
The crux of the various speeches is a request to the Commission and the Council to do something to guarantee the continuity of the textile industry , under the best possible conditions .
It is not a question of maintaining it in its current situation .
It is not just a question of helping it to survive .
It is a matter of providing it with a series of mechanisms to guarantee its competitiveness in an open market which is becoming increasingly competitive in the global economy in which we operate .
So we are putting a series of proposals to the Commission .
Firstly , we need to ensure that technological innovation , technological improvements and access to new technologies - basically , information technology and electronic commerce - can be applied correctly within the textile industry , and that the Commission analyses it .
Another very important aspect is that the whole production chain should be considered , not just a few specific subsectors of the industry .
And thirdly , it is also very important to ensure that people receive the appropriate training so that - I repeat - the competitiveness of the European textile industry can allow it to survive and maintain the employment level we all want .
Mr President , the textile industry is very important to the European Union but is also very delicate , as my companions have already said .
It is important because it is a basic industry in many Structural Fund Objective 1 regions and provides work for more than two million citizens of the European Union .
And it is delicate because of its disheartening statistics .
More than 600 000 jobs have been lost in the sector over the last six years and , according to forecasts , more than 800 000 will be lost in the short term .
This is a dramatic time for the sector .
We in this Parliament should denounce the situation and announce urgent remedies .
No matter what sector we are talking about , we cannot continue to have unfair competition and constant dumping in the European market , with adverse effects on our businesses and , finally , our people .
The current state of the European textile sector has partly arisen as a result of infringement of international and Community market rules , such as those relating to respect for the environment , and social and intellectual protection .
I have already mentioned the importance of the textile industry in most of the Objective 1 regions , the least developed of the European Union .
Perhaps for that reason , those regions are very vulnerable , not just to the effects of dumping we are complaining about here , but also to the Community market policy itself , with the recent entry into force of agreements with third countries such as Turkey , or liberalization with regard to countries in the east .
The entry into effect of the second phase of the WTO textile agreement is particularly important , since it opens the way for a greater liberalization of the market .
All these factors are hitting our Community textile industry .
At least the Commission 's document on textiles in the European Union is necessary and important .
However , it lacks a real plan of action which takes account of all the difficulties currently being experienced by the textile industry and the Objective 1 regions and does not include a real policy of economic and social cohesion .
And this is where we must insist and call upon the Commission to implement a Community policy which meets the needs of our textile industry and , above all , the needs of the regions involved .
It would be a good move for the Commission to increase the funding in Agenda 2000 and provide continuity for the Retex programme , which is so important for the sector .
That could only improve the competitiveness of our textile industry and of the regions concerned , while making a positive contribution - as we have already said - to economic and social cohesion within the European Union .
Mr President , I should first like to thank the five honourable Members for tabling and speaking to their questions and the five other honourable Members who have stayed to hear the replies and for giving the Council the opportunity to reaffirm its support for this vitally important European industry .
The Council is very aware of the challenges which face all European industry in a world of increasing globalization and new technologies .
It has recognized that competitiveness in European industry provides the very foundation for growth , creating jobs and raising living standards for us all .
The European clothing and textile industry is a key economic sector in Europe in terms of production and employment .
The Council has always recognized the need for Community support to ensure the competitiveness of this sector of the economy .
In this context it might be helpful if I set out some of the background to the current initiatives .
The guidelines governing the Community 's policies in this area were defined by the Council in 1994 .
These guidelines established a general framework for European industrial strategy in the textile and clothing sector .
The strategy was devised to take particular account of the specific features which characterize each industry .
These guidelines established a general framework for European industrial strategy in the textile and clothing sector and the current initiatives in the textile sector can be traced back to the conclusions of the Industry Council of 28 March and 14 November 1996 .
These concerned , respectively , the impact of international developments on the Community 's textile and clothing sector and also on the competitiveness of subcontracting in the textile and clothing industry in the European Union .
These conclusions were followed up on 3 November 1997 by a Commission communication entitled Action Plan to increase the Competitiveness of the European Textile and Clothing Industry .
That communication was prepared in the context of the dialogue which has been taking place at the Commission 's initiative between the parties involved in the textile and clothing sector and , in particular , the national and Community public authorities and the social partners .
The Commission 's action plan defines a number of priority areas on which the actions of different parties concerned should focus .
It is currently being examined within the relevant Council bodies and it is on the agenda of the next meeting of the Industry Council on 7 May 1998 .
At this stage the presidency envisages that the Industry Council will make an initial response to the Commission 's communication in the form of conclusions .
These would spell out the Council 's position on the initiatives identified by the Commission as areas for priority action .
All the issues raised by the five honourable Members today are highlighted as areas of activity within that plan .
In particular , the Council will want to consider five key questions : jobs and training ; the development and dissemination of new products , methods and equipment in the communication and information technologies ; the proper operation of the internal market ; access to the markets of third countries and strict compliance with the rules and disciplines freely accepted under international agreements ; and regional development .
Honourable Members and in particular Mr Ribeiro have raised the question of the precise resources required for training if the competitiveness of the textile and clothing industry is to be improved .
The Commission 's action plan does not contain details on which to base an assessment of its financial consequences .
The initiative suggested will be funded from within the current budgetary framework .
I commend the excellent document prepared by DG III in conjunction with Eurotex , the European Textile and Clothing Federation , which details in 91 pages and by sector where in each Member State funds can be accessed .
Although there is no suggested timetable for the initiatives under the action plan we hope to make steady progress .
We would also expect the continuation of the Commission-led dialogue with all those involved in the sector , including the Member States and the social partners .
This would help to ensure constant monitoring of progress and allow us to adapt measures to structural and economic developments .
I will turn now to some of the more specific questions tabled today and which are not directly covered by the action plan .
Firstly , the question by Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer .
The matter of child labour is covered by many ILO conventions to which all Member States of the EU are individual parties , in particular Convention No 28 on forced labour and No 138 on child labour .

This question has also been dealt with at Community level by Council Directive 94 / 33 / EC on the protection of young people at work , Article 1 of which states that Member States shall take the necessary measures to prohibit work by children .
Ensuring the correct implementation of this directive is a matter for individual Member States and the Commission .
Honourable Members have also raised concerns about health and safety and the environment .
These are matters which the Council is concerned to take into account in all its policies .
Any measures taken to modernize the textile and clothing industry in the European Union will need to comply with the Community 's current rules on workers ' health and safety and on protection of the environment .
These would include , among others , the framework directive 80 / 1107 / EEC on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to chemical , physical and biological agents at work , and all the subsequent individual directives .
Framework Council directive 89 / 391 on the introduction of measures to encourage improvements in the safety and health of workers at work and all the subsequent individual directives are also covered .
Two other points were raised to which I want to respond directly .
There was a suggestion and a concern that the European Parliament has not been given an opportunity to give its opinion .
I know this Parliament will pass a resolution tomorrow and I will ensure that the Council considers this carefully before it considers its action programme at the Industry Council on 7 May .
Members were concerned about market access .
This is a key target for the action plan which asks for strict compliance with rules and disciplines under international agreements .
In conclusion , the Commission communication has had the valuable effect of instigating a broad discussion around the idea of a genuine European strategy for the textile and clothing industry requiring the full participation of all Community institutions and bodies as well as Member States and social partners .
In that context , the Council will not fail to take account of the opinions delivered here by the European Parliament on this subject .
I look forward in particular to hearing your views during the course of this debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am happy to be able to explain to you the Commission 's position on the overall policy it is pursuing , or attempting to pursue , with regard to the textiles and clothing industry .
I will reply successively to the different aspects of the questions which have been raised , either verbally or in writing , whilst trying to be as general as possible .
Firstly , concerning the evaluation of financial aid given to the textiles and clothing industry , this sector does not receive aid from any arrangement which would be specific to it .
We currently have a number of horizontal programmes : Retex , SME , ADAPT and Emploi , along with actions in the field of the targeted technologies and in traditional industries .
The number of applications which are approved depends on the quality of the projects and the capacity for coordination between the industry and the social partners .
With regard to all the Community initiatives , evaluation reports are currently underway , which should enable us to examine the impact of these initiatives on the modernization of the industrial fabric of the regions concerned and of the coherence of these objectives with industrial policy .
Secondly , I want to mention sectoral adjustments , on the eve of the liberalization of world trade .
I would first of all say that this liberalization has already occurred , and it resulted in a deep restructuring and modernization of the sector . However , overall , increases in productivity , the strengthening of competitive advantages , know-how , a high value added and innovation all allow the textiles and clothing industry to safeguard its dominant position in world trade , since the sector is the world 's largest exporter of textile products and the third largest exporter of clothing .
With regard to the measures envisaged to alleviate , at regional level , the social and economic consequences of restructuring efforts , let me state that numerous instruments are available to accompany and support transformations in this sector .
I am thinking in particular of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund , which play an important role in regions where the investment and social costs of restructuring are particularly high .
That is the role of Retex , the role of the frameworks for Community initiatives or Community support frameworks .
In addition , there are programmes for training workers to adapt to industrial change , which enable stable jobs to be preserved within the Union .
On this subject , for the new programming which will cover the period 2000-2006 , the Commission approved a draft regulation on 18 March , relating to general measures for the Structural Funds .
In this draft , the Commission proposes , in particular , the implementation of a new Objective 2 which should support the economic and social redevelopment of regions faced with restructuring , especially those particularly affected by textile restructuring .
These actions , which are currently being carried out through the framework of the Retex initiative , could be renewed in the context of the new Objective 2 .
The fourth issue is child labour .
Let me remind you that Directive 94 / 37 , relating to the protection of young people , forbids child labour in Member States .
According to this directive , the minimum age is set at 15 or 16 , according to the education system in place .
Member States have had two years to transpose this directive into their national legislation .
The Commission is currently examining the notifications of each Member State to see in which states this has been carried out and how the transposition has been effected .
Furthermore , within the framework of social dialogue , the unions and management have signed a charter of good conduct relating to working conditions in the European textiles and clothing industry .
The social partners have committed themselves to assuring the promotion of this code of conduct and to following up its progressive accomplishment , particularly through an annual evaluation .
The fifth matter is the environment and public health .
Clearly , they constitute a key factor in the modernization of the textiles and clothing industry .
Nevertheless , it is appropriate to ensure that national legislations , which are sometimes different , do not create new and possibly unjustified technical obstacles to the running of the Community market .
That is why the Commission is carrying out an examination of this issue , taking the greatest account , of course , of consumer protection and the environment .
In certain cases , harmonization at Community level is insufficient , for example , this is the case with azo dyes .
In other cases - I am thinking especially of heavy metals - the pursuit of analytical work is still necessary , and an evaluation of the health risks which could occur through the use of these dangerous substances is underway .
Sixthly , can we quantify the necessary financial resources required for training in order to improve the competitiveness of the textiles sector ?
The amount needed to restructure the sector cannot be specified by the Commission .
Indeed , it is for the companies themselves to specify their financial needs for new investments and to use the amounts which are set aside for this purpose in the Structural Funds or within the framework of research and development programmes , or within the framework of Community initiatives such as ADAPT - ECU 1 400 000 000 - or Emploi , with the same amount .
All of these programmes can provide close support to the changes in this industry , especially with regard to training .

My seventh point concerns the questions by Mrs Ferrer and Mr Gasòliba to the Commission concerning the timetable set within the framework of Community initiatives , and concerning the action plan .
In its action plan , the Commission described the initiatives which have been taken , and which are going to be taken , as a whole .
May I remind you that these actions are the responsibility of Member States and the social partners , and thus the Commission cannot impose a precise timetable .
The Commission is also in the process of establishing a set of performance indicators which will cover specific actions .
On the basis of these indicators , the social partners , the Commission and the national political powers will evaluate the progress achieved , within the framework of a meeting which will be organized by the Commission 's services at the end of this year .
Developments in the sector over the last few years have highlighted a number of strong points and a number of weaknesses .
The problem is integrating this new sector into the technological revolution and giving it a modern character .
That is why , in its action plan , the Commission is convinced that the competitive advantage linked to innovation , creation , quality and know-how enable it to play the role of leader in the international markets , although over the last few years the sector has shown remarkable competitive performance .
It holds the future , and that is why the strategy of industrial policy must take account of the specific characteristics of the textiles and clothing industry , whilst integrating it into an overall industrial strategy .
And I will reply to Mr Novo Belenguer that its impact and its running have been widely discussed within working groups with all the economic operators involved in Europe .
It is on the basis of these results that the Commission has drawn up a communication which outlines the guidelines of an action plan .
This communication has been submitted to Parliament , to the Council and to the Economic and Social Committee , accompanied by an analytical table of the specific actions to be carried out between now and the year 2000 .
Finally , the last question involved financial action and support for research and development .
With regard to Community activity , several areas are concerned . One of these is the social domain .
In this aspect , it is clear that respect for basic labour law standards is essential .
The Commission underlines the necessity of respecting these basic standards , whilst of course rejecting the protectionist purposes which some could be tempted to use them for .
Finally , with regard to the environment , discussions are underway in the WTO 's Committee on Trade and Environment .
The Union is involved and is in the process of commencing an analysis of the environmental effects of trade liberalization and of the commercial effects of legislation in areas of concern to this sector .
Lastly , in conclusion , let me say that , in the field of intellectual property , the Commission is currently participating in discussions concerning the application of the Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights agreements under the auspices of the World Trade Organization .
Pursuant to Rule 40 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received a joint motion for a resolution from seven political groups on oral questions relating to competition in the textiles and clothing industry .
Can I say , Commissioner , that certainly the very rosy view that has been written for you by the textile unit in DGIII is not my personal experience of the textile sectors within my region and I am sure Mr Caudron will also have a different view from the French region that he represents .
Indeed , every day I hear of job losses in the textile sector in the East Midlands which I represent and only last month I learned of another 350 jobs that have gone in a women 's clothing and child wear sector in Huthwaite in Nottinghamshire .
I have to say that the majority of these problems and restructuring come indeed from the strength of cost competition from developing countries .
The cost advantages that these countries have will not go away .
Markets are becoming increasingly liberalized as has been said by other Members in the debate , and this inevitably means that overseas competition will intensify .
We cannot rely in the EU on traditionally high levels of tariff and quota protection .
The European textile industry has global advantages and these must be developed and strengthened .
Unfortunately , the Commission action plan does not go far enough in this direction .
A recent study by the UK Government , which I am sure the President-in-Office may like to comment on , looked at benchmarking and our partnership with business with the textile industry .
We looked at the world-class strength of the UK , we looked at fashion , design , IT , just-in-time techniques , and supply chains as Mr Ribeiro said , and we discovered that we can actually learn from other countries .
For example , the Italians have successfully moved into overseas markets , based on their strength and customer service , and they have actually avoided competing head-on with low cost imports .
Let me finally say that I believe that the Commission has an inconsistency in policy .
I am very disappointed that the Commission , in its anti-dumping policy , does not always comply with Community interests .
I feel that there must be more coherence by the Commission in how it approaches the needs of the textile industry .
You must listen to the industry and when you take your decisions on anti-dumping you must listen to the Member States .
When Members States vote 10 to 5 against anti-dumping procedures , which they believe will not be in the interest of the industry , then you and the Commission must accept those decisions .
Therefore , I ask Council to take on board those issues in the Industry Council on 7 May .
That is why we , as Socialists , have asked for the European Parliament to be associated with the anti-dumping investigation , for Parliament to have a role in terms of transparency and accountability , and not for the Commission to take unaccountable decisions counter to subsidiarity .
Mr President , neither the Council 's nor the Commission 's comments correspond to reality , as one of my colleagues has said .
Indeed , since 1992 , 100 000 jobs have been lost every year .
The crisis in the textiles industry is due essentially to management decisions to relocate and to an increase in imports , which as well as causing job losses have contributed to significant backwardness in the areas of training , research and equipment modernization .
It is so much more practical to produce in a country with low salaries and a large supply of labour than to make improvements in machinery .
A lack of purchase power has also led to a drop in consumption .
However , the textiles industry is still an industry of the future , with more than two million people employed in 120 000 companies throughout Europe .
Steps must therefore be taken , at both national and Community level , to put a stop to the haemorrhage of jobs and to contribute to the development of the textiles sector .
The support planned for restructuring which Mr de Silguy mentioned does not reassure me .
First of all , we must put a stop to the trend towards relocation , imports must be reduced , for they risk increasing even more with the Asian crisis and the progressive dismantling of the Multifibre Arrangements between now and the year 2005 .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left proposes the establishment of social clauses within trade agreements .
They could be in the form of a social anti-dumping tax on products reimported into the European Union by firms established in low wage countries , something which is rightly mentioned in paragraph 5 of the joint resolution .
In any case , national and European public aid must be withdrawn from those companies which relocate .
Indeed , if I have understood correctly , existing subsidies make up redundancy payments , which we cannot accept .
In its communication , the Commission unfortunately follows the employers ' recommendations , since its proposals aim at improving the competitiveness of companies , essentially , and finally , by putting pressure on the cost of labour and by developing flexibility , a solution which has been proved ineffective , as tax gifts also have .
Thus , whilst eliminating distortions in competition and combating social dumping - and I would like to have the opinion of the Council and the Commission on the precise measures which are being envisaged in this area - it is also necessary at European level to commit substantial sums of money to encourage investment , research and development , training and equipment modernization .
Preferential loans for those companies creating jobs should be established , European regulations , in particular the OPA , must be reviewed , and clearly at national level , an increase in purchase power would allow for an increase in consumption and would thus be a means of reviving the textile industry .
In response , I would therefore like to have the Commission 's opinion on these proposals and also on the level of funds committed , because we have not been given many details in this respect .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I personally noted in my report on European industrial competitiveness that , in spite of everything , the textiles and clothing industry remains , for me , an important factor in European industry , in its power and its future .
If I add to this the fact that this sector is established in areas which are beset by many serious difficulties , which began with the restructuring of the mining industry , the steel industry and now textiles , you can see how important this issue is and thus how serious this debate is in our regions .
Before Mr Ribeiro 's report on a textile action plan is even discussed in the House , we need to know the precise intentions of the Commission and the Council with respect to this industry and , by way of consequence , with respect to the regions which are struggling to find a way out from a deep economic and social , if not moral , crisis .
The Commission 's response to this question is vital , since we are told that hundreds of thousands of jobs are still under threat , in spite of the past loss of more than 600 000 jobs .
Our regions have today reached their limit .
And under such conditions , strong , clear , specific measures need to be implemented in favour of this sector to reduce the costs which weigh on jobs with a low added value .
I will say this once again , it is also necessary to fight against the savage and economically unjustified relocations which are taking place .
I know there is reluctance on the part of the liberalist purists , alarmed by the prospect of such aid .
But it is the only way to combat the social dumping being practised by certain countries , which constitutes unfair competition for the European Union , its industry , its jobs and its social model .
I am sure Mr Ribeiro 's report will be an important document .
It is just as important that the Commission and the Council move in this direction from now on .
It is also a question of putting all the resolutions of the Luxembourg Employment Summit into practice , as well as the necessary and vital fight against unemployment which , we all know very well , strengthens a little the position of anti-European extreme right-wing nationalists throughout Europe .
Mr President , facing the requirement to provide a positive answer to the problem of employment , the Luxembourg Employment Summit last November , and the Ecofin Council in the same period , pointed out , among other things , the possibility of intervening by lightening the tax or contribution burden in the highly labour-intensive sectors .
In the manufacturing industry , textiles and clothing certainly constitute the most highly labour-intensive sector , particularly in terms of female labour .
If we want to protect employment and the manufacturing sector , we need to be consistent with our declared objectives , without penalizing the workers and their wages .
The Commission 's action plan should therefore provide answers on how to meet the serious implication of the cost of labour on the overall costs in this sector .
We also need to help highquality products by adopting a policy to support small and medium-sized enterprises in the sector , to increase the fashion content and the quality of the raw materials used .
For this purpose , an integrated policy for spinning should be implemented in the areas involved and in the textiles and clothing districts such as the Carpi region , where I come from .
We have often talked about equal opportunities in this Parliament .
If we really want to promote employment , particularly for women , this is a sector to be defended and consolidated by the extension and positive administration of the Multifibre Arrangement , as well as rigorous controls at specialist points on the frontiers , to avoid the abuse of outward processing traffic .
In the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , we have started discussing the Commission 's action plan with regard to textiles and clothing , a plan which seems inadequate to deal with the problems in the sector .
The proposals should be revised , improved and made more specific and feasible .
Mr President , this resolution must not be interpreted as an open or covert demand for protectionist measures to reduce the EU 's import of textile products .
During the 1960s and 1970s Sweden 's textiles and clothing industry , for example , was exposed to competition which led to an extensive shake-up and demands for change .
The countries responsible for strong rises in exports included Portugal , Italy and Finland .
These exporting countries demanded free trade in textile products and did not tolerate any departure from trade commitments , and Sweden also resisted domestic demands for trade restrictions .
If the EU now resorted to trade barriers , such as by referring to social clauses or the need for anti-dumping measures , this would also damage EU countries which have already reformed their textiles industry to benefit from free trade .
It would also reduce the scope for poor developing countries to participate in international trade .
In the long term the whole of the EU would lose from protectionist intervention .
If the EU resorted to import barriers , it would be met with counter measures from other countries .
This would then hit the kind of production in the EU which has a higher processing value than textiles and which will provide more jobs for EU countries in the long term .
Certainly there are cases of anti-dumping , but this argument is often misused when the real motive is pure protectionism . The same applies to social clauses .
It is important to see the challenges for the regions exposed to demands for change .
Coping with competition from new countries requires dynamic companies and flexible labour markets .
The ability to implement changes and create new industries is the dynamic process which provides increased prosperity .
That is our mission , Mr President , not trade barriers .
Mr President , I will be brief , given the time and the fact that my earlier longer response anticipated a certain number of the questions which have been put to me .
It is clear that the textiles industry is a highly sensitive sector .
You do not have to tell me , Mrs Moreau , I am as aware of this fact as you .
It is also a sector which has experienced considerable restructuring but which has subsequently greatly strengthened its competitiveness and is now making sure it is the world market leader .
This said , of course , the future is not all rosy , I agree with you .
That is why efforts must be continued , based principally on the establishment of an environment favourable to the development of businesses , in order to enable them to adapt and to draw on their assets , assets which include a high added value , innovation and quality .
It is therefore up to the public authorities , essentially at national level in this respect , given the lack of content , at least in the French sense of the word , of the so-called industrial policy at Community level .
Secondly , it is important that at European level the single market , the domestic market , is effectively put in place , for it is the size of the market alone which will finally enable each company to have greater potential for outlets at their disposal .
Thirdly , and this seems important to me in relation to third countries , a policy which is both aggressive yet fair must be followed .
When I say aggressive , I mean that when exporting , we must use all our abilities in international negotiations to ensure that the obstacles to trade which our companies encounter when they export may be removed .
This is the challenge of past , and above all , future negotiations .
With regard to imports , it is also vital to ensure that the rules are uniformly applied .
I can assure you that in the area of antidumping , the Commission enforces the rules strictly and takes the decisions that it has to take .
Mr Chanterie , you mentioned Russian carpets earlier .
I seem to remember that not so long ago , measures were taken .
I believe that with regard to Brazil , the Commission is examining the situation .
Apart from that , I would refer you to what I said earlier regarding the means available within Community programmes .
I am not going to discuss this again .
Within the different aspects mentioned , the Community programmes enable the necessary support to be given to those European companies who so desire it and who fulfil the conditions , for them to continue their modernization efforts , which will enable them to develop and to make the most of their assets .
I will end on a point concerning international organizations , that of the social clause .
The Commission attaches a great deal of importance to this .
My colleague Padraig Flynn knows this much more than I , particularly within the framework of the International Labour Organization and , as far as environmental clauses are concerned , as I noted earlier , these are currently the subject of in-depth studies , within the framework of the World Trade Organization 's groups .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Apprenticeship training in Europe
The next item is the report ( A4-0135 / 98 ) by Mr Castagnetti , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the promotion of European pathways for work-linked training , including apprenticeship ( ( COM ( 97 ) 0572 - C4-0064 / 98-97 / 0321 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , this decision essentially has two objectives .
The first is to promote the mobility of trainees , and in this sense it is included in the subject we are dealing with in this session : the euro helps us to integrate Europe even further , to bring the European Economic Area even closer , to consolidate the internal market , and therefore to consolidate an area in which the free movement of people and , in this context , the free movement of trainees , should actually be promoted .
The other objective is to direct training increasingly at market and industry requirements , to provide answers to the changes requested , to make training a real start in the world of employment , and in this sense I believe that this measure also answers the numerous actions identified by the European Summit held last November in Luxembourg on combating unemployment .
How can these objectives be promoted ?
Through mobility : mobility between school and work , training mobility between one country and another , mobility between one occupation and another .
Who are the people for whom this mobility is intended ?
It is aimed at workers , young people in training and the training officers themselves , and through the promotion of mobility among young people in training , training officers , workers who lose their jobs and who must , and in some respects want , through training , to find another occupation , we will also achieve mobility , not only of training models but also of cultures and industrial techniques .
Everyone , every young person , every apprentice moving from one country to another , from school to a company , also takes with him skills and cultures that are beneficial to the person taking him on .
We know there are limits to the Treaty ; Articles 126 and 127 protect the independence of the academic and training regulations of the individual countries and in this sense this European pathway is seen as a means of training that is applied to existing programmes . It is not a new programme , it is a type of work-linked training , it is a means offered as an opportunity to the Member States and therefore implies voluntary acceptance .
The preparatory work we have undertaken in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs was first and foremost a discussion , to find out whether this decision answered the demand put by the social parties .
We have discussed the matter with other Parliamentary committees , we have discussed the matter with other Community institutions , with the Economic and Social Committee , with Chambers of Commerce , with Craft Chambers in various European cities , with trade unions and with manufacturers ' associations , and we have received a positive response .
The Informal Council of Ministers of Education and Employment , held in London last March , confirmed this direction , in the sense that it confirmed the commitment to promote work-linked training through partnership experiences .
In this spirit , the committee almost unanimously presented a series of amendments which I hope can be approved unanimously that substantially aim to create synergy between the incentives the Commission will have to produce and the actions of the national states , not in the spirit of a Commission that is not watchful and is limiting itself to recording what the Member States are doing but one that is encouraging and asking them to accept this proposal .
These amendments aim to monitor , through the EURES network , the experience acquired in the past , its effectiveness and the existence of a network of companies prepared to accept young trainees .
In short , we should use all the means the Community has established over the years .
With these amendments , we also want to encourage an initiative taken by the Commission and the Member States to identify the most receptive production structures , in terms of the workforce , so that vocational training becomes increasingly more effective in creating actual jobs .
With our amendments , we want to promote the actual application of this decision by urging all Member States to take part , even those that have not yet provided for training in their regulations .
We want to guarantee security , the protection of these experiences in work places that are healthy and welcoming for our young people who adopt this system of work-linked training .
We want to guarantee a minimum three-month period for this experience to ensure that there is no breach of the spirit of work-linked training and that it does not turn into educational tourism .
We need actual workplace experience .
In short , with this decision taken by the Commission and Council , our ambition is to start a process of modernization , of real Europeanization of knowledge and training processes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think in German the existence of the two words " Lehrling ' , apprentice , and " Auszubildender ' , trainee , in itself shows how diverse the reality is .
We have expressions which apply to very different sets of circumstances .
In fact , all that they have in common is that they do not involve a largely theoretical university qualification .
However , despite this difference , we can define a few common areas .
A European dimension will be required for all countries and European vocational training is a necessary doorway to mobility within the internal market , especially for those who have not gone to university .
We must create incentives ; we need a certificate that people can carry with them and produce when necessary , a Europass .
We must have examinations and assessments to move ahead with this process .
My colleague mentioned a whole range of other problems .
As yet there is no common legal framework , but only a decision to promote one .
We still have to achieve a guarantee of transparent quality .
And , most importantly , we still have to mainstream the process and to guarantee equality of opportunity without discrimination . The Commission is also responsible for providing a regular report on this initiative to guarantee a minimum of progress .
We all know that as long as practical and theoretical training are not integrated - and this may eventually come about - for the time being they are at least complementary access points .
Implicit knowledge acquired through practice does not simply disappear , but it reinvents itself again and again hand in hand with technological progress .
To this extent it is of key significance to offer training qualifications for those who do not graduate from university , and to provide these qualifications with a European dimension in the European internal market .
There is a good deal of merit in what the Commission has so far achieved , but here in Parliament it is up to us move it forward and provide a structure for this process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this proposal has the potential to encourage the development of apprenticeships with an added European value .
It aims to provide opportunities for those who are taking part in work-linked training and their employers to benefit from the trainees or apprentices receiving part of their training in another Member State and for that training to be accredited .
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , when considering this proposal for legislation , sought to make significant improvements and in his speech our rapporteur Mr Castagnetti has already explained some of the thinking behind his very helpful proposals .
Perhaps I could highlight some of the issues which we would like the Council and Commission to consider .
We think that this proposal should be seen and implemented as part of the whole package of measures that the EU is engaged in to encourage employment , education and training .
Several amendments refer to the need for synergy between this measure and other Community programmes and initiatives .
It is also very necessary to ensure that such European pathways are open to all groups and that there is real equality of opportunity built in .
Since it is very likely that the majority of those who take up these opportunities will be young people , it is particularly important that health and safety aspects are considered .
Young people at work or training in another European country will need a level of protection .
We would also like to see the involvement of the social partners and small and micro businesses in this initiative .
We want to see the provision of training for the mentors themselves and an agreement on the minimum period for placements of training .
We certainly need effective systems of monitoring and evaluation and last , but by no means least , a Community budget .
With the suggested improvements that have come forward from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , this scheme could improve both the mobility of apprentices and the quality of work-linked training received by apprentices and therefore make a contribution towards raising skills levels in the EU .
Mr President , almost two years ago the Florence European Council called for a report from the Commission on the value of dual vocational training .
In my country , this form of training has a long tradition .
Knowledge is acquired , skills are learnt through training , social behaviour and the ability to integrate are learnt through practice .
The very practical nature of dual training qualifies young people for the ever more complex demands of the labour markets and helps to reduce youth unemployment considerably .
The basis for this is cooperation between schools and businesses .
If it works and is constantly checked for new challenges from the point of view of education , organization and content , then the dual system has a future and offers a future to others .
However , within Europe , dual systems are still different , as indicated by Mr Castagnetti in his excellent report , so we must bring them closer together , aiming for European vocational training channels whilst actively involving employers and employees .
Measures in the Member States acquire a European added value at the same time as subsidiarity and responsibility for vocational training are preserved . This is made possible through intensive exchanges of information and experience , through implementing model projects and promoting mobility and trips abroad , tailor-made for individuals and financed by Community programmes such as the Leonardo da Vinci programme .
Today we are debating and tomorrow we will adopt two important issues simultaneously .
Firstly , there is the convergence report on the euro and the Member States .
But we are also looking at part of the future of vocational training .
If everything goes according to plan , from 1 January 1999 we will have a single currency and a common vocational training programme .
The path from the internal market to the European domestic market involves small steps as well as large ones .
Mr President , I too would like to welcome the Commissioner to the House and to pay tribute to him and to Mr Castagnetti for their initiative on this proposal for the promotion of European pathways for work-linked training including apprenticeship .
There are 18 million long-term unemployed in Europe at the moment .
Yet , in any country in Europe there are employers and businesses crying out for staff and they claim they cannot get them .
This is not just because of low wages nor just because of lack of social protection .
It is because of a lack of skills and a lack of work-related skills .
We are in the process of ratifying the Amsterdam Treaty which includes a special chapter on unemployment and we are introducing this new coordinated path of having national employment plans submitted to Brussels to be assessed by the Commission and evaluated at the end of the first year .
So we must guarantee that we can deliver real skills and real training to people to allow them to get real jobs , not simply massage the figures to take them off the unemployment statistics for a few months .
Between 1994 and 1999 the state-training agency in Ireland received £ 428 million for vocational training and education .
This had a dramatic impact on improving the available workforce to the growing industrial base and services base in Ireland .
From an Irish point of view it is essential that this funding continue after the year 2000 and up to the year 2006 .
It is also essential that we look at new models and new ways of training , and that we create this synergy between the employers , the trade unions and the unemployed themselves to develop the best models for coping for them .
In Ireland at the present time there are 14 000 apprentices of which about 11 400 are in the new system of standard-based apprenticeship and roughly 2 600 in the old system which was time-based .
It is essential that we in Parliament and the Commission , keep our minds , and our ears and our eyes open , for new ways of tackling the unemployment problem .
Finally , I should like very briefly to quote the following : ' Give a man a fish and you feed him for a day , teach a man to fish and you feed him for life ' .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Castagnetti on his excellent work and also express my appreciation to the Commission for the initiative taken .
One of the problems faced by all Member States in attempting to promote employment among young people is that of promoting and encouraging closer cooperation between schools and businesses , and this is also one of the objectives contained in the White Paper on the learning society .
The Institute of Apprenticeship , while operating under various procedures in the various Member States , is considered a privileged meeting place between these two worlds and therefore a sector for priority intervention by the Union .
The mobility of students , workers , teachers , training officers and trade unionists throughout Europe has had a great boost in Europe on account of the Commission 's incentives , provided through programmes such as PETRA , COMETT and FORCE in the past , or Leonardo and Socrates today .
This trend should be supported , or rather encouraged , with particular reference to the placement of students in industry and the requirements of work-linked training for apprentices .
However , alongside the essential quantitative increase in mobility , we also need to provide a counterbalance in terms of quality in the consensual determination of rules and behaviour able to guarantee the educational efficacy of placements and exchanges .
We should therefore welcome the proposal we are debating today on the establishment of the " European pathways ' programme and the " EUROPASS ' certificate intended to establish specific quality standards for the promotion and achievement of placements and to introduce the practice of certification within a modus operandi that is currently too deregulated and lacking in guarantees for those taking part .
However , this proposal is not enough in itself to resolve all the problems and remove all the obstacles connected with mobility in the area of work-linked training .
The Commission has recognized this and has announced that , within the context of the new Leonardo programme , it wants to create an ERASMUS for apprenticeship to facilitate mobility in this area .
Not only do we need to create an ERASMUS for apprenticeship , but we also need to provide the social security resources to enable the mobility of apprentices and set up a monitoring system , as the rapporteur said in his speech .
As the European Parliament , we will ensure that the Commission keeps its promises , in the context of the proposed training and educational programmes for future generations .
Mr President , there can be no doubt that the superb report by Mr Castagnetti is a milestone on the way to better youth employment .
The report highlights two core elements . One is the mobility of young people , which must be increased in order to increase their opportunities .
The second is the actual qualification and the quality of training . This must generally be raised , especially in the area of qualifications for skilled workers , and this is an issue that has been mentioned here many times .
Without doubt , mobility will be increased by the proposals , by means of mutual recognition , documenting vocational training in a Europass and pulling down bureaucratic barriers .
The other element is dual training which will increase quality .
One problem is the fact that we are training far too many young people for the wrong careers .
In my country , we train up to 80 % of young people for only eleven careers , so the chances of finding an adequate job are correspondingly low .
I would , therefore , like to add a proposal to this excellent report , a proposal which might bring us one more step forward . We should request that the Commission draws up an annual qualitative occupational needs analysis , which highlights what the labour market really requires in the medium and possibly also in the longer term .
This information should then be made available to countries as a service , to give them something to use on a voluntary basis as a point of reference .
This would mean that they could adjust or convert their vocational training systems so that later , young people would really be trained to meet actual demand in the labour market .
That could be an additional incentive : to train young people to meet precisely this demand and give them the opportunity to find their first job .
This would open up a whole new approach .
Mr President , I would also like to thank Mr Castagnetti for the excellent work he has done in preparing this report .
There are two dimensions to sandwich courses and apprenticeship training : the financial and the socio-economic , and they complement each other .
On the other hand , it is important to stress that small and medium-sized companies have a special role as employers .
The viability of this sector will have large-scale effects on European prosperity and the employment of the young .
That is why common resources must be put into this sector , enabling it to offer apprenticeships and places for young trainees .
Mr Castagnetti also outlines a process for linking this with the work of the labour market organizations .
The Commission should mention in its proposal just how important the role of the employers ' associations is .
This latter has been underrated for a long time now as a fully-fledged participant in social dialogue within the Union .
Harmonizing apprenticeship systems also means broader aims for harmonization in examinations .
Successfully getting the young into work and making the free movement of the workforce viable will require exams to follow a pattern that is common to all Europe in terms of their structure , length , content and degree of difficulty .
The main responsibility for the harmonization of exams and the training and apprenticeship periods that go with them belongs to the authorities in the Member States of the Union .
Only through direct cooperation and sharing information can the necessary confidence be created to form a basis for the general responsibility of the European nations for exams .
It is no advantage to European educational systems that so-called reliable standards have always been , as it were , handed down from on high .
Mr President , let me straight away thank Mr Castagnetti for his great efforts on this report and all those who contributed to the debate .
The aim of the proposal to the Parliament and the Council for the decision on the promotion of the European pathways for work-linked training , including apprenticeships , the Commission 's objective is to promote mobility of people in training in Europe whatever their age .
This was particularly remarked upon by Mr Castagnetti and I support him .
This corresponds to three major thrusts of Community policy : completing the internal market , building a citizens ' Europe and creating a Europe of knowledge .
In all of these three aspects mobility of people under-going training is so very important .
The Community 's experience of bi-lateral and multi-lateral cooperation between Member States , demonstrates clearly that there is a keen demand for training at all levels , including higher education .
Between 1995 and 1997 the Leonardo da Vinci programme has enabled 100 000 people to receive support for a period of training in another Member State .
On this basis of the experience which has been build up and in view of the strong growth in need and demand , it is important for us now to increase this mobility and to ensure that it is as fruitful as possible .
To do this we must agree at European level on a common quality framework to develop real European pathways of training and to increase their visibility .
The proposal which is based on Article 127 of the Treaty has a two-fold purpose .
Firstly , it seeks to define the content and shared general quality principles for periods of work-linked training in another Member State , linked to the training which the person concerned is following in country which she or he comes from .
Secondly , it aims to ensure that the training is more easily understood and has a higher profile thanks to a certificate known as the Euro Pass Training which validates the work or training experience acquired .
As Mr Castagnetti has pointed out , it is also linked of course to the European Union 's employment policy and the guidelines which were agreed at the Job Summit last November .
I would like to take the opportunity to thank all the Members of the House , and especially Mr Castagnetti , rapporteur for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee , for your suggestions .
The Commission has noticed , the interest which this proposal has generated in other committees : the Committee for Culture , Youth , Education and the Media for which Mr Kerr was the rapporteur ; the Budget Committee with Mr Bösch and the Committee for Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy with Mr Skinner , all of whom I would like to thank .


Parliament proposed 28 Amendments , 26 of which can be accepted including Amendment No 28 in part .
These amendments improve our proposal and in some cases even reinforce it .
I would mention in particular the amendments which highlight the role of SMEs and crafts in developing work-linked training , because the specific character of these types of business requires particular conditions , and those which stress the social partners and the other parties involved in the apprenticeships .
Then there are the amendments which aim to promote good information and wider based support systems for those European pathways such as health care , safety in the workplace and languages .
I would like to thank Mrs Waddington , who drew our attention to this element which is a key factor for their success .
Thirdly , there are amendments which stress the voluntary character of the implementation of the European pathways .
The Commission is conscious of the diversity of polices in the Member States and this proposal does not seek to modify either the organization or the content of training systems and machinery in the Member States .


On the other hand , the two Amendments relating to duration could pose some difficulties .
I have in mind Mr Castagnetti 's Amendment No 19 which specifies that the overall duration should not be less than three months and Mr Ettl 's Amendment No 21 which seeks to ensure that the pathways should not lengthen the period of training provided for in the Member State of origin .
I understand the concerns underlying these Amendments , no one wants these European pathways to amount to mere tourism , as was referred to in the contributions .
We must be sure that they provide periods of real quality training .
This is why the Commission proposes that their duration should be closely linked to the objectives of the European pathway and to the skill to be acquired .
All this must be specified in advance in an agreement between the sending partner , host partner and the beneficiary .
The diversity of systems , the specificity of particular branches of activity , but also the wide range of durations suggested in the course of the debate , show the difficulty of fixing a minimum duration .
To conclude Mr President , I can assure you that what you propose for the future , particularly regarding the new programmes , and with a special emphasis on the Leonardo da Vinci programme , will be very carefully considered .
This latter programme must increasingly promote mobility for people engaged in work-linked training and become as my colleague Edith Cresson has said on more than one occasion an ' Erasmus for trainees . '
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Supplementary pension rights
The next item is the report ( A4-0134 / 98 ) by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive on safeguarding the supplementary pension rights of employed and self-employed persons moving within the European Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0486 - C4-0661 / 97-97 / 0265 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , I am speaking instead of the rapporteur tonight .
Sadly , he cannot be with us . He has to attend to important business in Austria .
That is a pity because he has produced excellent work in the form of this report .
In fact , it is a mark of the success of his work as rapporteur that the report was adopted unanimously in committee .
Just one point of difference remained which had not been adequately addressed in the vote and that is now covered here in plenary in the form of Amendment No 18 with the full backing of the Socialist , EPP and Liberal Groups .
That degree of consensus is not arrived at easily ; it requires hard work , and I should like to congratulate Harald Ettl for the success of that work .
The proposal concerns the safeguarding of the supplementary pension rights of employed and self-employed workers moving within the European Union .
As such , it concerns an important practical step towards giving realization to freedom of movement .
That freedom of movement for workers is enshrined in the Treaty but in practice a mass of real practical difficulties stand in the way of its proper realization .
One such practical difficulty concerns the shortcomings in the coordination of supplementary pension schemes between the Member States and the fundamentally different weightings of state and supplementary social insurance systems in the various Member States .
These pose very real obstacles to freedom of movement .
This proposal will not remove all the difficulties by any means .
Those difficulties have to be seen against the backdrop of the Commission 's 1997 Green Paper on supplementary pensions ; that itself arose from the failure of a proposal for a directive on the freedom of management and investment of pension funds which was submitted in 1992 and then withdrawn .
That was followed by a 1995 directive attempting to tackle some of these difficulties .
That was itself stalled after reaching the Commission , much to Commissioner Flynn 's frustration at the time .
That in turn led to the establishment of a high-level panel of experts on the freedom of movement of persons chaired by Mrs Simone Weil .
All of these various attempts have focused on three main difficulties facing workers in relation to freedom of movement and supplementary pensions .
The first is the long qualifying periods which are necessary in some Member States for acquiring pension rights .
It is clear that several years ' employment in a company is required before an employee acquires rights , that is an obstacle to free movement .
The second is the transferability of pension rights and the third is the issue of double taxation .
An interim report of the Weil Group in November 1996 focussed on an approach which offered at least a start to the solving of some of these difficulties .
The approach suggested in that interim report is followed in the proposal we are considering here tonight .
It restricts itself to securing the principle of equal treatment for migrant workers .
It places emphasis on the preservation of rights of migrant workers as opposed to the transferability of rights from one scheme to another .
There are four main component to the proposal .
The first is in Article 4 which ensures that the vested rights of members of a scheme are preserved when the member of the scheme moves to another Member State .
Article 5 , the second component , ensures that members of the scheme who live in another Member State receive payments in respect of all benefits to which they are entitled under the scheme .
The third component concerns the situation of workers posted abroad . That is dealt with in Article 6 and 7 .
The final component - which will be very important - is contained in Article 8 . That requires the managers of pension schemes to provide all relevant information for scheme members wishing to exercise their right to move to another Member State .
All these provisions are important .
The main amendments submitted in the report from Harald Ettl , is Amendment No 4 .
It draws attention to the fact that this directive can only be seen as a first step towards the regulation of the supplementary pension system within the Member States of the Union and says that where necessary the Council in future will need to adopt further acts on waiting periods and the general and cross-frontier transferability of vested pension rights .
This proposal is a step in the right direction .
I hope the Commission will take particular account of Amendment No 4 and I congratulate the rapporteur on his work .
Mr President , I believe that , as Mr Hughes said , this proposal can only be considered to be a first step because it is a proposal for a restrictive directive in relation to the significance of the problem , which is to ensure effective mobility of workers , according them status of some importance .
It is true that Amendment No 4 aims at pension rights held , that is , acquired rights ; unfortunately , however , one amendment proposed by the Committee on Legal Affairs and by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has not been accepted . This lay somewhere between the long periods laid down by some states , and the overly short periods laid down by others , and adopted the solution of the high-level panel , chaired by Mrs Simone Veil , which proposed five years .
However , the Commission 's proposal takes its idea from an amendment , or rather adopts it , of the Committee on Legal Affairs on the interpretation of Regulations Nos 1408 / 71 and 574 / 72 , that is Amendment No 1 .
This is very important because it offers an additional framework , from the legal point of view , between this proposal and the regulations the Commission had interpreted too rigidly , providing an interpretation connected with the compulsory pension schemes .
In fact , by replacing " only ' with " primarily ' , Amendment No 1 opens the way to supplementary voluntary , contractual pensions and therefore an integration that harmonizes the legislation fairly adequately .
In my opinion , this is therefore a positive proposal overall , which we should naturally see incorporated into the Green Paper which this Parliament will soon receive and which will constitute the mosaic in which the central problem will be situated .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to explain the position of the Socialist group .
As our chairman has already said , this report was adopted unanimously in committee and there is broad consensus amongst all the groups in the House on this issue .
I would , therefore , like to start by thanking Harald Ettl for his very hard work on this very complicated issue .
And we should not forget the panel of experts chaired by Simone Veil which deserves thanks for its excellent work for Parliament and , I hope , also for the Commission 's legislative proposals , as we are particularly keen to hear these .
At the moment , around 300 000 men and women are working within the Member States of the EU in a different country from the one they previously lived in .
Actually , this figure is much less than we once thought , and we have assumed from the beginning of the internal market that it would increase .
There are many reasons for this , certainly some individual , but also some political ones .
It is our task to look at the political reasons .
They are an issue which we have covered in great depth in recent months , especially in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Women 's Rights .
The issue has been debated in detail in recent months in Parliament , and we are becoming ever more aware that national regulations and provisions raise an incredible number of obstructions ; I would almost go so far as to say they amount to harassment .
This is one of the political reasons for the situation .
The second reason , Commissioner Flynn , and I will say this openly , is that in the past the Commission was somewhat hesitant and sluggish in dealing with this issue ; any progress made was blocked by the Council - the same old story .
However , a small step has been taken and it is a good one .
In any case , it will ensure that employees in Europe will not be worse off if they make use of the freedom of movement which they have been guaranteed .
Of the three pillars of pension provision , the company supplementary pension scheme is still relatively small , especially in my country ; in Germany it makes up less than 5-7 % of contracts .
But we know that in future these supplementary schemes will have a more important role than they had in the past .
What must be important to us is that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I welcome the proposal of the Commission .
I would also like to congratulate Mr Ettl for his objective and balanced report .
He describes clearly the issue of migrant workers who under certain circumstances face reduced entitlement to supplementary pensions if they work in different Member States . This naturally has a negative impact on the freedom of movement and often on necessary mobility .
In past years there were repeated calls for the supplementary systems to be assigned to Regulation No 1408 , which previously only applied to the statutory social insurance schemes of migrant workers .
The multiplicity of supplementary pension schemes simply does not permit a straightforward addition of periods of contribution payments , as is the case under 1408 .
This proposal for a directive contains only some initial steps - as several speakers have indicated - towards a common approach to supplementary schemes .
I would prioritize their urgency and the need for them as follows : firstly , protection of entitlement already acquired from company or supplementary pension schemes ; secondly , transnational payments of pensions from company pension schemes , in other words , exportability of benefits as envisaged in Regulation No 1408 ; thirdly , the establishment of special arrangements for short-term employment postings to other Member States .
Mr Ettl 's report sets out the objectives of the directive better and replaces imprecise definitions .
The directive contains some of the measures proposed in the Green Paper on supplementary pensions .
In addition , the Green Paper places particular emphasis on enabling transnational investment in pension funds , thereby improving freedom of movement .
This type of fund already plays an important role in several EU Member States .
In my own country , Germany , we have just started to develop these . However a key to the new asset policy which so many parties are striving for is to make shares in this kind of unit trust attractive , particularly to employees with lower incomes , by extending the statutory range of investment facilities beyond asset formation by employees .
In my view , profit-sharing from property ownership for employees is an important way forward , if not as a second pillar alongside statutory pensions , then as supplementary income in old age .
The Ettl report does not cover this perspective of course , but rightly concentrates on the proposal for a directive from the Commission and improves it in some important points .
For this reason , the Group of the European People 's Party will vote for the report .
Mr President , this report deals principally with the cross-frontier transferability of pensions , and it has been rightly pointed out by a number of my colleagues that it is a first step and that the directive is in fact a rather limited one .
I was actually rather taken by what Mr Ferri said in his report on the free movement of workers , that this requires a completely different approach to the transferability of pensions .
I think we will have to sort this out when we are dealing with the Green Paper , as the entire issue will obviously come up again there .
Nonetheless , in his written contribution Mr Ettl has pointed to problems , such as double taxation and in some countries the long qualifying periods for pensions , which should be consigned to the past .
You cannot tell workers that their behaviour should be more flexible on the one hand , and tie them down on the other - and I say this to Mrs Menrad in particular - with extremely long qualifying periods .
To be honest , I think this is a form of theft from the worker .
We should have the courage to resolve this from within Europe .
A number of issues have been improved by this report , in particular with regard to the definition of posting , I believe good proposals have been made .
I hope the Commission will want to adopt them .
I would also like to thank Mr Ettl sincerely for his admirable cooperation , and I hope our chairman , Mr Hughes , will pass this on , because I believe that the cooperation in this case has been excellent .
But , again , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , Commissioner , this is really only a first step on the way to solving an issue which we have to solve with regard to pensions .
The Commission can expect a great deal from us if we are able to cooperate as we are doing in this Parliament at present .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Ettl in his absence for a good report .
In general , I can surely say that I believe the pension system is something which is being discussed in all Member States , in view , among other things , of the rising proportion of elderly , which means that more or less all pension systems need to be revised , especially state ones .
We are not discussing that here today , but these systems are the most important , and I would like to emphasize that for our citizens .
It is the supplementary pensions that are being discussed here .
As a previous speaker said , they are becoming increasingly important .
The problem with supplementary pensions is , above all , the difficulties with regard to the single market and the restrictions which exist in terms of the freedom of movement .
This is discussed in part in the Commission 's proposal , which says that workers who are sent abroad by their employer should be able to belong to the system which they belonged to before .
Guarantees are also given that they will be informed of their right to a pension and the rules which exist in the EU when they move .
These are of course , as several others have said , important proposals .
However , they are not enough and are only a first step .
The difficulties which Mr Ettl has pointed out , the long earning periods , the problems of transferability and the question of double taxation are issues which must be raised in future and supplemented in future proposals from the Commission in order for freedom of movement to be realized .
Meanwhile , I am of course supporting this proposal , which is a good one , but it is important to emphasize again that this is a first step .
Mr President , I should like to thank all those who have contributed .
I should preface my remarks by saying that you are all quite right .
This is just a start , a very small start , and it must be followed up in due course by further proposals .
In that context I should like to congratulate the rapporteur .
Even though he is absent , Mr Hughes has done an excellent presentation on his behalf .
I thank all of you for the excellent work done here .
We are all allies in the task of removing obstacles to free movement related to supplementary pensions and making progress towards achieving a fundamental principle of the Treaty .
The purpose of this proposal for a Council directive on which your opinion is requested is to provide protection as regards supplementary pension schemes for the pension rights of workers and members of their families who move from one Member State of the European Union to another .
This proposal takes into account the conclusions of the high level panel on free movement chaired by Mrs Weil .
It constitutes a first step in removing identified obstacles in this area .
The proposal will have a positive affect on labour market mobility since workers will be less hindered from going to work in another Member State .
Similarly , the proposal will make it easier for companies who wish to second workers within their organization to work in another Member State .
As emphasized in the 1997 Green Paper on supplementary pensions and the single market , supplementary pension schemes play an important role as a second pillar of social security which complements the protection provided by the statutory schemes .
As more and more Union citizens turn to these supplementary pension schemes as a way of guaranteeing adequate income in their retirement , protection of the rights in these schemes becomes more important .
In this Green Paper the Commission looked at several issues , a number of which are intended to deepen the analysis of obstacles to free movement and are outside the scope of this present proposal .
In particular , it addressed the question of long vesting periods , difficulties with transferability of vested pension rights and tax difficulties linked to acquiring pension rights in more than one Member State .
The proposal before us today , once adopted , should form the basis for renewed political effort to remove the remaining obstacles .
And that is the key point .
This is the start .
It must lead on to further efforts to remove the obstacles .
I can accept eleven of your amendments in the belief that this will enable the Commission proposal to go ahead and to be adopted by the Council .
We hope this is going to happen in June under the United Kingdom presidency .
The amendments the Commission is willing to accept are as follows : Nos 2 and 3 in principle , part of No 4 and Amendments Nos 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 and 9 , 13 , 14 and 17 .

These amendments clarify the existing provisions and reflect the concerns of Parliament about legal certainty and its commitment to further action to be taken to remove the remaining obstacles to free movement .
Amendment No 1 raises some technical legal complications that require further consideration .
So I must reserve the Commission 's position on this amendment for today .
I must also reserve our position on Amendment No 18 which I have seen for the very first time tonight and which would seem to require some very careful consideration .
I cannot accept Amendments Nos 10 , 11 , 12 or 15 because these restrict the scope of the proposal .
Amendments Nos 10 , 11 and 12 restrict the personal scope of the directive .
Amendment No 15 restricts the material scope of the directive since the trans-border affiliation for posted workers provided for by Article 6 should be limited only in schemes of comparable entitlement in the host Member State and in the country of origin .
As far as Amendment No 16 is concerned , it cannot be accepted at this stage because it goes beyond the aim of Article 7 to which it refers .
You will note that Article 7 deals with taxation aspects of supplementary pensions contributions made on or behalf of a posted worker .
This is the most sensitive aspect of the proposal for which a political agreement in the Council is going to be very difficult to achieve anyway .
The tax aspects of supplementary pensions need a broader approach in order to find suitable solutions to the existing problems and by avoiding additional and simultaneous double taxation for persons moving within the European Union .
These tax aspects are under discussion with all involved parties in the context of the Green Paper .
I trust that on this basis we can consider that we have a political agreement and that the Commission proposal can go forward for adoption by the Council , as amended following the adoption of Parliament 's opinion .
I look forward to making further advances on this matter at a later date .
Thank you , Commissioner Flynn .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Mr President , you have chaired this evening 's sitting very fairly , so I would again like to point out that my group applied for three minutes for me , otherwise I would have planned my speech very differently .
Secondly , there was no red light after two minutes were up .
I would be grateful if you could take note of this .
I should explain , Mrs Weiler , that according to my notes here your speaking time was two minutes .
So far during this debate , you are the Member who has gone furthest over the allotted speaking time .
That is why I had to interrupt you , because you were already over your time-limit by a third .
We are probably both right , but that is what happened and I wanted to explain it to you .
Judgments in matrimonial matters
The next item is the report ( A4-0131 / 98 ) by Mr Verde i Aldea , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the draft Convention on jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgements in matrimonial matters ( 13245 / 97 - C4-0063 / 98-97 / 0918 ( CNS ) ) .
Draftsman of the opinion : Mrs d 'Ancona , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs ( Hughes Procedure ) .
Mr President , 30 years ago the then European Economic Community realized that increased international trade meant that the Member States of that Community had to reach a convention to determine competence and how to implement sentences in contractual matters .
Contracts were - and are increasingly so today - international contracts , especially in the Union , and that convention was absolutely necessary .
It was drawn up in the form of a convention because the Community had no competence in that area .
Thirty years later , we can say that that 1968 Brussels Convention , under the jurisdictional tutelage of the Court of Justice , has progressed satisfactorily during that time .
Having reached this point , the Member States have realized that there is another area too - that of the freedom of movement of persons - which has given rise to a situation of transfers and contacts between the different countries within the Union , which has led to increasing numbers of marriages between nationals of different Member States .
At the same time , another phenomenon has arisen - maybe not parallel , but also on the increase : the phenomenon of marriage breakdown , with sentences of divorce , separation , annulment and so on .
The Council has realized this and has now presented this draft convention on matrimonial matters , under the guidelines of what is beginning to be a Community competence - judicial cooperation - which so far involves Articles K of the Treaty on European Union .
This Parliament is just acting in a consultative capacity as regards this convention presented by the Council .
The Council is not here for this debate , so I do not have to make any very profound remarks to try to convince them of the value of our amendments . However , I will say that Parliament and the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights have been inclined to accept this convention .
We know it has been debated at length in the Council because this question has given rise to tensions between Member States , - especially between the Nordic countries , which also have a convention and have done so for a long time , and others . The effect has been to make this an extremely delicate text , and any amendment could once again call into question the whole convention .
The amendments presented by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights - where they were approved almost unanimously - do not attempt to make any great change to the convention .
There was a proposal from the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs to try to achieve a new convention , with a view to the forthcoming implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty .
But obviously , the Amsterdam Treaty is not in force , so it is better to base things on the current competences of each of the institutions .
So I have restricted myself to accepting some of the amendments from that committee .
Mr President , the amendments are certainly not an attempt to change the convention .
They try to clarify some important points .
I will only mention one of them , which would create a special article concerned with questions of language and how these declarations have to be notified .
And on that point , which may seem the most innovative , I want to mention that there is a Commission proposal along almost the same lines , which refers to the Brussels Convention .
It seems to me that if the innovation is valid for that convention , it would be a good thing to make use of it for this one too .
Those are the outlines , Mr President , of this convention . I hope the Council will take account of the thoughts we have expressed verbally and in writing - they are thoughts rather than amendments - and that one way or another , and as quickly as possible , the convention will reach a happy conclusion and can be published in the Official Journal and enter into force as soon as possible , because society really needs it .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Verde i Aldea for his studious and thorough work .
This is an important plank in judicial cooperation and a major subject of human interest .
The proposal seeks to alleviate the difficulties experienced by couples in seeking to extract themselves from failed or unsatisfactory marriages and other legal relationships where there is a cross-border element .
It also covers children of such marriages .
This draft convention known as the Brussels II Convention applies to civil proceedings with divorce , legal separation and marriage annulments and civil proceedings relating to parental responsibility over a child of both spouses .
Like the Brussels Convention , it assures that a court order obtained in one Member State should be recognized in another Member State without any special procedure .
Similarly a child parental authority judgment given in one Member State can be enforced in another Member State .
It is especially important with increasing cross-border marriages and mobility of people and the need to protect children of such marriages .
Finally , I should like to thank the UK Presidency and .
In particular , a former colleague on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , now a minister in the Lord Chancellor 's Department , Mr Hoon , and the Lord Chancellor for piloting this important judicial cooperation reform .
Like Mr Verde i Aldea , in the name of my group I should like to support the amendments he has proposed .
I thank him again for his work .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I should like to thank Mr Verde i Aldea for this very important piece of legislation , in particular as it relates to a very human issue and , one which is increasing and poses problems for many of us .
On behalf of my group I should like to say that my group congratulates Mr Verde i Aldea for his report .
I give my group 's official position first , after which I will make a couple of points myself as the President 's mediator for transnationally abducted children .
The group considers Amendments Nos 3 , 6 and 10 as very important .
They refer to points D , E and F. The group is against the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs because it was adopted without formal procedure .
It was announced as a letter even on the agenda of the Civil Liberties Committee on the day of adoption and no deadline was fixed for amendments .
It is against Amendments Nos 4 , 5 and 8 for legal reasons .
The two previous speakers have outlined the history and need for this Convention .
I hope very much that it will get unanimous support from Parliament .
The reason why I have asked to speak particularly tonight is because one of the amendments refers to my role as the mediator for the President of the European Parliament on transnationally abducted children .
Amongst the many difficulties we are facing in this area is the very frequent refusal of courts from one Member State to recognize judgments made in another .
This has a two-fold effect .
It often prolongs very real human misery but as far as I am concerned one of the major problems it provokes is that of the abduction of children .
There is a genuine human fear at the heart of many of these abductions of a child .
We must be able to reassure both parents , either the custodial parent or the non-custodial parent , that they can rely on the support of the courts in their own country and the courts of the country where a child may be living to ensure that they will have access to their children .
Very often this fear of the loss of a child results in an abduction .
Sometimes there is not just one abduction but even two and , in extreme circumstances , even three .
That is to say , one partner abducts , the other abducts and then the other abducts again .
We must arrive at some form of genuine cooperation between the courts ; there are a great many areas in the legal systems in all of our countries that need to be carefully reassessed in the light of this very difficult and growing problem .
That having been said , I accept that not only do we need the legal underpinning that your excellent report gives us but we also need considerably more training for the judges in all our countries .
Obviously I would very much like to see it in non-Union countries as well , where we experience very considerable difficulties , in particular in the North African countries , when children are abducted .
The report recognizes pragmatically the realities of a very recently introduced divorce law in Ireland and also historical realities which relate to the annulment of marriages and agreements with the Holy See .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for his work and congratulate him .
Mr President , we are all familiar with the difficult situations people find themselves in when they become the victim of separation , divorce or annulment lawsuits , if they are the respondent and do not share the nationality or residence rights of the plaintiff . Then there are those distressing situations caused by the failure to comply with resolutions accompanied by provisional and precautionary measures , the effectiveness of which depends on the speed with which they are implemented .
Such situations mean that the respondent is put in an almost defenceless position when the plaintiff makes use of their own law , and there is real injustice when the resolutions not complied with involve alimony .
It is our duty to put an end to that situation .
It is necessary and even urgent to put a stop to it as soon as possible . Very well-argued doubts have been expressed about the urgent need for this draft convention , but I do not go along with them .
But even recognizing the urgent need to resolve these flagrant problems , it has to be said that this draft convention is ambiguous and limited , although I think it has been markedly improved by the amendments approved in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , especially those by Mr Verde i Aldea .
It could be said in its favour that " half a loaf is better than none ' . However , it would have been better to have been more ambitious in this case , not just clarifying things but extending the scope , to include for example the financial obligation between marriage partners , and between them and their children .
It is regrettable that this has been a wasted opportunity , in part .
Nevertheless , I congratulate Mr Verde i Aldea .
Mr President , it could be argued with the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs that this is not an appropriate time for this Council initiative in view of the ongoing ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam and in view too of the current revision of the Brussels Convention of 1968 .
However , I take a different view and thank the rapporteur for showing us the merits of this initiative .
The draft has a clear legal basis in Article K.3.
Its definitions are narrow and rigid , but clear , and despite the tight framework - here I refer to Mrs Banotti 's speech - , it takes account of children 's rights which are particularly worthy of protection .
As it aims to replace existing conventions , it represents an important step towards Union civil law .
Parliament , therefore , should follow the proposal of the Committee on Legal Affairs and its motions for an amendment and support this important Council initiative for a European Union civil law .
Mr President , I am one of those who has long argued that it is unreasonable for it to be possible in the European Union to be regarded as married in one Member State and as divorced in another .
I therefore warmly welcome the report by Mr Verde i Aldea on the Convention on jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgements in matrimonial matters .
The convention is a concrete example of what we at EU level can achieve to improve the quality of life of citizens , families and children within the Union .
It is natural that questions of jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement are brought to a head when countries move closer together .
Closer cooperation leads to increased contact and relationships between individuals , institutions and companies .
Consequently , there is also an increase in the number of disputes which cross the home country 's borders .
In 1968 the Member States of the Union decided on a convention which regulates the question of jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of civil law judgements .
It is aimed , above all , at companies and other financial operators .
However , matrimonial and custody questions were entirely excluded .
Since then , developments have gone towards citizens coming increasingly into the centre of the cooperation .
The free movement of persons is an objective which today has largely become a reality .
More and more citizens are marrying citizens from other Member States . More and more are like us in that they choose for various reasons , for longer or shorter periods , to live or work in a Member State other than their own .
This is of course a welcome development .
It is therefore natural to also develop the framework for international civil law .
An objective for us must be that disputes between individuals which involve the legal systems of more than one Member State can be resolved quickly and efficiently .
Matrimonial and custody disputes are both often heart-rending for all those concerned .
It is therefore particularly important that these disputes can be resolved without being complicated by procedural difficulties .
The European Parliament knows better than most the problems which rules of procedure for matrimonial disputes can cause for individual EU citizens .
A large number of petitions have been sent to the European Parliament on this issue .
In practice , the current situation means that a decision on divorce in one Member State is not automatically recognized in another Member State .
This can have serious consequences .
A couple can thus be legally divorced in one Member State while at the same time being regarded as married in another .
For the individual concerned this is of course entirely unacceptable .
It has particularly serious consequences if either of the parties wants to enter into a new marriage .
The result can then be that the new marriage is regarded as bigamy in another Member State , which is a punishable offence .
The draft Convention on jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgements in matrimonial matters sets clear and exhaustive rules on who shall have jurisdiction in a particular case .
The basic principle is that jurisdiction is decided according to where the parties have their permanent place of residence .
In exceptional cases , nationality or place of abode may decide .
The convention also includes a number of rules which simplify and speed up the procedures for recognition and enforcement .
In practice , the rules mean that a ruling in a matrimonial case will automatically be enforced in another Member State .
In the event of divorce or separation , the children are often the most vulnerable .
Therefore , it is important , as far as possible , to create conditions for the children to maintain close contact with both their father and their mother after a divorce .
When more than one Member State is involved , the rules must be formulated so that the question of custody can be resolved unambiguously .
The starting point must always be what is best for the children .
In this regard , the convention is a considerable improvement compared with the current situation .
In future , the court which decides on matters of divorce will also be qualified to make decisions on the question of custody if the children have their permanent place of residence in the Member State .
The court will also be able to decide questions of custody if the children are resident in a different Member State on condition that at least one of the parties has custody of the children and that both parties accept that the court shall have jurisdiction .
In his report , the rapporteur raises the question of the role of the Court of Justice in the interpretation of the convention and finds that it is limited .
A preliminary ruling can only be requested by a court of appeal or by the highest legal authorities in a Member State .
I share the rapporteur 's view that it would have been good if the Court of Justice had been given greater scope to give preliminary rulings .
I note in particular that the limitation is more extensive than is the case with the 1968 Brussels Convention .
The Convention on jurisdiction , recognition and enforcement of judgements in matrimonial matters is an important step towards the Europe of the citizens .
It is my hope that the formal decision on the convention is taken at the Council of Ministers for justice and home affairs on 28 and 29 May .
It is therefore important that the Member States also ratify the convention afterwards .
Thank you , Commissioner Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
Aspects relating to world trade
The next item is the report ( A4-0125 / 98 ) by Mr Pimenta , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on environmental , health and consumer protection aspects of world trade .
Mr President , I should first like to endorse the latter parts of what Mr Pimenta said .
I hope not to repeat them .
More and more often we are seeing results of appeal decisions at the WTO which have negative effects on the environment and , despite the provision of Article 20 of GATT , environmental protection seems to be far to the back of the minds of many of the international trade lawyers involved in this work .
In our own work in this Parliament we have watched decision son baby sealskins , leghold traps , animal testing for cosmetics , all coming to grief simply in the face of threats of the WTO , let alone actual cases .
For instance , I do not know if the officials who are developing the post-Kyoto policies and measures are taking precautions against future WTO attacks from , for example , the oil-producing nations .
But I certainly hope they are doing this .
The tuna dolphin and shrimp turtle decisions have increased the anxiety amongst NGOs and the public that the WTO is a threat to socially and environmentally sustainable development .
Yet , none of these cases are intrinsically trade disputes and ought to have simply been mediated .
If we had had more strong multilateral environment agreements , some of these problems could have been avoided .
It would be very sad if NGOs totally lost faith in the WTO because they could use the WTO tools for instance to battle for reductions in tariffs on environmental goods and services .
My group wholeheartedly supports Mr Pimenta 's excellent report , including paragraph 8 .
It should be an essential input to the main ministerial meeting on WTO and I hope that the Council of Ministers will listen to our concerns about the need to strengthen the WTO committee on trade and the environment .
The Commission has floated this idea of a high-level trade and environment meeting in Geneva in the autumn bringing together top-level policy-makers to push forward the debate on how to strengthen the CTE 's work .
This could well be a useful initiative .
Mr Pimenta worries that this might be a delaying tactic and in many ways the work needs to be done beforehand by high level officials .
Nevertheless , it could be a useful step forward .
We are in a world where , to look at one area , increasing biotechnological innovations are threatening farmers ' livelihoods in developing countries .
Natural herbal medicines from these countries are being pirated and patented by rapacious multinationals who then want to sell these products back at prices which cannot be afforded .
The Multilateral Agreement on Investment is being negotiated which may not yet contain sufficiently strong social and environmental clauses .
All these problems have a bearing on world trade and the way in which the WTO needs to develop and cope with them .
The WTO must be made to evolve so as to be able to work in a way which respects these important areas .
Mr Pimenta 's report contains some very important and sound points and I commend it to the House .
Mr President , starting where Mr Eisma left off , I also hope that Mr Pimenta 's report is approved tomorrow .
As he also said , it was approved unanimously at the last meeting of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
We hope it is approved because , as the rapporteur rightly says , the WTO summit in Geneva in May will really be the last chance to adopt binding , essential political decisions to prevent the constant conflicts between environment and trade , health and trade , and social rights and trade .
We cannot have a repetition of the frustrating situation at Singapore in 1996 , of flagrant non-compliance with what was agreed at the 1994 WTO summit in Marrakesh .


The reports by Mr Spencer , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and Mr Pimenta on a different occasion , as previously debated in this Parliament , all repeated the same questions as this one .
Trade rules cannot be given priority over those required to protect health , the environment and the future of our natural resources .
So we are going to support the Pimenta report and , as Mr Eisma said , let us hope it will be approved tomorrow , if not unanimously - which is a very complicated matter in the House - then at least by a large majority which will allow the European Commission to take a clear and forceful stance at this Geneva summit so that , before the end of this century , we can have rules to defend every area we are fighting to protect : environmental rules , health rules and rules for a fairer society .
Mr President , I will not have the chance to say much in one minute , but in any case I will say that Mr Pimenta 's report is excellent and we will vote for it without hesitation .
Indeed , Mr Pimenta clearly highlights the shortcomings of the current WTO and the fact that the values given priority at the moment put free trade before environmental and health protection .
The three best-known conflicts which have been settled by the WTO since the adoption of the Marrakech Agreements , those concerning hormones , bananas and fuel in the United States , are all conflicts which have given rise to decisions which are detrimental to both public health and the environment . This seems to me to be a vital point .
If we want this destructive process to end , we must get to the heart of the problem at all costs and not hesitate to challenge the very statutes of the WTO , where clear evidence of the principles of pernicious decision-making can be found .
I am thinking particularly of the fact that , when an individual state , or the European Union , wishes to adopt more rigorous measures in the areas of health or the environment , it is up to them to justify it .
Uncertainties regarding the harmlessness of certain products or processes are not sufficient to justify more restrictive measures , and this is not acceptable to us .
The beginnings of a change must be adopted in Geneva .
Mr President , may I first make a comment for the benefit of the Parliamentary staff : paragraph 4 is wrong in all languages .
It should not read ' the caution principle ' , but the ' precautionary principle ' .
I would ask the staff to correct the error , because this is an important matter .
Turning to the Commissioner , I would firstly like to thank him for being here , and tell him that I know him well and know from his background and his lifestyle that he is sincere when he speaks on environmental matters and participation in civil society .
Nevertheless - and I hope I can rely on your vote , Commissioner Oreja , as an ally of ours in defending these causes - I would like to make sure the whole Commission knows , first and foremost , that there must be a declaration on the environment in Geneva in May , because there was none made in Singapore .
Because in Singapore , as you know , the Committee on Trade and Environment ( CTE ) report was not even ratified , and if there is no declaration in May it will mean another year will be wasted on discussions at official level .
We need a political initiative at the highest level , within the WTO . Otherwise the debate will not be resumed .
Secondly , a high-level meeting should not be a meeting of senior officials .
It should be a ministerial initiative , because it is not the Director-Generals who answer to their national parliaments on policy and receive policy directions , however well qualified they may be technically ; it is the ministers .
It is the ministers for trade , the ministers for the environment , as it is the Commissioners here .
I would ask the Commissioner to properly forward to the Commission the fact that this House is seriously interested in political initiatives , and raises these questions at political level , without wishing to detract from the excellent work that has been done by technical experts , and especially European technical experts , in this field .
Mr President , I have certainly taken note of what Mr Pimenta said .
I will make sure I remember it and convey his opinion to the Members of the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner Oreja .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
European City of Culture
The next item is the report ( A4-0083 / 98 ) by Mr Monfils , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Decision establishing a Community initiative for the European City of Culture event ( COM ( 97 ) 0549 - C4-0580 / 97-97 / 0290 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , since 1985 the choice of the European Cities of Culture has been left to the Union 's Council of Ministers .
Decisions were not always based on the cultural value of the projects submitted .
Furthermore , in the year 2000 , Europe has made no choice since it has accepted the designation of nine cities as Cities of Culture .
The directive presented by the Commission is aimed at giving greater importance to European cities and greater objectivity to the choices made .
At a procedural level , the directive proposes setting up a Selection Panel .
On the basis of its opinion , on the proposal of the Commission and after consultation with Parliament , the Council will designate the European City of Culture by a qualified majority .
The directive furthermore extends the choice of cities to the countries of the European Economic Area .
It also strengthens the demands relating to the content of the projects to be presented .
After a particularly in-depth debate , for which I would especially like to thank the members of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , some of whom are present today , I can say that this committee approved virtually unanimously the amendments presented to you here , which are furthermore in line with the suggestions I made in my report .
There are seven points worth highlighting .
Firstly , with regard to the choice of city , we are proposing to replace the previous intergovernmental method with a Community method .
Thus the cities will submit their applications directly , without going via their national government .
I am aware that there is clear opposition to this method within the Council of Ministers .
There are even some who would like the European City of Culture to be designated in turn by each Member State , or by the state holding the Presidency of the European Union .
Thus , after Great Britain , an Austrian city would be nominated by Austria for six months , then a Swedish one , then Danish , then Belgian and so on .
To do this would be to ruin completely the idea of a European capital of culture , which must not be designated by a State for reasons of circumstance or opportunity , but as the result of a proper cultural analysis of a project presented by the city and an appreciation of the capacity for influence within Europe of the candidate city 's cultural project .
I am convinced that a very large majority of this House will share the virtually unanimous view of the Committee on Culture and will not accept the cheap selling-off of the very idea of the European City of Culture .
Secondly , we wanted to strengthen the independence of the Selection Panel and place the emphasis on quality , in particular at the level of cultural expertise .
Thirdly , on a procedural level , we are proposing to implement fully the codecision procedure for choice of city , which implies close participation on the part of Parliament in designating the city , and not simply giving an opinion .
Fourthly , we consider that a candidate city may present a specific cultural project in association with other cities , even if a state does not belong to the European Union - maybe to the European Free Trade Association or the European Economic Area , for example - but that the city presenting the project would be solely responsible to the European Union and would hold the title of European City of Culture .
Fifthly , the Committee on Culture wanted to add depth to the content of the projects to be presented by cities , by placing emphasis on the development of artistic creation . This implies not being satisfied with a simple show of cultural events imported from other countries or cities , but demanding that the cultural project should be rooted in the social fabric of the city , encouraging maximum participation in the cultural project on the part of the city 's citizens and groups and insisting that conditions for a follow-up to the year 's cultural events be presented in the project .
Sixthly , the new importance given to the designation of European City of Culture and the fact that stricter conditions for eligibility have been set mean that greater financial support is required .
We are proposing a sum of ECU 2 million , obviously without wishing to influence the possibility of receiving other benefits , in particular via the Structural Funds .
Finally , my seventh point , we stand by the proposal for a European Cultural Month for the countries which are not part of the European Union but who would have an undeniable interest in this if it were to be made more dynamic .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Culture and the European Parliament have worked quickly .
As I said , we wanted to make the designation of European City of Culture one of the strong points of the Union 's cultural policy .
We obviously want to insist that the procedure should not be delayed , so that everything can be in place by the end of the year and we can thus apply the provisions of the new directive to the designation of European City for 2002 . This is also what the European Commission hopes for , and in particular the European Commissioner , Mr Oreja , whose company we have the pleasure of here today .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that I have been invited to be the first speaker on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , because I think the European City of Culture is a brilliant idea , a real stroke of genius .
I therefore hope we shall not strangle it at birth .
In 2002 this programme must stop being an extended intergovernmental pilot scheme and unreservedly become a Community initiative for which Governments , the Commission and Parliament share responsibility .
This is a change we consider fundamental in order to invest it with a highly important threefold function ; the representation of national , regional and local culture , which is naturally dear to governments ' hearts , the demonstration of a common European culture , which is naturally dear to the Commission 's heart ; and the expression of the vital forces of society , which is naturally dear to Parliament 's heart .
The future of this important programme will be put at risk if we do not move forward towards the communitization , the codecision-based selection procedure proposed by Parliament .
The proposals in the Monfils report amount to an important signal to the people .
They prove that when a programme demonstrates its worth , European institutions are capable of recognizing it , in this case by proposing to increase the budget and extend the number of participants to enable the programme to realize its full potential .
Let us see whether the Commission and the Member States will match the generosity of Parliament , which is proposing a reference amount of ECU 2 million .
Since the event was first instituted in 1985 , the European City of Culture has taken various forms , and in the last few years has shown a maturity which has been apparent not only in the consistency and innovation of most of the programmes suggested by the cities , but especially in the extent to which those cities have in some cases been transformed .
This is a fundamental way of guaranteeing the effect of an investment going beyond the festival year .
After 2002 , if Parliament 's proposal is accepted , the European City of Culture can no longer be an event that has nothing to do with the people who live there , or with other cities , inside and outside the Union , with which it is called to join hands .
It must not fail to be a link between the past and the future , making good use , as the report suggests , of the relationship between the continued exploitation of its heritage and contemporary creative work .
It must also seek to ensure that local initiatives are publicized so that they reach other cities and regions of Europe .
The future City of Culture must submit itself for selection directly , without having to go through central government . It must be selected by an independent consultative Selection Panel , and must finally be approved by the three European institutions .
In proposing this , Parliament is giving its clear backing to the initiative and responsibility of the cities themselves .
This may help to advance the claims of medium-sized and peripheral cities which would be unlikely to be put forward for selection if they were to rely upon being chosen by their Governments .
Parliament has had the courage to add to this excellent proposal by the Commission .
Let us hope Member States will be able to see the potential of this means we are offering them to achieve our common objective : to reinforce the cohesion of the European fabric through cultural cooperation .
Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of my group I would like to thank Mr Monfils for his splendid report .
The notion that Melina Mercouri put forward thirteen years ago regarding the City of Culture event has been an undoubted success .
By the year 2000 all Member States of the Union will have their own City of Culture year planned .
Actually , Finland is the only country that is having to share its designated City of Culture year with eight other cities .
There is nothing there can be done about this in itself , but I seriously think that Finland too , and perhaps especially , given her status as a relatively unknown new Member State , should have had her own individual City of Culture celebration .
Helsinki should have got her own City of Culture year considering her internationally respected , and at the same time totally indigenous , contribution to the Arts , as well as the cultural arrangements that are now being undertaken in preparation for the year 2000 .
Sharing the City of Culture among many only serves to water down each city 's visible contribution to cultural development .
In future programming the City of Culture status must clearly only be awarded to one city at a time .
The most important contribution the City of Culture project can make is , in the end , its permanent influence on society , and it is therefore necessary to try to get the community as a whole involved in events , to take part in them and get something out of them .
It is then that the influence the event has will carry on in an active and creative way long after the year in question is over .
The City of Culture year must be mainly based on the city 's own resources and special features , its history and its challenges in the face of change .
You can then build a selected theme on that individual cultural base , taking advantage of reciprocal action and cultural offerings on an international basis .
The birth of lasting cultural cooperation is one of the key goals of the Union .
Although cooperation among different cities is to be aspired to , it is the essential responsibility of just one city , and , if it likes , that city can adopt a natural partner to help in the formulation of its City of Culture year , a partner that has something in common with its geographical situation , history or culture : one of the applicant countries , for instance .
I hope the Commission will continue to develop the European City of Culture notion , which is a splendid opportunity , for example , for associate countries to develop their cultural heritage and creativity .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , a common market , common political institutions and a common currency which we are seeking to set in motion today , are all the results of a European accord .
They should lead to the people within the European Union growing closer together and combining their energies .
Yet the foundations upon which the States in the European Union have been building their Community for almost a half century , and the soil in which it will thrive derive from something which has linked the peoples on this continent for several thousand years : their common culture .
The Community European City of Culture initiative is based on this thinking .
It takes the very thing that could persuade Europeans to consider seeking a political accord in the first place , and uses it to strengthen this accord .
From time immemorial , European cities have been centres of culture .
Art , music , literature , dance , theatre , film , architecture in the past and now thrive best where people meet and are culturally active .
The " European City of Culture ' programme should awaken new interest amongst the citizens of the Union for the cultural heritage in our cities , and focus their eyes more keenly on their beauty .
However , in the quest to become European City of Culture there is no place for cities that are inwardlooking .
Cities only have a chance of gaining this distinction by placing their own culture in a European context .
Where are the city 's European influences , and in what way has it influenced Europe ?
It is the task of Europe 's cities to illustrate this by means of cultural events .
And , in terms of the initiative we are to adopt today , this will be all the more successful the more cities cooperate with other European cities on their projects and involve creative artists from other cities in their campaigns .
All Member States of the European Union basically agree that , in order to maintain the cultural diversity of Europe , it is imperative to preserve the cultural sovereignty of the Member States .
Yet , in terms of the European City of Culture , it is a question of being aware of the riches generated by this diversity whilst keeping in view its common roots .
The great opportunity of this initiative is that it can reach all citizens of the Union , for everyone can be culturally creative and take pleasure from culture . Precisely because culture has such a strongly integrating effect , we in the European Parliament would re-emphasize our call as a legitimate democratic body to participate in the decision on the European City of Culture from the year 2002 and to make available ECU 2 million as an annual contribution to finance the initiative .
Finally , I offer my warmest congratulations to the rapporteur for producing a sound report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mr Monfils on his excellent report .
" European Cities of Culture ' is amongst the few projects which appeal to everyone 's imagination , yield considerable economic benefit for the city concerned , and can look to the business community for support .
The rapporteur rightly stresses that neither the size of a city nor its political importance within a country is of overriding importance .
In the past we have focused mainly on capital cities .
This new directive intends to give smaller cities a chance .
One condition is , however , that the candidate cities present a clear project which is aimed at the future of the city and which has as its premise its individuality and its role in European history .
An important point regarding the participation of smaller cities in the programme is that Europe provides sufficient resources .
My city , Bruges , for instance , candidate for the year 2002 , does not have the facilities and infrastructure which capitals have ; this is why I support the amendment which provides for ECU 2 million .
In conclusion , I agree with the proposal that candidate cities should be able to submit their candidature directly to the European Commission , and not to their governments .
If added to this there will be an independent panel and a Parliament which can have the final say in the choice of the city , I can see a true democratization of the selection procedure .
We hope that the approval of this directive can be finalized this year , so that from 2002 the selection can be made according to this new directive , as planned .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Monfils for the successful work he has done in drafting this report .
It is important to stress that the City of Culture programme ought also to be used to bring capital cities outside the EU to the attention of the public .
Lasting cultural cooperation can be furthered not just by concentrating on one city but through regional and cross-border projects .
One city should , however , bear the responsibility of coordinating the work .
Sufficient community funding must be found for these programmes , but even more important is the link between business and the events themselves .
The weighty contribution which business can make will guarantee publicity for the events and the region in question , and financial tie-ins can also help to promote the development of sustainable projects in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first I want to congratulate both Mr Monfils , on his excellent report , and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media .
Parliament attaches great importance to the inclusion of the European City of Culture within the Community framework and demonstrates the need to support this event , which has met with increasing success ever since it was launched .
The purpose of the initiative presented by the Commission is to highlight the richness and cultural diversity of European cities and , at the same time , as Mrs Vaz da Silva reminded us a moment ago , draw attention to our common cultural heritage .
And that is in keeping with the spirit and the letter of Article 128 of the Treaty .
The Commission is pleased to accept most of Parliament 's amendments , which undoubtedly improve the text markedly .
However , there are some amendments which we would prefer not to incorporate into the initial proposal : specifically , Amendments Nos 7 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 and part of No 9 .
Let us consider Amendments Nos 7 and 14 first .
The funding for the European City of Culture initiative is provided for in the Commission proposal on the framework programme , which has not yet been adopted by the Commission .
So at this stage of the procedure the Commission cannot accept amendments with regard to funding since the budgetary provision has to form part of the framework programme .
As for Amendment No 8 , insofar as it concerns the presentation of candidates , the Commission believes that the support and initiative of the Member States is indispensable for the event 's success .
This is to avoid what we see as a potential waste of effort and money by cities with no real chance of being selected right from the outset , because of a lack of venues , for example .
In reference to the last part of Amendment No 9 and Amendment No 10 , the Commission proposal certainly makes no attempt to marginalize Parliament .
On the contrary , we want it to have a greater role in this activity which , from being intergovernmental in nature , is turning into a Community initiative .
The selection procedure proposed by the Commission tries to involve the Community institutions fully , and is flexible enough for the decision to be adopted quickly , allowing the selected cities enough time to prepare for the event .
The legislative procedure of codecision , provided for in Article 189 ( b ) of the Treaty , is generally required when establishing measures to promote the cultural sector , but it does not seem the most appropriate method for the specific designation of the city . Given its complexity and length , it could stop the programme working properly .
As for Amendments Nos 12 and 13 , the Commission does not consider their approach to be in keeping with the Community 's commitments to associated third countries as regards the possibility of their participation in Community programmes and activities .
Finally , the Commission wants to stress the need for us to conclude all the procedures connected with the implementation of this initiative as quickly as possible . In that respect , I can tell you that the Commission will spare no effort and will do what it can to try to get the different institutions to adopt a similar position , so we can reach a satisfactory solution which preserves or even increases the vitality and success of this event .
To Mr De Coene , who said a moment ago that the Council had adopted a decision , I want to say that the Council cannot adopt any decision until you have adopted yours .
And at this point , allow me to put on my institutionalist 's hat .
The Council can exchange opinions , but cannot decide , because first of all there has to be a first reading - which is what you are doing now - and then the Council will make a statement . There will be an opportunity for that on 28 May , which is when the Council will be able to examine a common position , if it wants to , and possibly adopt it .
Very rapidly , Mr President , I would simply like to say to the Commissioner that I am extremely disappointed by his response , in three respects .
I will pass over the problem of financing , one to two million , when the European Union 's budget is ECU 900 million or 1 billion - what am I saying ! - 100 billion per year , the issue is clearly ridiculous .
But there are two points to which I would like to draw your attention , Commissioner .
Firstly , you cannot accept Amendment No 8 , which is the amendment enabling cities to submit their projects directly to the Commission .
I thought you were the defender and the promoter of cultural development in the European Union .
To hand the choice of cultural city over to the Member States is to trivialize completely the role of European City of Culture and , my apologies for saying this , but you are playing into the hands of the Member States and not that of the Community that you should be defending .
Secondly , when you say that codecision will slow things down , Commissioner , may I remind you that you submitted your report to us a little before the New Year .
I commenced my report around 10 January .
By 20 January it was being translated .
Any delays involved in this report have been through administrative reasons or reasons of timing only .
The Committee on Culture has completed everything in the shortest time possible .
To tell me that we are not capable , at the level of the European Parliament , of giving an opinion on a European city , that is , of saying yes or no to Brussels , Salamanca , Helsinki or elsewhere , is clearly to make a mockery of the work of Parliament .
We have proved that in less than three months , and with a series of delays which were not of our making , we have been able to draw up a report , discuss it , amend it and vote on it .
Consequently , Commissioner , I have the feeling that in this respect you are making a mockery of the work of Parliament .
I would like to end , Commissioner , in a word , by saying this to you : in your directive , you wanted a sign , a strong symbol for the European Union , in terms of culture , and we agreed with you .
Not only did we agree , not only did we propose it , but we also reinforced it .
Commissioner , do not destroy cultural symbols in a world such as ours .
They are essential in order to experience our culture in all its diversity .
Commissioner , I do not wish to call into question your expertise regarding institutional issues .
I know that you are a specialist on the matter .
I would merely like to say one thing , namely that if , in the common position , the Council was to amend the date the directive enters into force , and say 2005 or 2006 was laid down instead of 2002 , this would in fact amount to the same thing . Promises have already been made to cities , and to countries at intergovernmental level .
Everyone knows this , and it has even been published in non-official publications .
So let us not be naive .
I know that you oppose this .
I know that you do not accept this because as Commissioner , you want to oversee the actual procedures . But let us be honest .
Simply through this simple amendment , the Council of Ministers for Culture can undermine your intentions and what we want .
This is what is happening at the moment .
So let us be sensible and let us react immediately and say that this is out of the question .
I only wanted to issue a warning about some demarches happening at the moment .
I really did not want to teach anyone a lesson .
Mr De Coene , I think there has been an interpretation problem .
Since I understood you to say that the Council had decided , all I wanted to say to you was that the Council had not been able to decide , because the Council cannot decide until you have done so . It was a question of principle .
I was not referring to any other problem .
Obviously , like you , I have read rumours about the positions the Council is currently trying to adopt .
But I just wanted to deny those rumours , because it is an institutional matter which affects me .
The Council cannot decide until you have done so .
That is all I was referring to .
However , I know as well as you that there are rumours at the moment about certain intentions along the lines you mention .
We shall see what the Council says on 28 May , and immediately afterwards - as soon as you invite me to the committee - I will come and tell you what has happened in the Commission and in the Council .
Secondly , I would like to say to Mr Monfils that the Community nature of the initiative does not depend on whether it is the cities themselves or the Member States who present the candidates .
It is a question of preference .
I respect your opinion very highly and you can rest assured that I will look into it .
At the moment , I am not going to accept the amendment , but that does not mean I will never accept it .
I will think about it and study it because I greatly value what Mr Monfils has done .
I am not going to accept it today because I think it is a good procedure for the Member States - not to decide on the city - but to present the cities , and for firstly the Commission and then the panel to decide on the city .
You say the cities should compete directly .
I have my fears about that .
I want there to be some sort of security , and a country provides more security than any city .
There are many cities which would not pose any problem for me , but one or two might do so , and I prefer the procedure based on Member States .
But I am not inflexible on this issue .
It is not a question of theology .
You have presented me with an observation , and I am not able to accept it at the moment .
What I can promise you is that I will think about it .
As for the second matter , I believe - and again this is a question of principle - that the general rule has to be adopted by codecision , which is what you are doing now .
You now adopt decisions by codecision .
On the other hand , I think the choice of city is an implementational measure and in such cases I do not think codecision should be used .
It is debatable .
You know that the boundaries between what can and cannot be submitted to the codecision procedure are not always very well-defined .
I am in favour of extending codecision as much as possible , as I said in the intergovernmental conference .
My opinion is well known .
I expressed it in this House after the European Council in Amsterdam .
But in this case , I think we are dealing with an implementational measure .
I was here in Parliament yesterday and spoke at length on the subject of comitology , which is also an implementational measure .
So I have made a note of what Mr Monfils said .
I am in favour of making a distinction between general and implementational aspects , and that is why I have not accepted your amendment .
Thank you , Commissioner Marcelino Oreja .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 12.05 a.m. )
I rise , Madam President , to seek your support and in fact the support of the President of the Parliament for relief for the devastating floods and the effect of those floods in my constituency over the Easter weekend .
Some two thousand homes were affected and hundreds of families are now living in temporary accommodation .
To make matters even worse : in Northampton , alone , the area that was affected was a socially deprived one where people basically have very little insurance coverage .
I know that you will be aware of these floods ; they hit the whole of the Midlands .
I have already written to the Commission seeking support and I seek your support too for some disaster fund alleviation of this really very tragic situation in which there was not only loss of property but tragically also loss of life .
So I seek your support this morning on this very serious matter .
Thank you , Mrs Billingham .
I am extremely saddened by this disaster and will , of course , take careful note of your comment .
Naturally , I will inform the President and the necessary steps will be taken , you have my word .
Madam President , I rise on a point of order that I referred to this House back in September of last year following the tragic death of Diana , Princess of Wales .
I said this raised the issue of a possible intrusion by the press into the privacy of individuals .
At that stage , following a motion from Mrs Pauline Green , it was suggested that the matter should be referred to committee .
I raised the item again , earlier this year ; that is a matter that to my knowledge has not yet been referred to any committee of this House although it was the decision of the House , as I say , in September of last year .
I wonder whether you can give us any information at this stage whether there is any intention to honour the wish of the House and refer this to committee , or whether there is somebody attempting some sort of cover up ?
In general , Mr Perry , I can tell you that we have the greatest intention to respect Parliament 's wishes .
That is quite clear .
As regards the precise matter you are raising , I cannot give you any information at this precise moment , but we will look into it and ensure that , in this instance , the wishes of Parliament are followed .
I will make sure of it .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of 29 April 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , my name is not on the register of attendance for yesterday , through nobody 's fault other than my own .
I was present at the House and I contributed to the debate on Northern Ireland .
I would appreciate the fact if my name could be included among those who were present .
Of course , Mr Collins .
It was a mistake .
We did note your presence and the matter will be rectified .
Madam President , I should like to enquire when the results in connection with the declaration on crime in Brussels will appear in the Minutes .
According to the Minutes , Mr Schulz said that we are concentrating only on the protection of employees of the European institutions .
I should , however , like to stress that we are , of course , equally concerned with the protection of all citizens in Brussels .
Absolutely , Mr Rübig .
If a declaration was made but not recorded in the Minutes , we shall look into the matter .
( The Minutes were approved )
Services based on , or consisting of , conditional access
The next item is the report ( A4-0136 / 98 ) by Mr Anastassopoulos , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the legal protection of services based on , or consisting of , conditional access ( COM ( 97 ) 0356 - C4-0475 / 97-97 / 0198 ( COD ) ) .
Madam President , I cannot see a representative of the European Commission in the Chamber at the moment and I would not be prepared to proceed with the debate if there were no Commissioner present to follow it .
I would like to make a request to wait for perhaps a moment or two until the Commissioner arrives , since it is impossible for us to have a debate without a Commissioner here .
Mr Anastassopoulos , I had certainly noticed the Commission 's absence .
I was hoping their representative would arrive during the procedural motions but that has not happened .
I am extremely sorry , and not very pleased about this .
It must surely be some problem with the planes .
Communication is not always easy everywhere ...
( Mr Martens : " The Commission is in Brussels ' ) It was a joke , Mr Martens .
Mr Anastassopoulos has made a request which I personally approve of , if there are no objections .
We shall suspend the sitting for a few minutes , while we wait for the relevant Commissioner to arrive .
I hope we shall be able to resume the sitting as soon as possible .
( The sitting was suspended at 9.10 a.m. and resumed at 9.15 a.m. )

Ladies and gentlemen , we can resume the sitting .
Commissioner Monti was delayed due to a strike on the part of the officials at the Commission .
Mr Commissioner , there is no need to apologize .
Given your punctuality and the fact that you are always available to the European Parliament , we were not really worried and we were sure that the reason for your delay was of a pressing nature .
The rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos , has the floor .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the question of conditional access is a central interface for the whole range of services in our information society .
What we have here in fact is the question of what are the conditions under which conditional access should be introduced .
It is , therefore , a matter of defining the conditions for conditional access , and this poses a series of fundamental questions .
Firstly , the relationship between fee-payment and private acquisition must be determined , because we could not , of course , allow someone to acquire Shakespeare and subsequently demand a fee whenever Shakespeare 's work is performed .
The fact of the matter is that our culture is always a combination of individual and joint achievements .
Corresponding lines of demarcation need to be drawn here .
Secondly , it is a question of the relationship between the information-rich and the information-poor .
We must not allow conditional access to lead to a situation in which essential elements of our culture , essential elements which are public property , are accessible only to privileged minorities who can afford to pay for them .
Ultimately , we are dealing with a segmentation of the public which can indeed restrict people 's freedom to form their own opinions .
The appropriate conditions must be imposed here so that , if private acquisition is necessary and sensible , it can indeed take place and rights can indeed be properly exploited as well .
We just need to bear in mind that we shall keep coming back to convergence , and there would certainly be a connection .
But basically , we have here a first opportunity to talk about the problem of convergence at this interface as well .
I have also complained about the regulatory minimalism which the Commission has displayed , instead of using this interface aggressively .
We have been particularly struck by two points .
Firstly , the fact that national boundaries and technical ranges do not coincide . This leads to all sorts of inconsistencies in practice which have not been satisfactorily addressed .
If , for example , you use a decoder for Sky television as an English-speaking viewer in Belgium , is that structurally illegal ?
Surely not !
Secondly , there is a very dangerous tendency for those who exploit rights to put themselves in the position of the copyright holders or of the originators , and to some extent to give these rights a subordinate character .
We must ensure that the originators and copyright holders are also protected .
That seems to me to be a necessary condition .
When we talk about conditional access , we are at the same time talking about the conditions that we want to impose on private industry for the introduction of conditional access .
With that in mind , I think that this ought to be our fundamental approach to the subject .
Madam President , I too would like to congratulate the rapporteur and his colleagues on the Legal Affairs Committee who have brought this matter to our consideration today .
It is our view , on the Culture Committee , that we are quite properly here looking at issues of delivery and not at issues of content .
There are many concerns about content and I will refer to them in just a second .
But , essentially , today we are looking at the protection of certain services from the point of view of the delivery of the signal to the individual consumer .
It is for that reason that we cannot vote for the latter part of Amendment No 20 , despite all the real concerns about copyright .
They are legitimate concerns but we need a copyright directive to address them and we need it urgently to move in parallel with the subject we are debating today .
We all agree that the problem of piracy is substantial and it grows day by day .
In the end , content matters in this directive because the funding of content , the provision of the programmes for the increasing number of digital services , essentially relies for many broadcasters on the revenues from remunerated conditional access .
If you allow the pirates to flourish that revenue will be diminished .
If the revenue is diminished there will be fewer services available for the public at large .
Nevertheless , we want to make sure that in attempting to tackle this question of pirates , we very carefully delineate precisely what the actions are that we are prescribing .
We are not in favour of restrictions on the citizen and draconian punishments for the mere possession inadvertently of a smart card published for other reasons , perhaps in another state .
We are in favour of pursuing those who deliberately manufacture these instruments for profit .
That is why we support the phrasing of Amendment No 22 .
My final point is that in all of this we need to have regard to the area of public broadcasting and broadcasting which is free to air .
Nothing in this directive should force broadcasters into encryption and into measures of protection not necessary in terms of the purposes which they serve .
That is the point of Amendment No 25 and of many of the preambles which I believe have been properly addressed by all the three committees that have looked at this matter .
I would certainly commend the directive to the Parliament .
Madam President , I think the word " piracy ' has been used too much in this morning 's debate .
The rapporteur , Mr Anastassopoulos , is Greek and knows that a pirate was a sailor who burnt boats belonging to other countries or other people . This caused people to die , and was a terrible thing to do .
At the moment , people seem too ready to use the term " piracy ' .
There is no piracy here : we are dealing with the protection of certain economic interests .
Economic interests deserve to be protected .
On the other hand however , there are other rights which must also be protected , such as the right to information or the right to privacy .
I am saying this because it seems that , at least in the discussions in the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , there has been a temptation to protect encoded communications as if they were a fundamental right .
But there are other fundamental rights .
All we are doing here is providing a certain amount of protection , to enable that activity to develop and the providers to be remunerated .
It is a simple question of economics .
In that respect , I think the Commission 's proposal is good and well-balanced , because it protects those economic interests but without restricting people 's rights .
I want to congratulate the rapporteur for being so understanding during discussions on this subject , because I think the 20 or so amendments which have finally been adopted are reasonable and balanced .



However , in the Group of the Party of European Socialists we have objections to the second part of Amendment No 20 and the second part of Amendment No 22 .
As regards the former , Mr Whitehead has already mentioned the difficulties of protecting content which , in the end , might end up as the justification for protecting more than just remuneration .
Secondly , we object to the second part of Amendment No 22 because , in referring to the " sole intended purpose of enabling unauthorized access to a protected service ' , it weakens the protection , because it does not cover the case of an instrument with a useful purpose .
In other words , with the exception of the second part of Amendment No 20 - specifically the words " or its content ' - and the second part of Amendment No 22 - " for the sole intended purpose of enabling unauthorized access to a protected service ' - the Socialist Group agrees with the amendments and , of course , we are in favour of approving Mr Anastassopoulos ' report in its current terms We also congratulate the Commission on having achieved a balance in the proposal it has presented to us .
Madam President , I must start by saying - and it is not just rhetoric - that it is an honour for me to be the first member of the Group of the European People 's Party to speak following a rapporteur from our group .
It is an honour because the rapporteur has followed in the best European Parliament traditions of Members defending their ideas - their ideas about protecting citizens ' interests - with all the energy they can muster , with no effort spared and , at the same time , eager to reach conclusions by means of dialogue .
Madam President , as the rapporteur rightly said , we are faced with a Commission proposal which we in this Parliament see as a response to a resolution passed in this House .
And in that sense , we have to agree with the rapporteur when he says that the Commission has not done everything this House requested . In other words , it has not dealt with the problems of non-remunerated encoded services or the possibility of offering more protection for authors ' rights .
Having said all that , Madam President , and speaking now in a personal capacity - since the Group of the European People 's Party will vote according to the rapporteur 's voting list - I am going to mention a few doubts .
Madam President , I do not agree with some of the amendments proposed by the rapporteur and accepted by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
The reason is very simple : in Europe at the moment we want to " legislate less to legislate better ' .
There is a declaration in the Treaty of Amsterdam which says that legislation must be clear , concise and aimed at a specific problem .
The Commission proposal meets those criteria .
It is true that the title of the proposal should have specified that it refers to remunerated encoded services .
That reference to remuneration should have appeared in recitals 5 and 12 , in Article 1 and elsewhere , to make it absolutely clear which problem was being addressed .
And for the sake of that clarity we advocate , those recitals should also have mentioned that there are other large problem areas , such as non-remunerated encoded services , which should be addressed in other normative instruments .
Having said that , some of the approved amendments are not going to have the effect of harmonizing legislation or solving the existing problems . Rather , if they were included in the final text they would create even bigger problems .
I am not going to repeat what has already been said about the " sole intended purpose ' , but blank tapes are not prohibited and , in that sense , there is no reason to think of banning an instrument which has a general use but can also be used for illegal purposes .
To pass on to other things , in Spanish we have a saying that : " He who attempts too much ends up doing nothing properly ' .
And by including concepts such as direct or indirect profits , or content , we are creating margins for discretion , to be interpreted in the last analysis by the courts in each Member State . That could give rise to greater differences , if that were possible , in the very matter we are trying to harmonize .
So I hope , Madam President , that along this normative journey , we may reach a good solution which meets the criteria set out by the rapporteur - doubtless in other normative instruments .
Madam President , Mr Commissioner , the starting point is important with this directive , namely that we are trying to provide legal protection for the economic values associated with intellectual activity .
That is what should be important , not obstructing access to information , as one of our colleagues also said .
We should recognize that protection of services also creates an interest in developing high-grade products .
The liberal point of view is that private services should in principle have the same protection as public services in this sector .
We should not experience what happens in some places , namely that people are prepared to resort to repressive measures if the public service licence has not been paid , but not to protect commercial television .
The committee and the rapporteur have rightly pointed to the freedom of speech aspects , which are important .
I hope this directive really helps to create a single market for products which are needed for the information society .
We have a problem with the fact that there is no functioning market today , such as in the case of encryption to protect private interests .
It is important that we create rules which do not represent obstacles for the future .
The change we are proposing in Amendment No 22 is so that we can get such a development .
That is why my group is going to support it .
But just as someone from the Group of the Party of European Socialists said earlier , we cannot support Amendment No 20 , because it would create confusion and not clarify the directive .
Madam President , I should like to thank the rapporteur and my colleagues on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and also the draftspeople on this rather complicated directive .
In particular , I should like to thank Phillip Whitehead whom I have worked closely with on this subject .
This is an important subject for the citizens of Europe as television is such a popular pastime .
The directive recognizes that new technology is coming into the industry and that it will be moving towards digital technology .
It provides for protection for the smart cards which will allow access to pay TV .
The proposal is intended to protect the providers of these services .
I have had a huge postbag on this proposal and the reactions to it have been very mixed .
Essentially we need a balance between protection and access to service for the consumers .
The rapporteur has endeavoured to achieve that .
Some of the particular points of concern raised in correspondence from all sorts of sources - individuals as well as firms - has been that the possession itself of a smart card should not be illegal and I agree with that .
There has also been concern on the civil liberties aspect of this directive and some writers have felt that the proposal is draconian .
I hope the Commission has received similar correspondence .
It is important that ordinary citizens ' voices are heard in this Chamber and by the Commission .
Another point of concern - and I have not had an adequate response from the Commission so perhaps Commissioner Monti could address this in his reply - is why the directive only applies to pay TV .
Some public service broadcast services are remunerated and , consequently , there is going to be a problem with litigation on which services are provided for remuneration and which are not .
In the interests of good law-making we should avoid unnecessary litigation .
In conclusion , I broadly support the proposal and the amendments although I may have some concern about particular aspects .
Madam President , I would like to express my respect for the rapporteur and thank him for his excellent report .
Still , there is one point I would like to draw attention to and that is the protection of the rights of artists and authors .
They need strong legal protection , and they are entitled to it .
That is why I wholeheartedly support Amendment No 20 in its entirety .
Piracy must be combated forcefully .
It is not enough to forbid instruments which are specifically designed and made to give unauthorized access .
It is sometimes also possible to infringe copyright with legal and seemingly harmless software . This should also be combated .
Amendment No 22 limits this protection to equipment with the sole intended purpose of enabling unauthorized access .
This amendment must therefore be rejected , and most certainly the words " with the sole intended purpose ' .
The European cultural world must not only be protected in special directives on copyright , important as this is , but must be protected in all cases , and therefore also in this directive .
That is why I ask the House to support Amendment No 20 in its entirety , and to vote against Amendment No 22 .
Again , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , and could I ask Commissioner Bangemann and Commissioner Monti , present here today , to bear in mind the cultural dimension in their policy .
This is an extremely important issue .
It determines the cultural diversity of Europe , and that is Europe 's strength .
They have to bear that in mind in their policy .
Madam President , I am one of the admittedly small number of members of the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights who voted in committee against some of our rapporteur 's amendments , and subsequently also against the directive that had been amended in accordance with his proposals .
I should like to make it clear here that this rejection did not relate to all the changes .
I do give my full support to all the amendments which are aimed at protecting not only those services which are subject to restricted access for commercial reasons , but also to those which are restricted for reasons to do with the security and integrity of the information transmitted .
However , I believe that , for systematic reasons , the right of originators to bring an action , proposed in the report , ought to be dealt with not in this directive , but in the copyright directive which is also currently being dealt with by the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights , and that it should be considered by them at the same time as aspects which are essentially legal .
Otherwise we shall end up with a proliferation of requirements in a range of different directives , which would be of very little assistance to originators .
However , the greatest substantive problem I have relates , however , to the more or less clearly expressed demand that Member States should also criminalize private ownership of smart cards and similar devices .
This encourages more snooping around in people 's homes , and on the whole I also believe that too little consideration is being given to the rights of free access to information .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I first wish to apologize for the delay this morning , owing to difficulties on this particular day . I am very sorry and I would like to thank Madam President for being so understanding .
I would like to thank the draftsmen of opinion of the various Parliamentary committees and in particular the rapporteur for the Committee on Legal Affairs , Vice-President Anastassopoulos , for the complex and very thorough work done on this proposal , which is both important and difficult .
The proposal for a directive aims to protect radio and television broadcasters and the suppliers of new services in the information society from piracy , that is from the production and distribution of equipment that enables services normally provided for payment to be received free of charge .
It should be remembered that the start of pay television was also the start of a flourishing industry in commercial piracy which , by providing users with pirate equipment , caused huge losses to the service providers and hindered the development of this emerging sector .
Some Member States reacted by introducing a specific legal protection against piracy , while others did not do so for various reasons .
Moreover , the national legislations recently adopted are extremely varied .
Consequently there is no equivalent level of protection , and the Union is thus becoming a refuge for pirates and offers several possibilities for eluding the legal protection guaranteed in some Member States .
The proposal for a directive seeks to resolve this problem by introducing harmonized regulations within the scope of the single market .
I am pleased that the report from the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights and the amendments proposed are generally in favour of the Commission 's proposal .
It should not be forgotten that this is the answer to a repeated request from Parliament , last made in Mr Anastassopoulos ' previous report on the Commission 's Green Paper of 1996 .
I am also pleased that the Anastassopoulos report , in the same way as the reports from the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , contains numerous amendments that mainly help to clarify or reinforce the Commission 's proposal .
I am referring in particular to Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 10 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 , 16 , 17 , 19 , 23 , 24 and 25 which the Commission will accept in full , if not to the letter at least in spirit .
However , following a careful examination and taking into account the opinions of the various parties concerned , there are several amendments the Commission cannot accept .
This is the case , for example , with Amendment No 20 , which aims to extend the scope of the legal protection to services using conditional access systems for reasons other than those of ensuring appropriate remuneration .
This type of amendment goes beyond the aim of the proposal , which is to deal with the fundamental problem of piracy , that is , the desire of certain users to obtain services they would normally pay for at reduced or no cost , and the interest of the pirate industry in satisfying this demand by providing users with illegal equipment .
These amendments , however , seek to extend protection to services using conditional access systems for reasons other than that of guaranteeing payment , such as the requirement to ensure observance of contractual agreements arranged between service providers and content providers , seeking to make it impossible to receive a service in territories other than those for which the rights were requested .
This goes beyond the scope of the proposal and cannot be accepted in the context of this proposal .
In this connection , however , I would like to point out , Madam President , and to the rapporteur , that personally I am convinced of the interest and need to examine this matter . I think it would be useful , for that purpose , to begin a study to establish more clearly the terms of the question , its compatibility with Community law and the possible means available to offer an appropriate solution that takes due account of the interests of all parties involved .
One further amendment the Commission cannot accept is Amendment No 22 for , by restricting the definition of illicit pirate devices , it risks creating loopholes and weakening the protection considerably .
The Commission cannot accept several other amendments which , in our opinion , are not sufficiently clear and could give rise to confusion or incorrect interpretations .
I am referring to Amendments Nos 5 , 9 , 11 , 18 , 21 and part of 23 .
However , I wish to point out that despite the fact that several amendments cannot be accepted by the Commission , the agreement between the institutions on the objectives and the reasons for combating piracy and on the need to react urgently is broadly based and very encouraging .
I am sure that constructive cooperation between Parliament , the Commission and the Council will make it possible to achieve the objective , and I hope that every effort will be made in this connection .
Just one word , Madam President , on the point raised by Mr Pex , to reassure him that the Commission has taken maximum account of the cultural dimension , the value of cultural variety in Europe .
This spirit is reflected in the fact that we accept all the amendments made by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media . Finally , with regard to the point raised by Mr Oddy , I have already partly explained that the Commission 's proposal only guarantees protection for services using conditional access to guarantee payment , as it is only in these cases that there is a legitimate interest and a real requirement for protection .
I would like to add that intellectual property rights are not prejudiced , as simple reception , without reproduction or retransmission , cannot constitute a breach of an intellectual property right .
Moreover , when the service is not paid for , the service provider cannot sustain any direct financial loss as a result of unauthorized access .
This is a subject that should be examined further but , given the time constraints , I will stop here for the time being .
Madam President , I would particularly like to thank the Commissioner and all those colleagues who took part in this difficult debate on a very difficult issue , which has occupied those of us on the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights - you yourself are aware of this as you are a member of that committee - for many months , with many opposing views and many sides who , in fact , maintained their views right up to the present .
Following Commissioner Monti 's speech , I would like to highlight two points .
There is still a fundamental disagreement between us concerning the limits of legal protection .
This disagreement was expressed in the Commissioner 's speech and also in his opposition to the basic Amendment No 20 , or at least , as I heard , to a section of this amendment , which somewhat attenuates the disagreement .
But I would like to mention the Commissioner 's statement , which bore witness to his good intentions , that together with his colleagues in the European Commission , he was prepared to launch a study aimed at discovering whether , in the future , he could go beyond the scope which the Commission itself determined and which , of course , Parliament seeks to broaden .
As a result of the Commissioner 's statement , I do not have a problem in allowing the report to be adopted , whereas I would have had a problem had there been no such statement . Perhaps I should ask Parliment to refer it back to the Committee on Legal Affairs and Citizens ' Rights .
We shall see how we can solve the problem of disagreement before the second reading .
I must point out of course that the Commission accepted 16 to 17 amendments , which is a detail I cannot overlook . Of course , I think that the efforts of all of us are aimed at finding syntheses that will serve every possible balanced outcome .
We always bear in mind that rights are affected , and one way or another we endeavour to find the best solution . I wish to point out that , for my part - and I have stressed this repeatedly - my intention is that public broadcasting services be covered by legal protection , since I place great importance on public broadcasting channels , for many reasons .
Having made these observations , I would like to thank you , Madam President , since we are now in a position to have a complete picture of this extremely difficult issue , which we shall be voting on at 11.00 a.m ..
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.00 a.m.
The internal market in natural gas
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0140 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position established by the Council ( C40103 / 98-00 / 0385 ( COD ) ) with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council Directive concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas ( Rapporteur : Mr Desama ) .
Madam President , the vote which will follow today 's debate brings to an end a file which has been open for six years , that of the internal market for energy , with its two components , electricity and gas .
I would like to highlight the continuity with which this has been handled within Parliament , since during these six years a single rapporteur has been dealing with this issue , yet during the same period we have seen three different commissioners and even more presidencies of the Council .
Having said that , how should we judge this gas directive , and the proposal for a common position which is put to us today ?
Firstly , it should be recognized that , as with the electricity case , we find in it the main essentials of what Parliament voted for at the first reading in November 1993 .
I will not list these points here . I would merely like to mention a number of essential points which give real structure to the future directive .
Firstly , of course , the creation of the new concept of negotiated access to the network .
It was , in fact , the European Parliament which came up with this idea . It is taken up in the directive , and we are very pleased about that .
The second important factor is the desire for a progressive opening up of the markets , to take into account the large differences in the way the systems are structured . This we also find in the directive .
The third element is the implementation of the principle of subsidiarity , which is necessary not to protect national interests but to give the desired time for a rapprochement in organization and systems , as they are so different within the European Union .
The fourth element , finally , is public service mission .
I think that in the directive on energy , for both electricity and gas , we have probably reached the best solution with regard to the protection of the public service mission .
In any case , these are far better solutions than the ones we jointly came up with for telecommunications .
So we are very pleased with this .
In the compromise which has now been reached , two positive factors can also be highlighted , for which I would like to congratulate both the Commission and the presidencies which persevered with the issue : the Dutch , Luxembourg and British presidencies .
These two compromises are important factors in the safety and supply of natural gas within the European Union , firstly that of the storage and use of installations and also , above all , that of the application of take or pay contracts , that is , long term contracts which guarantee the security of supply to a Union which is heavily dependent on external supplies of gas .
Of course , whether we see ourselves represented in this directive at an 80 % or an 85 % level , there is still a small margin with which we do not agree , but then , as Alfred de Musset said : " The pleasure is all the more intense for not being complete ' .
It would be complete if we had today secured the eligibility of distributors and the eligibility of cogeneration .
It is not surprising that a certain number of Members have tabled amendments on this point .
It is a strong demand from the European Parliament that should undoubtedly be answered when the directive is reviewed in a few years ' time although , by then , times will have changed and attitudes will undoubtedly be more mature .
With regard to the amendments which were retabled at the second reading , there are essentially three , since two of them are identical .
The first relates to the time-scale within which we are asking the Commission to give an assessment of the development of the issue .
We wanted to remind the Commission of this necessity , but I am perfectly willing to call on my colleagues to vote against these amendments if Commissioner Papoutsis can give us the necessary guarantees with regard to this .
Secondly , the eligibility of distributors .
We had already defended this point of view with regard to the electricity directive .
Today , although in essence I share this desire , as rapporteur I am called upon to recommend you to vote against this amendment , since it could also have the effect of threatening the balance of the compromise and thus preventing both the legal security and the necessary links with the electricity directive .
It is for the same reason that I am opposed to the amendment on cogeneration , even though it has been tabled by my group , for on this issue too it has been difficult to reach a compromise .
To challenge this issue would be to challenge the whole directive , so I obviously call upon you to vote against these amendments .
Mr President , firstly heartiest congratulations to Claude Desama for achieving this uncompleted business for us over the time-scale involved .
Of course he has the support of the Socialist Group .
That is quite obvious .
We shall be pursuing the amendment on cogeneration and I will explain why in a moment .
The timelag is , indeed , very long and during this period of years several things have happened .
For example , the United Kingdom experience of a very rapid liberalization of the market within that country demonstrated that there is some benefit in doing it more progressively , in doing it slower .
The United Kingdom experience was so rapid that the large loss of jobs and the difficulties associated with unbundling came over far too short a period .
That is not going to happen with this directive .
Nevertheless , the experience with the gas directive , as with the electricity directive , will be a faster liberalization than the directive actually demands .
In some ways the six years have made it a little anachronistic and there will be developments which are not foreseen in the directive .
The other thing that has happened in those six years is the development of environmental concerns , in particular expressed in the agreements made at Kyoto where cogeneration plays an important part , as one of the resolutions .
That is why we are representing our amendment .
The majority of the Socialist Group does not believe that Article 18.2 is appropriate .
Indeed , we believe it directly contradicts the Commission 's communication on cogeneration .
We will therefore give people the opportunity when we vote to make it clear that they support cogeneration .
Nevertheless , like everyone else , we want the directive speedily .
We do not want to be obstructive .
Madam President , after three legislatures , believe it or not , we are today reorganizing the last large sector of industry in the Union .
The Member States have given the Union the task of bringing their markets together into a single internal market , and of enforcing the freedoms of the Treaty , namely the freedom to trade and the freedom of settlement , in all sectors .
The gas sector must surely be the last one where these two legal objectives have not yet been enforced .
This directive thus represents the keystone of the internal market .
I would remind you of the lesson we have learnt from our knowledge of economics : wherever there are monopolies , it is easier for mistakes to be made because the costs have to be met by captive customers .
On the other hand , competition forces mistakes out into the open , because it puts companies which make the wrong decisions at a competitive disadvantage .
As a result , competition puts pressure on prices and provides a motive for suppliers to come up with the best solutions .
But when does competition arise ?
At the point when the consumer can choose the same product from different types of supplier .
And that is what this directive achieves , by establishing that state of affairs - namely freedom of suppliers and thus freedom of choice for the consumer .
A different directive achieved this at the level of production at an earlier stage .
The gas directive achieves it in the area of transport and distribution , on a step-bystep basis , by abolishing legal monopolies and making it possible in practice to circumvent pipeline monopolies , since branch pipelines can be constructed , and there is a right to the freely approved construction of parallel infrastructure .
As a result , however , it is clear and important that practical monopolies will be abolished since , by being opened up to everyone , the pipelines can be used by third parties , with adequate protection being given to the owner as he receives a payment which covers his costs , and since the long-term supply contracts are given adequate protection .
A great many Member States were concerned about this point . In my opinion , the degree of protection it receives in the directive is in fact exaggerated .
Finally , there is also protection for Member States who set particular store by the ability to impose public service obligations on the companies .
After three years of discussion , the Council has unanimously agreed a highly skilful compromise , a very wellbalanced and sensitive compromise .
We have decided - I speak for my group in committee and here in Parliament - to approve and support this compromise , because the way to construct Europe is to advance step-by-step .
What could have been improved ?
In my opinion , the distributors have not been dealt with sufficiently well - but that is not the opinion of everyone in my group - and it could have been further improved in the area of combined heat and power .
However we recognize that important interests on the part of the Member States justify the arrangements proposed .
Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what happens next ?
Firstly , we expect clear statements from the Commission about regular and early reports , so that further steps can ensue .
Secondly , in those cases where states make use of the exemptions in relation to combined heat and power , we expect a report to Parliament so that that , too , can be discussed by it .
Parliament would like to follow this issue .
Thirdly , without further delay , we expect Commission reports on the need for harmonization in the areas of the environment and tax .
Fourthly , I want to make it clear that with this directive we are agreeing a level to which the applicant countries of the former Communist bloc in central and eastern Europe will have to adhere , and for which they must now prepare themselves .
Fifthly , I would like to voice my hope that the reformed and more efficient firms in the gas market will also become capable , as a result of this reform , of tackling the world market , where in my view they have so far been inadequately represented .
I thank the Commissioner , I thank the entire Commission , and I thank all the Members - first and foremost , Mr Desama - who have shown such a commitment to this directive over the years .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to announce the favourable position of our group , the Group Union for Europe , with regard to the directive on the natural gas market and Mr Desama ' s report .
This favourable position is the result of agreement with the other political groups in the European Parliament and also of mediation within our group .
I would have preferred the directive to be more ambitious , to provide more space for decentralized production , to introduce some more ambitious elements of competition promoting the districts and associations of small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
However , we have listened with satisfaction to the undertakings given by the Commission in the discussions within our Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy . Consequently , the outstanding aspect that leaves us with most uncertainty is the treatment of the cogeneration plants , in which regard the directive still seems to be ambiguous and retains complete discretion on the input thresholds .
Nevertheless , I have listened to the reasons put forward by the various parties involved and the rapporteur 's analysis , and , to conclude , it seems to me that the guideline of good in relation to better should prevail , as in the electricity directive , and that the gas market should be re-regulated well as soon as possible , rather than fight with the Council again , possibly for years , for something better .

Moreover , the amendment introduced by Mr Pompidou and accepted by the Desama report , which requires an assessment of the results of this directive over a certain number of years , offers the European Parliament a certain pathway along which to pursue our objectives .
I would like to conclude by congratulating Mr Desama and the Commission on their excellent work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , my group , the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , is very pleased with the directive on natural gas .
At last there will be an internal market for gas with the attendant market functioning and natural competition .
It means prices that conform to the market - in other words , lower prices for European companies and in future also for consumers .
I obviously congratulate Claude Desama on his result .
Although the market opening is still extremely limited , my group can agree with the Council 's common position .
We support Mr Desama , apart from two issues on which my group has tabled amendments .
It is our job after all to ensure that Europe has effective legislation .
The European Union Member States are becoming increasingly dependent on gas for heat and electricity .
Although gas is a relatively clean form of energy , CO2 is released when it is burnt .
In view of the agreements made in Kyoto concerning CO2 reduction , it is important that we use our gas as efficiently as possible .
A technology which makes a contribution is cogeneration .
Combined heat and power stations have an output of 80 % to 90 % . This is almost twice as much as a conventional gas-fired power station .
Cogeneration should therefore be promoted and should benefit from the liberalized market .
The Council 's position gives only the big combined heat and power stations the right always to buy gas freely .
Yet in reality , more and more small combined heat and power stations are being built , for example for companies which generate their own electricity and use the heat for an industrial process .
In the Netherlands combined heat and power , as well as CO2 from combined heat and power stations , is used in market gardening , a totally closed circuit which is efficient and environmentally friendly .
Did we not agree with the Council that energy-efficient technologies ought to be promoted ?
My group believes that all gas-fired combined heat and power stations should be entitled to buy gas freely .
We oppose Article 18 .
2 and , with the Group of the Party of European Socialists , will support the amendments on this .
My second amendment concerns the position of distribution companies in the gas market .
Distribution companies are able to stimulate initiatives such as the construction of combined heat and power stations at local level .
It is therefore important that these companies can be considered full market players , and are able to buy their gas freely .
Only proper market functioning under equal conditions will ensure that energy is used as efficiently as possible .
If we wish to comply with the Kyoto agreements then this is a necessary condition .
On principle , our group will persevere with this as well .
To conclude , Mr President , the fact that the Council is somewhat casual in curbing the use of fossil fuels , and therefore CO2 , is made particularly manifest by the budget for the ALTENER programme which is being debated after this .
My group fully concurs with the opinion of the rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz . The budget is so low that all statements from the Council about greater efforts towards climate protection seem almost laughable .
Mr President , in spite of the absence of a common energy policy , we receive directive after directive adapting the energy market to the principles of free trade and competition .
After electricity , as has been said , it is the gas market which is to be liberalized .
Certainly , a compromise agreement was reached between the different governments on 8 December 1997 , a compromise which the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has not wanted to threaten with amendments , judging the Council 's common position to be balanced and reasonable .
I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Desama on his work .
Nevertheless , the opening up to liberalization is progressive and not as strong as the Commission initially proposed .
Long term supply contracts are safeguarded and measures relating to public service obligations are recognized , in particular with regard to distribution .
But even if it is progressive and controlled , the opening up of the market to competition is no less real and will not fail to weigh ever more heavily on the development of this sector .
Manufacturers will benefit from price reductions due to competition between suppliers and , in compensation , domestic users will suffer an increase in prices .
This is , moreover , exactly what the president of Eurogaz admitted when he spoke to the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
Market pressures will be exerted on the principles and mission of public service , which risks being progressively dismantled in the face of attacks from competition .
Thus , before the directive has even finally been adopted , the French Government has challenged the monopoly of Gaz de France by opening up the market to the private sector in districts which are not currently served .
Furthermore , owing to a rapid return on investment , liberalization risks leading to preference being given to electricity production based on natural gas , to the detriment of other sources such as nuclear energy .
For all these reasons , the majority of our group , in particular the French Members of Parliament , are opposed to this directive to open up the gas market to competition .
In our opinion , in the absence of a common energy policy , there is no justification for the liberalization of the energy market , be it the gas or the electricity sector .
Our position is based both on Article 90.2 of the Treaty , which recognizes the possibility of each Member State organizing its public services contrary to the rules of competition , and also on the principle of subsidiarity , which must enable the special nature of energy to be taken into consideration . It is not a product just like any other and must not therefore be subject to free competition .
Mr President , I am happy with this compromise , which I would describe as a flexible one . It will enable each Member State to move still further towards the creation of an internal market in natural gas whilst enabling a controlled opening up of the market and recognizing the obligation of public service as essential .
This compromise takes into account the different comments made by all the actors in this affair since 1993 .
Parliament has greatly contributed to this outcome and I do not think , as some Members wish , that we should move towards conciliation at any cost .
This procedure is a last resort which tends sometimes , it is true , to show Parliament 's importance and determination . Nevertheless , a weapon is never truly dissuasive unless used sparingly .
With the issue of gas , it can be said that we have reached a satisfactory balance at second reading .
It is essential , for example , that Member States designate eligible customers .
As with the electricity directive , the future gas directive leaves this problem to the realm of subsidiarity .
It is also essential that this agreement is , as I said , flexible - that is , that the Member States are able to move at their own pace with regard to opening up their respective markets , some wanting to move much faster than others .
Differences in the structure of consumption between countries must therefore be taken into account , and the minimum degree of opening up that is decided upon in the agreement consequently seems acceptable to me .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance would like to thank Mr Desama and approves of his report , which will give rise to a directive enabling clear rules to be formulated for such a strategic sector .
Let us not forget that although Europe is going to find itself in a position of surplus supply in the short term , with greater competition between the traditional suppliers , new resources will be necessary from around 2005 and the Union 's dependence on external gas sources will increase .
Mr President , I should also like to offer sincere thanks to Claude Desama .
Following on from what he said earlier , we might also say that Council presidencies come and go , but the rapporteur Claude Desama goes on forever .
He has certainly worked on these matters for a very long time and has ensured himself a place in the history books of European politics .
The real problem we have in this case is Article 18.2 .
It is our intention that it should be possible for combined heat and power to purchase gas as cheaply as possible , in other words to be accepted as a customer , everywhere , in every country .
Now the objection that arises is that people say : " Well now , that calls the Council compromise into question .
They went to a lot of trouble in the Council , so why should we now extend the procedure by means of a process of negotiation ? '
I am sorry , but I cannot accept this argument .
If we accept this argument , then all proposals from the Council are reasonable as a matter of principle , and we can give ourselves a relatively easy life .
Translating this to national Parliaments would mean that , if the government makes a legislative proposal , it clearly will have had a reason for doing so , and consequently the Parliament would have to give its agreement .
I cannot go along with that , although I concede that the procedure will , of course , be extended as a result .
But there is also a second point in relation to this matter .
At the same time as we are debating this gas directive , the Commission has presented a paper , an interesting communication on combined heat and power .
We , the Parliament - the rapporteur is Mrs Estevan Bolea - shall also demand that the contribution of combined heat and power within the European Union should be doubled or trebled .
What Parliament is doing here is a contradiction .
On the one hand , we are calling for a doubling or trebling of the role of combined heat and power ; on the other , we are afraid to write into our directive that they may buy their gas wherever they like .
If Parliament behaves like this , we shall lose credibility . That is the worst thing that can happen in politics , and we are being severely punished for it at the moment in some places in the Member States .
That is why I ask you to support the Socialists ' amendment , and then we shall see what happens .
After all , we are dealing with sensible people !
Mr President , after almost ten years of debating the issue , the natural gas markets are now being deregulated .
I would like to thank Claude Desama for his excellent work on this matter .
The proposal for a directive is a good one , but I wish to point out one weakness in all this , which is that in the gas directive the status of combined heat and electricity production is inferior to that of other means of energy production .
Electricity producers will be allowed to pipe gas regardless of the size of the company , but if the company is a producer of combined heat and power , Member States may determine the minimum size of the gas company allowed to pipe gas .
I do not think this is right .
Combined heat and power production is surely one of the best ways of achieving the aims of the Kyoto conference , as it will lead to a reduction in greenhouse emissions as companies increase their overall efficiency .
Besides , I think it is very important that the implementation of the directive in Member States is monitored and that the Commission also shares its experiences with the European Parliament and Council by means of a report .
Mr President , this may not be in keeping with what has gone before , but I feel obliged to say that I am against the directive and the recommendation , and of course I cannot congratulate Mr Desama .
The reason for this is that both the directive and the recommendation operate within the framework of privatization , the most extreme liberalization , and free competition within an unregulated free market .
The directive is targeted towards the gradual exclusion of the public sector while , on the other hand , encouraging and promoting a private monopoly over natural gas in the shape of the integrated enterprise , whether vertical or horizontal .
If integration is horizontal , enterprises trading in other sectors , such as electricity , may enter the natural gas sector . Thus we will have enormous monopolistic business conglomerates which will rule in tyranny over society , holding in their power this most crucial element - energy - which is vital for growth and development , for the provision of social services and for the protection of the environment .
A private monopoly is incompatible with these three factors because it seeks profit and nothing else .
It will therefore rule in tyranny over the whole of society , which will be obliged , through taxation , to pay for structural work on behalf of these enterprises , and even for safety and protection .
For these reasons we will not vote for this action .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as we are all aware , the proposal for the internal market in natural gas is extremely important .
The gradual liberalization of this market , which has an annual turnover of more than ECU 100 billion , is inextricably linked with our aim of increased competition in the European economy , and also of reduced unemployment .
I would like to thank the European Parliament for its decision , first and foremost , to speed up the examination of the common position on natural gas in order to enable the timely submission of the second reading to the Energy Council to be held on 11 May .
The common position on the internal market in natural gas , which is being submitted to the European Parliament for second reading , is the fruit of intense negotiations .
During these negotiations we succeeded in laying the foundations of the new competitive electricity market , as well as those of the corresponding natural gas market , which form the fundamental pillars of the internal energy market .
These important results would not have been possible without the personal contribution of your rapporteur , Mr Desama .
I would therefore like to thank Mr Desama for his excellent work throughout those years .
It is true that the landscape of the internal energy market has changed radically .
The issuing of the electricity directive demonstrated the determination of Member States , the determination of industry and consumers , and also the determination of market forces , to open up the energy sector to competition .
In reality , as is clear from the recent Commission report to the European Parliament and the Council , Member States are opting for the fastest possible opening up of the market , with the widest possible range , in relation to what is called for by the directive on the electricity market .
This fact justifies the choices we made in issuing the electricity directive .
I believe it is in the interests of industry and consumers alike to put the gas directive into effect and not to delay it in relation to the directive on the electricity market .
The opening up of the natural gas market to competition must not be delayed .
The common position on the gas directive , which was adopted unanimously by the Council on 12 February , is a significant achievement and reflects the general agreement that has been established between the Member States .
It includes a large number of common rules which must be implemented by the Member States , in accordance , however , with their own idiosyncrasies .
In accordance with the intentions of the European Commission and Parliament alike , the present directive provides a common framework for the whole of Europe , leaving the definition of the relevant provisions to the principle of subsidiarity .
More especially , it provides for the existence of minimum levels of competition in the natural gas market .
The directive also guarantees that , from the outset , a large number of industrial consumers , as well as all electricity producers , will be free to choose their own natural gas provider .
This eligibility also includes combined electricity and heat producers and is therefore fully in line with the priority that is accorded to this sector .
Only in very special and exceptional cases is it possible for a Member State to institute reduced ceilings , which in any case will be communicated to the Commission and , in consequence , will be carefully monitored by the Commission as to the actual justification concerning the imbalances of the domestic electricity markets .
There are already indications that many Member States will restrict themselves to the basic demands of the directive , but they will open up their markets to competition .
According to these indications , the results of liberalization will be more significant than previously anticipated .
The directive also provides for the protection of obligations to provide a service , which Member States can impose on natural gas companies in their market in the broader economic interest .
Nor must we forget that liberalization of the market does not mean privatization .
Liberalization of the market means that public state enterprises and private enterprises alike must operate within the framework of the internal market , and respect the principles of healthy competition .
These obligations will be defined by the Member States in the context of the community framework and will subsequently be communicated to the Commission , which will monitor them on the basis of the provisions of community legislation .
This mechanism will allow Member States to counterbalance competition with public service whenever it is judged to serve the broader public interest .
As regards storage , we believe this cannot be regarded as part of a natural monopoly , since it is a commercial activity . For this reason , the Commission considers that there is no cause for special provisions in addition to what is already included in the proposal .
As regards the important issue of take or pay contracts , I am very satisfied with the unanimous and widespread support for the solution that has been achieved .
This solution allows the Commission to carry out effective control on the basis of clear and objective criteria .
I am determined to set up an efficient method of cooperation between the Commission and the Member States on this issue .
The Commission and the Member States are now called upon to play a very important role in this regard .
The common position incorporates a large number of amendments which were tabled during the first reading by Parliament and which had already been taken into consideration by the Commission in its amended proposal .
I have to say that these amendments contributed to the clarification of a number of important points , and also to the broader balance of the text .
I especially appreciate the work of Parliament 's Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy in this second reading and I would like to stress that , in principle , the balanced structure and the value of the common position has been acknowledged .
As regards the amendment on the submission of a report after the directive has been in force for three years , I would like to say that the European Commission is willing to accept this amendment if Parliament considers it to be really necessary .
I would like to make it clear that , in any event , the Commission intends to submit reports to the European Parliament and to the Council whenever this is deemed expedient and a de facto imperative .
More especially , it will provide a good opportunity for a regular review of the possibility of implementation by the Member States of the special provision relating to the cogeneration of electricity and heat .
I would also like to emphasize that the Commission recently drafted its first report on the monitoring of the electricity directive , although the directive itself does not provide for this obligation .
I can assure you that what we do for electricity we shall of course do for natural gas .
These reports are of vital importance for the preparation of the next stages in the development of an internal energy market .
And I would like to add that the presidency fully shares this approach .
It is clear that it rests with Parliament to decide whether such an amendment is necessary after what has been said .
In any case , I consider the close monitoring , on the part of the Commission , of the implementation of the gas directive , in close cooperation with Member States , to be absolutely vital .
Moreover , it is the only way to avoid misinterpretation of the various provisions of the directive and to ensure the full , timely and effective realization of this important initiative .
In the case of the electricity directive , we successfully followed this approach , which proved to be effective and received a warm reception on the part of all the Member States .
As regards the other amendments which have been tabled , the Commission is not in a position to adopt them .
We cannot adopt the two amendments which have been put forward in relation to cogeneration since , as I have already explained , cogeneration is already eligible , except under very specific conditions which must always be communicated to the Commission .
As regards the amendment which has been put forward on distributors , this touches upon one of the most sensitive issues which have been debated in the context of the overall compromise .
Distributors are already eligible as regards the supplying of their own eligible customers , whether industries or electricity generators .
Any freedom of choice beyond this falls within subsidiarity , and this touches on the very essence of the compromise , especially in relation to the possible obligation of public services .
For these reasons the Commission cannot accept the amendment .
The Commission considers it vitally important to approve , as quickly as possible , the present directive , which is supported by consumers and industry alike .
Today 's debate has clearly shown that this position is shared by the European Parliament .
I would like to finish by once again expressing my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Desama , to all the Members of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy of the European Parliament , and to all the Members who spoke today in the context of the debate in this Chamber .
I wish to thank them warmly for their constructive contribution to this extremely important process , which we are completing today .
Thank you , Commissioner Papoutsis .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.00 a.m.
ALTENER II
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0143 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position established by the Council ( C40032 / 98-97 / 0106 ( SYN ) ) with a view to adopting a Council Decision concerning a multiannual programme for the promotion of renewable energy sources in the Community ( ALTENER II ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs. Bloch von Blottnitz ) .
Mr President , the ALTENER programme is a typical example which illustrates the yawning gulf in politics between demands and reality .
I would simply remind you of the resolutions in Berlin , Rio and Kyoto .
We committed ourselves to a reduction in the emission of pollutants and CO2 .
It was said that this was one of the most important tasks that we face in the coming years .
In its deliberations on ALTENER II , the Council itself says that by the year 2000 we shall have an increase of 3 % in CO2 emissions , not a reduction .
It goes on to say - and I regard this as cynical - that ALTENER II should make a significant contribution to the increased use of environmentally friendly , renewable energy sources , and that it should represent a principal component of the Community strategy for the reduction of CO2 emissions .
I have to say , that strikes me as frankly outrageous when I see that only ECU 22 million have been provided for it .
What on earth can you do with ECU 11 million per annum ?
The Council goes even further than this by restricting our budgetary authority , not de jure , which it cannot do , but de facto , and it even wants to prescribe how much we have to allocate in the budget next year .
That is not on , and under no circumstances can we can put up with it !
ECU 11 million this year , and next year we shall see .
Moreover , what we might call the last straw in this outrageous behaviour is the fact that the Council has not planned to put the issue on the agenda of the Energy Council meeting on 11 May .
This would mean that we would have no more money at all this year , that we would have no ALTENER II programme at all and once again would do nothing for renewable energies .
I would just like to remind you once more of the shameful fiasco - since there is not enough money - of SAVE , JOULE and THERMIE .
We all know that we are dependent on imports of raw materials .
And so of course all my nuclear friends come along and say , well then , what about nuclear power ?
I tell you that is utter rubbish , we need uranium for nuclear power , and we have to import that as well , so let us just be clear on that point !
In addition , it creates many jobs .
It is an export opportunity for the next millennium .
It is environmentally friendly .
It is the only way we shall achieve a reduction in CO2 .
The Council says so , we know that , but there is no money for it !
I would just like us to get as much money for these programmes - only for four years - as we chuck at the nuclear industry each year , for fusion for example .
In that case , we blithely spend ECU 250 million , and sometime , possibly in the year 2050 ...
But in the case of something that is necessary , that creates jobs , is good for the environment , and contains enormous innovative potential , we simply do nothing !
I have to ask myself , where am I , what sort of play are we performing here ?
Is it a comedy ?
It is no comedy ; it is tragic .
I would also like to point out again that , on top of everything else , it is envisaged in the programme that domestic waste should be accepted as renewable energy .
This , of course , makes me wonder what it is all about .
Domestic waste , I ask you !
That is not renewable energy .
Of course , it is quite clear that a number of industries have a good deal of interest in this , namely the waste incineration plants .
The point is that they are now in the hands of the large electricity supply companies . Because these companies were able to build up such large reserves for the disposal of nuclear waste , and they were able to put away billions in taxpayers ' money , they were able to take over all the waste incineration plants .
And now we are expected to subsidize them as well , and allow domestic waste to be accepted as renewable energy !
What we ought to be doing is finally to put all the knowledge and all the money that we have into photovoltaics , into hydrogen , into geo-thermal technology and so on , in order to achieve some success in these fields for once .
What we also ought to be doing as a matter of urgency is to have at our disposal firm regulations on feeding electricity into the grid , otherwise we may as well not bother .
And of course , at the end of the day , the price would have to take account of how environmentally friendly they are .
That means we would have to tax the other energies to some extent because at the end of the day , the environmental costs and costs of illness are being imposed on society , while the profits are privatized .
Fine , I do not object to that , but we really must ensure that there is a fair division here .
All of this is lacking , and no country wants to introduce taxation .
We are all ducking and weaving our way around the issue .
We all continue to muddle through as we always have done in the past , and then we stage enormous international conferences , like the recent one in Kyoto , and say , of course , yes , CO2 reductions , we commit ourselves to 10 % .
Then the Council says , well , in fact we shall have a 3 % increase , but ALTENER is getting 11 million , and really we would prefer not to do anything ; and since we are arguing , we had better quickly get it off the agenda of the Council meeting on 11 May 1998 .
And , at best , suddenly we hear that we should be applying subsidiarity !
They fall back on that then , and every country is left to fend for itself .
If I look around at the individual countries , I discover that none of them is doing anything .
Each one says it just cannot afford to act because unfortunately it is part of the internal market now , it is in a competitive environment and so on .
I hope that at long last matters are being taken seriously , and we endow these programmes sensibly .
The Commission had proposed ECU 30 million .
Even that was too little in my eyes , but by comparison with what the Council is now dangling in front of us it is little short of a gigantic amount .
For that reason I would like to ask the House to approve the amendments which have been proposed by the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , which Parliament in any case approved at first reading .
At the end of the day , the Commission was also in agreement with these amendments , although it always makes a few very diplomatic changes .
I am more in favour of clear words , so there can be no excuses .
If this is not achieved , there is just one thing I want to say to you : the costs of our sloppy behaviour , in failing to act , are so great in the health and environment fields that we shall simply be unable to pay them in the next millennium .
At the end of the day , we do have a certain responsibility towards future generations .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , I think I can very largely associate myself with the very clear words of the rapporteur .
The ALTENER programme is the only programme we have in the European Union that is available exclusively for the assistance of renewable energy sources .
By the year 2010 , the proportion of total energy consumption to be contributed by renewable energy sources is to double , according to the European Commission 's proposal in its White Paper on renewable energies .
They know that in calling for this , they are knocking at an open door as far as the European Parliament is concerned because , in the Mombaur initiative report , in my report on the Green Paper , we called for a significant build-up - at least 15 % - in renewable energy sources because of our profound conviction that , from the viewpoint of climate policy , from the viewpoint of environmental policy , from the viewpoint of import dependence , with regard to rural areas , and with regard to additional jobs , the European Union needs to do a great deal more in this respect .
I also know that it is not only - perhaps not at all , when it comes down to it - a question of European assistance programmes which will determine whether the desired goal is reached .
Political decisions which lead to genuinely fair competition conditions through fair access to the grid , and which lead to the internalization of the costs of different ways of generating energy through European energy taxes , are fundamental preconditions .
A political strategy which leads to a restructuring of taxes in energy policy needs to pervade almost all Community policies , and needs to be implemented through coordination between the Member States and the European Union .
Nonetheless , facilitating the use of new technologies for energy generation from renewable energies through financial incentives and through concrete assistance will be of exceptional significance if genuine market penetration is to be achieved .
The Commission has proposed a breakthrough campaign in its White Paper .
One million photovoltaic roofs and house fronts , 10 000 megawatts from wind , 10 000 megawatts from biomass .
ECU 4 billion of public funds are required for this .
I know that a good deal needs to come from the Member States as well .
But I also know that the 22 million envisaged for two years here is at best a drop in the ocean , and perhaps not even that .
That is why it has to be quite clear that there has to be some room for manoeuvre over the budget at least for next year , and that we can top it up .
Secondly - and you , Mr Commissioner , can be sure that you will hear from us when the time comes to consider the successor to ALTENER II in the energy framework programme . We expect that there will be a significant increase there as well .
Thirdly , and on this point I give my full support to the rapporteur , it is absolutely necessary that the Council really does reach a decision on 11 May so that measures can begin during the current year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party is also going to support all Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' amendments , which have already been approved in the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
I have to say , Mr Commissioner and Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , that most of them are nothing but good intentions and an academic exercise similar to the squaring of the circle . Not only is there no money - because there really is not - but , as we are always saying in the Energy Committee , where we talk about renewable energy every day , all we are being presented with by the Commission are good intentions far removed from reality .
Perhaps in some cases we do not just need money to support renewable forms of energy , Mr Commissioner , but political decisions too .
If you look at the current renewable energy production figures for the European Union , you will see that we stand at 6 % .
In Spain the figure is 8 % because that country has made a great effort .
But of that 6 % , 90 % is conventional hydraulic energy , which means we have just 0.4 % from other renewable energies , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz .
You are trying to use biomass in your house and you know how difficult it is .
I think the Member States must make political decisions to favour hydroelectric energy , although most of the groups are opposed to it because they do not want dams . It is the cleanest energy we have ; it is truly renewable ; and it is the only renewable form which allows us to store electricity .
The rest cannot do that .
We will be laying great stress on research into renewable energies in the framework programme on research and development . I think that is the first step .
Obviously , that includes photovoltaic energy .
I think the future of renewable energy lies in solar photovoltaic energy , but not yet - it is still very expensive .
How can we help renewable energy ?
Obviously , from the financial point of view , with investment - because all these forms of energy only work for very limited periods of time .
Wind energy is very interesting , but it only operates for 1500 to 2000 hours each year , and sometimes it works at night when we do not need electricity .
So we will need to support investment .
And I do think subsidiarity is important , Mrs Rothe and Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , because each Member State should make the greatest possible effort if they really believe in renewable energy . Otherwise , it is all just words .
In any case , Mr Commissioner , we support the ALTENER programme . We think it has very little funding .
We think Directorate-General XVII has very little money for all its programmes . However , there is something I want to say to you : maybe you do not just need money .
Maybe what you need is more courage and fortitude in your political decisions and more results and clarity with the Member States . Because , by the way , we have a liberalized electricity market which is working very well , and a gas market which is not going to be liberalized to such a great extent because - except in the UK , Holland and a bit in Denmark - nobody produces gas , so it is a very special type of transport liberalization .
That is why this directive was easier than the electricity directive and , in the end , no effort is too great .
Mr President , the continuing debate on renewable energy highlights again the importance of a coordinated and integrated approach to all EU development programmes .
The importance of alternative energy policy is widely accepted in this House .
To the extent that energy based on renewable resources is of significant importance in the utilization of our land resource and , therefore , offers potential to farmers and to job creation in rural areas , I would urge the Council and the Commission to coordinate their efforts in the formulation of long-term energy policy with the development of agriculture and to do so - and this is important - in the context of Agenda 2000 .
In my view there is far too much fragmentation of EU policy and certainly not sufficient appreciation of the importance of developing the full potential of our European land resource .
The inevitable reform of the common agricultural policy highlights the importance of producing non-food crops .
Alternative energy programmes based on renewable resources offer a profitable alternative for our farmers and for rural dwellers and rural development programmes .
As I have already said , we have prioritized the importance of rural development .
We have identified the European model of agriculture based on the retention of the maximum number of farm families on the land of Europe .
That is widely accepted and supported in this House .
However , if we are serious about achieving our objectives under both headings we must coordinate energy policy with the development of agriculture and with employment in rural areas .
The technology for the production of alternative energy based on agricultural crops is clearly established .
The technology is there .
We now need a coordinated approach and a willingness at EU and national level to adjust policies and create the economic environment for the sustainable development of alternative energy closely related to , and based on , the development of our land resource and agriculture and with the central theme of retaining the maximum number of farmers on the land of Europe and the maximum number of people employed in Europe 's rural areas .
So , if we are serious , we must adopt this coordinated approach and I appeal to the Commission and the Council to work more closely together in terms of the final production of European and national policy in the context of Agenda 2000 .
Mr President , I want to say that the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left agrees with Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' report too . In addition , I would like to express our satisfaction at our constructive cooperation with the Commission - with the Commissioner , Mr Papoutsis .
However , I wish to express our great dissatisfaction with , and protest at , the position adopted by the Council .
I think the Council 's position with regard to the annual ECU 11 million basically places the ALTENER programme in cloud-cuckoo-land and thus deprives it of any real significance .
It is something which we , as a Parliament , must fight against and challenge , especially during the budget procedure .
It is very important that these inconsistencies be stopped .
We can see that there are opportunities for the vast exploitation of gentle forms of energy , such as wind power in the Cyclades , for example , and in the Islands of the Aegean .
And in spite of the few steps that have been taken , their exploitation will be much less than could be achieved . I would like to put this question to the Commissioner , Mr Papoutsis : what could be done here - in the context of course of the difficult financial possibilities which exist ?
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , for her report .
There is no doubt that the ALTENER programme must continue because it is the only programme in the EU in which people are dealing exclusively with renewable sources of energy , and also in view of all the money which the EU gives to other sources of energy .
The least we can request is that renewable sources of energy also get money .
So it is laughable that the Council is only able to agree to ECU 11 million per year .
But what has happened to all the fine words from the Council , including from the Kyoto Conference ?
What do these words mean ?
Nothing in reality .
How is the goal of reducing CO2 emissions actually being achieved ?
How did the Council see this ?
Is the Council going to start performing magic or are people going to start juggling the emission figures ?
There does not appear to be any other explanation .
The ECU 30 million which the Commission is proposing is also low , but it is still acceptable .
However , the Council 's figures are totally unacceptable .
You cannot give less money to renewable sources of energy under these conditions when CO2 emissions are constantly rising .
If the emissions were to decrease sharply , then you could perhaps talk about stabilizing the programme , but not in this case .
Furthermore , the amendments are important , particularly Amendment No 3 .
If you pollute nature you should also pay for it .
However , if you have a good environmental policy , then you should also pay less .
In that case it is important for the different figures to estimate the emission costs to be calculated in different ways too .
What is cheap should also be good for the environment , and what is bad should be expensive for companies .
Mr President , allow me to give a practical example .
At home , in my local area , just behind my house in fact , a windmill construction project is planned and a private developer is ready to invest between 150 and 200 million Belgian francs into it .
Curiously enough , opposition to this project has come from a cultural association , concerned about the beauty of the landscape and the fact that the nearby castle would suffer visually from the windmills on the plateau behind .
In this context , the ALTENER II project is a very appropriate means to carry out an impact study , enabling it to be proven by computer simulation that , from the castle , the windmills will not be seen and there will therefore be no visual impact .
Of course , I am more worried about the noise , and it is for this in particular that the ALTENER project will give us the means to finance these impact studies .
If you consider that an impact study for a project costs 1.5 million Belgian francs , then the ECU 22 million granted by the Council is exactly enough for 500 projects throughout the European Union .
I find this amount ridiculous and that is why the Group of the European Radical Alliance will vote for the amendments presented by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , whom I would like to thank for her excellent work .
Mr President , like the rapporteur , I would first like to say that waste incineration has nothing to do with the issue of renewable energy .
There is no connection .
It would be a fine example of cynicism to keep waste incineration in this report since it would be a question of a real misappropriation of funds to the benefit of large companies who could not care less about renewable energy sources .
Apart from this , " experiments ' - I put the word in quotation marks - " experiments ' in the field of renewable energy have been going on for years throughout the western world .
For years we have been told of such experiments and the Member States grant a handful of pittances in order to fool public opinion .
I think there have been enough experiments and not enough large-scale efforts .
Apart from hydraulic power stations , renewable power sources continue to be nothing but gadgets designed to amuse people .
You might think this incapacity on the part of countries to pursue an active policy of renewable energy development - an incapacity which is explained particularly by the large economic interests of the energy lobby - would lead the European Union to compensate for these failings , to have an approach far more in keeping with the general interest , to climb above all these mercenary interests .
But no , we remain at a level of pious wishes , fine words and declarations with no follow-up .
Just a few months after the Kyoto Conference , which timidly indicated the path to be followed in order to preserve the balance of our planet , it would seem logical for the European Union to affirm a certain priority for renewable energy , which protects the environment and brings real potential in the areas of employment and technological development .
So , what has become of this priority that the Union should be showing ? ECU 22 million , or rather two times nothing , not even a pittance .
In fact , I am truly embarrassed by this report .
I am embarrassed because I think Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' work is remarkable , and I thank her for it .
The issues are expressed well in the document and it is clearly only the budget which does not match up .
To ensure that this work has not been in vain , I will of course align myself with the rapporteur 's recommendations , but I am still convinced that we will be a long time yet in this energy Stone Age , especially as we will not have internalized all the indirect costs of conventional energy sources .
Given that the calculations are distorted , distortions in competition remain and no progress is made .
My wish is that there might be a new tax system , as soon as possible , in which as well as economic criteria , social and environmental parameters are finally taken into account within a rigorously accountable dimension .
We will vote for Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' amendments .
Mr President , rarely do we hear a subject discussed in this Chamber which brings so many groups together in enthusiasm .
That subject is renewable energy .
Renewable energy enables us to keep our promises , the promises made at Kyoto .
It creates jobs , it fits in with our priority of job creation .
I support wholeheartedly the report of Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ; except that I do not agree with her omission of domestic waste and will vote against it .
Colleagues , if you want Europe to matter to the people in your constituency , choose subjects which interest them .
Renewable energy interests European citizens .
We have a multi-pronged approach , we spend millions and millions on research into renewable energy .
We need , at the same time , to create the legal framework through access to the grid which enables it to prosper and we need a programme like ALTENER .
In every single Member State of the European Community ALTENER promotes renewable energy .
I know from the excellent work done by the South Midlands Renewable Energy Centre , the only one in the United Kingdom , that if we go out with the message that renewable energy helps the environment and helps jobs , we get public support .
Comrades and colleagues in this Parliament , we need public support for the European Union .
We need to look at the circumstances relevant in every geographical part of this Union , from Lapland to the Greek Islands and we need the renewable energy that is appropriate for every part of the EU .
The minister representing the United Kingdom presidency , John Battle , is one of the enthusiasts for renewable energy and he has personally reassured me that he will not allow ALTENER II to slip away until it is too late to implement .
He will do everything in his power to ensure that something of interest to all Europeans gets through an appropriate Council .
I believe that the budget in the preliminary draft budget has been much improved .
That is an encouraging sign .
It seems to me that when the European Union started it looked at coal and it looked at nuclear energy ; the energy to look at now is renewable energy and I therefore am delighted that the ALTENER II programme will receive support from every party in this Parliament .
Mr President , the Commission 's goal to raise the share of renewable energy sources in total EU energy consumption to 15 % by the year 2010 is in keeping with the aims decided upon at Kyoto and Parliament must give it the support it deserves .
Actually , this target has been well exceeded in Finland .
With further development of the markets , the right training and guidance , and the existence of the ALTENER programme , we will be able to promote the use of renewable energy sources throughout the Union .
Owing to geography , circumstances in different countries vary .
According to proposed national quotas , an additional reduction in gas emissions will cost Finland more per ton of CO2 than any other EU country .
We have already begun to adopt all the easiest ways of reducing emissions , such as district heating , using wood for fuel , setting up combined heat and electricity production plants and following energy saving programmes .
It is only the expensive alternatives that are left .
High technology in Finland has a place in nearly every walk of life .
For example , our homes are built for our cold climate , and heat does not escape from them like it does in many other countries in the Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to specially thank the rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , for the work she has put in regarding the ALTENER II programme .
Before I come to the amendments that Parliament is proposing in this second reading , I would like to mention some more general developments .
You will of course remember that during Parliament 's sitting of November 1997 , when I presented the ALTENER II programme to you , I outlined to you the framework for the programme , and I also outlined the aspirations we had to strengthen our policy .
Just five months later , I have the pleasure of referring to the positive developments which ensued .
I announced to you then my intention to propose as soon as possible for approval in the European Commission the White Paper on renewable energy sources and the framework programme for energy .
Both these important proposals were unanimously adopted by the Commission and are now being debated by the institutional organs .
As regards the White Paper on renewable energy sources , it is anticipated that a resolution will be adopted by the Energy Council on 11 May , which will support our proposals .
This is important because the ALTENER II programme is an essential vehicle not only for the implementation of Community strategy but also for the implementation of the action plan , which is outlined in the White Paper .
At this point please allow me to refer to two specific issues , which were brought up by several honourable Members who spoke today .
But first of all I have to say that I fully share the view of Mr Alavanos , that we must strengthen wind power even more .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , although I understand why there is a certain restlessness in the House , because the debate has been delayed through circumstances completely beyond our control , I must once again request Members to abstain from private conversations for a few minutes and treat speakers with a modicum of respect , enabling them to be heard with all due dignity , whether the speaker is a Member of this House or the Commissioner .
Thank you Mr President .
I was saying that I fully share Mr Alavanos ' view that we must strengthen wind power even more , especially in regions where conditions are favourable , such as the Cyclades , as he himself mentioned , but also in other regions of Europe .
I assure you that we will make every effort in this direction , in collaboration with Member States . I would like to take this opportunity to stress that the Commission proposes that , from the year 2000 , the Regional Fund should include actions for renewable energy sources .
And I hope the European Parliament will support this proposal .
As regards the issue raised by Mrs Rothe and Mr Pinel with regard to waste , in the context of the ALTENER programme and in accordance with Community policy on waste , priority is given to ecological management , such as biomass , chiefly of the organic part of the waste .
I must say , I am especially satisfied that the Council and Parliament alike declared on behalf of the Commission proposal for ALTENER II and approved practically without amendment all the actions provided for in the context of the programme under review .
The importance of ALTENER II is thus confirmed , as is the need for its immediate approval at the Council on 11 May , with a view to its immediate implementation from 1998 .
I would also like to highlight something which I mentioned during the first reading : in the opinion of the Commission , the substance of certain amendments places them within the framework of the Community strategy for renewable energy sources rather than within the ALTENER framework .
More specifically , as regards the amendments which you propose , the Commission accepts , in principle , Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 6 , 7 and 9 .
However , as regards Amendments Nos 1 and 2 , in accordance with the position it outlined during the first reading , the Commission considers that it is more suitable to place the fundamental principles which are introduced with the respective explanatory statements Nos 20 and 19 .
As regards Amendments Nos 7 and 9 , they are already covered at other points in the ALTENER II proposal .
The content of Amendment No 6 is better placed with , and is covered in , the proposal of the White Paper on renewable energy sources .
As regards Amendment No 3 , the Commission considers the reference to indirect costs and their inclusion in tariffs to be premature .
This possibility must be analysed and it could be introduced in a possible legislative proposal to be submitted later .
Amendments Nos 5 and 8 concern the amount which is entered in the budget .
In this regard , the Commission inserted in the minutes of the Energy Council of December 1997 a communication in which it opposed including in the text of the resolution any amount concerning the budget .
Moreover , the Commission considers that the budget which was approved by the Council for the two years is inadequate .
In consequence , we also consider the budget which was approved by the competent budgetary authority for the year 1998 to be inadequate .
Therefore the European Commission can accept Amendment No 5 .
On the other hand , it cannot accept Amendment No 8 .
Nor can the Commission accept Amendment No 10 concerning committee procedures .
The Commission has made every effort to incorporate Parliament 's proposals as far as possible and as faithfully as possible into the legal text of the proposal we are being asked to decide upon .
I would like once again to thank you and your rapporteur , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , as well as the Members of the Parliamentary Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , for your support throughout this endeavour .
Thank you , Commissioner Papoutsis .
I apologize on behalf of the House for the way in which this debate was conducted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.00 a.m.
Air pollution by motor vehicles
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0126 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , on the common position adopted by the Council on 23 March 1998 , with a view to adopting a Directive of the European Parliament and Council relating to measures to be taken against air pollution by emissions from motor vehicles and amending Directive 70 / 220 / EEC with regard to light commercial vehicles ( C4-0177 / 98-96 / 0164B ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr. Lange ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in February we took a decision in relation to the Auto / Oil Programme on air quality in Europe .
One small component was missing , namely light commercial vehicles .
These are the vehicles which make deliveries in towns - postmen , small greengrocers , deliveries for suppliers .
It is for vehicles such as these that we need to add a component as soon as possible to ensure an improvement in the air quality in the towns of Europe .
This procedure at second reading is a perfect example of Parliament 's ability to work quickly and efficiently .
We received the common position on 2 April and having completed our work on it today - at the end of April - we are now able to come to a decision .
That shows how quickly and efficiently Parliament can work .
That is why I do not want to make any grand speeches . I want instead to uphold this tradition and urge quickly and efficiently that we follow this recommendation from the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection , so that industry can plan with confidence , and so that the air quality in the towns of Europe is improved .
Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament for enabling us to arrive at a result very quickly in this procedure as well .
I should also like to thank Mr Lange , and I would ask you to understand that , although we are now in a position to take this matter forward to the conciliation procedure , the Commission cannot accept amendments which go beyond the Auto / Oil Programme II . That applies in particular to Amendment No 5 and the other amendments connected with it .
However , it does not mean that we shall not cooperate with Parliament in a very open and positive way , as we have in the past .
Although not many people have heard this remark , that does not matter because it is well known that this is how we work .
Thank you , Commissioner Bangemann .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.00 a.m.
Votes
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I propose to our Parliament that we show solidarity with European Parliament staff , who are currently holding a standing general meeting to defend the independence of the European civil service against nationalization and politicization .
Mr President , lest there be any ambiguity , my group will be voting against all amendments .
We decided this procedurally .
We welcomed a common text which , very unfortunately , Mr Nicholson felt unable to sign .
Our position is to support this text unamended .
This should not be interpreted to mean that we do not agree with the substance of some of the amendments but we are satisfied that the Good Friday agreement contained strong commitments to decommissioning .
Therefore , my group will be voting for the compromise text debated yesterday .
Mr President , I rise on the same issue .
The question of the decommissioning of weapons in Northern Ireland is a very delicate and deeply sensitive question .
I want to make it quite clear that the position of the Liberal Group is that we shall vote for the joint resolution and we shall not vote for any amendments .
I wish to say to Mr Nicholson and to the people he represents that we do so because we believe that the sensitive question of decommissioning is comprehensively addressed within the boundaries of the agreement .
For that reason we do not wish to pick individual items from the comprehensive text .
Therefore , we support what is in the agreement but will not be voting for amendments to the joint resolution .
Ladies and gentlemen , we cannot have yet another debate .
That is for the explanations of vote .
You are now having a debate which , I confess , puts me in a difficult position .
Other Members have asked to speak . I cannot let everybody speak , so I will just let two people speak and I will then close this debate .
Mr President , in relation to the amendments , quite naturally I would support the thrust of the amendments which is the active decommissioning of all weapons held by terrorists on both sides of the divide .
But I wish to state that it is very unwise to selectively highlight any one issue which is already covered quite comprehensively in the agreement .
Therefore , we cannot support any individual amendment at this stage .
In relation to amendments which use the term ' Republic of Ireland ' , I would like to recall for colleagues that the official name of my country is Ireland .
Mr President , I did not table these amendments this morning to create any trouble for this House .
But I have to say to Mrs Banotti , Mr Cox and Mr Collins that simply giving verbal support to them is not enough .
I say to this House today that you have a chance to say to all terrorists in Northern Ireland : Decommission your weapons !
Vote for my amendment .
That is why I tabled it .
Mr President , I hope you will refuse explanations of votes from these people .
They have done them in advance .
Mrs Green , you are absolutely right .
That is what I said , but you can see that Mr Hume now wishes to speak .
I am in a very difficult position , since this dance has started and I am not being fair in the eyes of the other groups .
I will let Mr Hume speak .
I cannot make distinctions between the political groups .
Mr President , just to get the facts right .
Mr Nicholson raised a very serious issue - the decommissioning of arms of violent organizations .
We all agree with that .
However , I want to point out that in voting for the agreement and for the joint resolution , this is what the agreement says we are voting for : ' All participants to the agreement accordingly reaffirm their commitment to the total disarmament of all paramilitary organizations ' .
That is what the House is voting for .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , in accordance with the Bureau 's instructions , I asked for the floor prior to the vote .
You should have called me prior to that vote .
My presence should be noted on this occasion for this vote .
Mr Falconer , I am very glad you keep reminding us of the Bureau 's instructions , in case anyone should have forgotten them !
Mr President , given that the implementation of the single currency is nothing but a political fraud , I will not take part in this vote .
Paragraph 11
Mr President , I should like to propose the following oral amendment , namely to replace the final words in the German text , i. e , " zu vertiefen ' by " weiterzuführen ' .
Paragraph 16
Mr President , paragraph 16 is important , but not central to this report .
In order to achieve as large a majority as possible in this House , I am prepared to delete this paragraph , and I would ask those colleagues who have difficulty with this either to vote against or to abstain
Mr von Wogau , since you are the rapporteur and paragraph 16 is your paragraph , you have the right to withdraw it .
We do not need to vote for you to withdraw it .
Paragraph 26
Mr President , we have accepted other oral amendments and so , with your consent and with the House 's consent , but particularly with the rapporteur 's agreement , I would like to propose an oral amendment because the amendment is incorrectly formulated in terms of the law .
It is - I repeat - a small technical amendment that I would like to read , if you agree : " The European Council is asked to observe its undertakings and to propose a single candidate for the Presidency of the European Central Bank during its forthcoming Summit , on 2 May 1998 ' .
I would like to hear the rapporteur 's opinion .
Mr President , we discussed the amendment in its original form in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and we came to the conclusion that we should not agree to it because it contained two factual inaccuracies and was formulated in such a way that we could not accept it .
As it now stands , the formulation reflects a very broad extent of opinion in this House .
I have asked the different groups in the committee .
They all were of the opinion that what we now have is an expression of the view of the House .
That is why I would recommend that we agree to Mr Dell 'Alba 's amendment in its revised form .
Paragraph 43
Mr President , in relation to paragraph 43 my comment is this .
We had reached agreement in committee as regards the content of the compromise amendment but , because the formulation was not quite right , we came to an agreement on the following ; paragraph 12 , on which we have already voted , says exactly what has to be expressed here , and that is why , as rapporteur , I would propose that we vote against paragraph 43 and that those who have difficulty with this - and I would urge this strongly - should at least abstain .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , because there were so few of us present earlier for the debate , I would ask the honorable Members to listen carefully to what I have to say now , for it is an important moment . I would like to state my position as rapporteur with regard to the different amendments .
In fact , the vote we are going to take today brings to an end a process which has been in progress for six years now .
We are going to vote on four amendments .
I would like to give an opinion initially on the first three .
Mr President , I will ask you to allow me to speak later on the last amendment which , paradoxically , is No 1 .
With regard to Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 , I would like to say that as rapporteur I am opposed to these amendments .
I therefore hope that the House does not vote for them , at the possible risk of causing upheaval within my own group , since Amendment No 2 is from my group , tabled by Mrs McNally .
The reason I am opposed to these amendments is clear . They do not address the fundamentals .
Yet the British presidency - which has put a great deal of effort into this compromise - the Commission - which can confirm this , if the Commissioner so wishes - and I myself , are all of the opinion that after six years of work it is not possible to reach a better compromise than the one we have at last reached , as regards the issues addressed by these amendments .
To send us to conciliation for these amendments would really create a major problem of blockage for a directive which urgently needs to be passed now .
All the players in the energy world are calling for it .
I am therefore asking you , please , whatever your position on the basic issues , show some political reason and reject these amendments .
Mr President , just to increase the confusion on the left a little more , Amendments Nos 2 and 4 , one from the Group of the Party of European Socialists , and one from the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , are identical .
The Socialists intend to vote for the first one , but against the second one .
I have a feeling this will lead to considerable confusion amongst the voters if we have a roll-call vote .
Amendment No 1
Mr President , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy voted for Mr Pompidou 's amendment in order to encourage the Commission to clarify its position on the issue , that is , to give Parliament the guarantee that there would very soon be a report from the Commission on the state of application of the directive .
In this amendment , we anticipated giving the Commission a three year period .
Earlier , Mr Papoutsis gave an opinion on this amendment saying that the Commission could accept it but that , in reality , the time-scales set by the Commission were even shorter than anticipated in the amendment .
Consequently , if my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party will allow me , I think we should not try to be more catholic than the Pope and I therefore request that this amendment from the Committee on Energy be rejected .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the vote on the Desama report I would like to thank Parliament , and especially your rapporteur , Mr Desama .
With today 's vote a big step has been taken towards the completion of the internal market .
From a political viewpoint , today is very important because , after six years of negotiations , with the directive on the internal market for natural gas as well as the directive on the internal market for electricity , in less than two years , during this present legislature , we have given a new dimension to the European internal market , a market which represents ECU 250 billion a year or , in a few days , 250 billion euros . It is a market which has important beneficial repercussions for industry , employment , and the citizens of Europe .
For this reason , I would like once again to thank the European Parliament for its particularly important and especially creative contribution to this great effort .
Mr President , this vote marks the end of a debate which was under discussion for three legislatures .
On behalf of my group , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Desama , for his extraordinary commitment and for the successes which the Parliament as a whole has achieved .
Even if not provided for in the Rules of Procedure , Mr Mombaur , it is impossible to ignore such courteous remarks .
( The President declared the common position approved ) Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0143 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , on the common position established by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision concerning a multiannual programme for the promotion of renewable energy sources in the Community ( ALTENER II ) ( C4-0032 / 98-97 / 0106 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz )
( The President declared the common position approved ( as amended ) )
Mr President , I would like it to be recorded that I am present from now on and I will not take part in the vote .
Mr De Luca , we have taken note of it .
Amendment No 29
Mr President , even before this vote I indicated my wish to speak for a quite simple reason .
Clearly , a translation has been made that is liable to be misunderstood in several languages , and this ambiguous translation for Amendment No 29 may also lead to a quite different outcome in the vote .
We are dealing here with a measure against youth unemployment .
Many young people are qualified for the wrong occupations , for occupations for which there is no demand .
That is why we have here the proposal that the Commission should ascertain which occupations really are in demand , with a qualitative analysis of occupational needs .
This analysis should then be made available to the Member States , and the Member States will decide whether or not they make use of this information and change their training plans .
In other words , we are dealing with the provision of a service , and Member States will decide on a voluntary basis whether or not to make changes .
This appears in several translations as a binding proposal , and as a result it may lead to a distortion of the voting outcome .
I would ask you therefore to allow the voting on Amendment No 29 to be repeated .
Mr Pirker , we will check the translation from German into the other languages .
You need not worry . Your amendment has been adopted .
I did not give you the floor straight away but we try to get the vote moving , since if we did not we would go very slowly , and I cannot slow the pace down by allowing Members to speak all the time .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
This matter is now closed . I cannot of course congratulate the rapporteur !
Mr President , I have requested the floor because the President cannot congratulate the rapporteur in this case , so I want to do so on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
The Spanish are always courteous , and in the case of Mr Medina Ortega this is Socialist courtesy too , for which I am obliged .
Mr President , we would avoid problems like that raised by Mr Medina Ortega if the rapporteur would not preside when we are dealing with his report .
Mrs Thors , as you are aware , this is a common practice , and when reports do not present problems it does not matter in the least .
Report ( A4-0134 / 98 ) by Mr Ettl , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Directive on safeguarding the supplementary pension rights of employed and selfemployed persons moving within the European Union ( COM ( 97 ) 0486 - C4-0661 / 97-97 / 0265 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I am sorry , but from here I was just not able to see as well as you could that in the case of Amendments Nos 3 , 4 and 5 by the Green Group in the European Parliament there really was a clear majority of votes against .
To be quite honest , I cannot understand it either , because in Question Time on the issue yesterday the Council and the Commission were in agreement with it .
It has been confirmed .
There are already working groups in the ecological area of the textile industry .
Mrs Soltwedel-Schäfer , as you are aware Parliament , in its wisdom , has the right to vote for whatever position it thinks it should take , without taking into consideration either the position of the Council , or the position of the Commission , or the positions of many of us .
That is what always happens . The important thing is what Parliament decides and what it values , and I do not think comments are necessary .
Parliament has decided .
It has rejected the two amendments and adopted the rest .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
The Green Group in the European Parliament is in agreement with the Commission and the majority in Parliament that the further development of the market for electronic services - pay-TV , pay-perview , pay-radio , online access to databases - on the one hand , and the current fragmentation of this market by national legislation , make regulation at Community level indispensable .
The present directive fulfils this purpose insofar as it provides a sufficiently comprehensive and flexible framework at Community level through its combination of definitions of protected services , the application of internal market rules and the exclusion of all unauthorized access technologies .
We share the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media that the importance of copyright protection against exploiting interests , the guarantee of access to public information independent of market interests and the ability to protect the private domain by means of encryption technologies should receive proper emphasis in this directive as well , in spite of regulations in force elsewhere .
We also agree with those who reject any restriction of the definitions in Articles 1c and e .
Resolution on Northern Ireland
I allowed you to go over your time because I must say I was feeling a little uneasy as during the morning I gave some of your colleagues the chance to speak .
I was in a very difficult position then as the House was , quite rightly , demanding that there should be no debate .
On the other hand , I had already given the floor to one or two people and I was feeling very uneasy in the face of your request .
So I gave you extra time to recompense you .
Mr President , I would like to make clear today why I vote against this resolution .
I hope Mrs Malone can remain in the House to hear why because it might do her a bit of good .
It was because the Socialist Group were not prepared to include decommissioning .
Mrs Malone , let me tell you I am not cherrypicking .
Can I further tell you that this agreement would never have come to place but for the courage and determination of my party leader in all of this .
Can I say to you and the Socialist Group that I speak in this House for the largest Unionist Group in Northern Ireland .
If the Socialist Group wish to discount what we feel , wish to discount what we say and wish to discount what we really believe in our inner hearts , then you can do so .
But you do so at a price and at a very serious price .
Your comrade , the Secretary-of- State , showed us here yesterday that she could not even be balanced when she came to this House in her contributions .
Mrs Malone , let me make it clear in this House today , I want all terrorist groups to lay down their arms .
I want them to give them up .
I know they will not give them all up but they at least should give an indication of how much they will give up .
I would like to say , unfortunately , this House sent the wrong message to the Unionist people that I represent in Northern Ireland .
I will have to take back to my party leader a message that is not a good one .
Fine words are not enough , we need action ; if you want consent , if you want consensus you have got to work for it .
I did not see any attempt to create consensus in the Socialist Group here in this Chamber .
I do not have anything against any other group in those negotiations , it was only the Socialist Group .
I wish to express my full support for the agreement reached by the Irish and British Governments and the political parties in Northern Ireland on Good Friday .
The commitment shown by the two governments and in particular the Taoiseach Bertie Ahern and the Prime Minister is a reflection of the deep desire of the majority of people on the island of Ireland and Britain for a just and lasting peace for all the people .
Time does not permit me to go through the list of all the participants to the process .
However , it would be remiss of me not to recall the tremendous courage and vision of the former Irish Taoiseach Albert Reynolds and Prime Minister John Major .
The success of the present negotiations can be traced back to the signing of the Downing Street Declaration of 1993 which set the parameters of joint cooperation , mutual respect , equality and reform of inequities that were inherent in the systems .
The much pilloried Hume-Adams Document was significant in bringing the nationalist parties to the table .
However , the inclusion of the representatives of loyalist paramilitary groups helps to ensure that all traditions are encompassed .
The ongoing support , both financial and moral , of the institutions of the European Union has been a vital ingredient of the process .
Europe never lost faith in the Irish people to reach an accommodation that reflects the differing traditions whilst building on common goals and ideals .
On 22 May the island of Ireland will vote in dual referenda on the agreement and the proposed changes to the Irish Constitution , British constitutional legislation and the establishment of new North-South Bodies .
My wish is for a resounding majority support for the agreement : " opportunity comes to pass but not to pause ' .
I would like to finish with two quotes , first from Abraham Lincoln : ' with malice towards none ; with charity for all ; with firmness in the right , as God gives us to see the right , let us strive to finish the work we are in . '
Finally the often quoted lines from the poet William Butler Yeats , in the Lake Isle of Innisfree : ' and I shall find some peace there for peace comes dropping slow ; dropping from the veil of the morning to where the cricket sings . '
I would like to begin my comments by saying that I welcome the Irish Peace agreement reached at the multi-party talks in Belfast on Good Friday last .
I would like to pay particular tribute to the political parties who had the courage and the conviction to participate in these negotiations and to have ensured that a balanced and equitable agreement was secured .
This agreement is a balanced and reasonable accommodation which recognizes the different values and cultures on the island of Ireland .
Opponents of the agreement cannot come up with any progress that is being made to foster peace and reconciliation on the island of Ireland .
This agreement needs to be given an opportunity to succeed and a resounding YES vote on both sides of the Irish border would be a sensible step in the right direction in this regard .
I welcome the role and support played by the European Union in assisting the process of peace and reconciliation and I hope that this will continue in the near future .
von Wogau report ( A4-0130 / 98 )
Mr President , in the vote on the von Wogau report on convergence conditions for the introduction of the single currency , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations wanted to carry out a test in order to clearly demonstrate the wide abyss between the ideas of the European Parliament and the national parliaments with regard to how monetary union should be controlled .
We tabled two amendments , which repeated word for word the demands of the French National Assembly in its resolution of 22 April last .
One was a request that the President of the future Central Bank would periodically give an account of the bank 's objectives and actions before the appropriate bodies of the National Assembly . The other was the wish that an interparliamentary committee on the euro be created , composed of representatives of both European and national parliaments , which would have responsibility for regularly and publicly hearing from those in charge of the ECB with regard to future monetary policy guidelines .
The test seems to be completely conclusive .
The European Parliament has massively rejected these two proposals , and has even adopted a contrary proposal by voting for the following text and I quote : " Being the EU 's only directly elected institution , the European Parliament has a formal role interacting with the European Central Bank ' .The European Parliament text continues by defining an extremely lightweight control over the Central Bank , which does not question its sovereignty .
Those are the words of this House .
So in this declaration , the possible role of national parliaments is completely eliminated .
We were well aware , and I want to highlight this most strongly , that if our amendments had been adopted they would not have fundamentally altered the antidemocratic nature of monetary union , but their rejection makes the lesson that much stronger , a lesson which the French National Assembly should remember : the European Parliament will never allow the slightest real power to be given to the national parliaments of the Union , because what it really wants is their complete subordination , along with that of the nations they represent .
But at the same time , its control will never have the legitimacy of national parliaments , for it is too distanced from the people .
Thus , European monetary union is constructed in such a way that the most legitimate parliamentary control is also the most impossible .
We predict a very bad time for democracy if the system is really launched in its current form .
Mr Berthu , I am not in the habit of making comments , of course , but I must say you have taken a really very prophetic tone .
Mr President , I have voted against this report because it follows the line of eurofanaticism , a line obsessively aimed at the sole objective of the single currency , without trying to outline a common economic policy at the same time .
For the future Central Bank , the report also accepts a leading role , a status of inaccessibility , with no kind of democratic control .
By submitting to all this , the majority is unfortunately reserving a subordinate role for the European Parliament .
Yesterday marked the beginning of a historic week .
The many years of work towards economic and monetary union have finally come to fruition , for we have now chosen the first wave of countries who will participate .
During the past months and years , we have been able to examine the strengths and weaknesses of virtually all areas .
There is , however , one issue which I would now like to come back to , and which was the subject of much discussion two weeks ago .
The forthcoming transition to the euro is , in fact , of great concern to the many economic and political players in the African , Caribbean and Pacific regions .
At the time of the ACP-EU Joint Assembly , the issue was discussed at length .
One of the main concerns is the redistribution of influence in these regions , to the detriment of Europe and to the benefit of a fluctuating dollar .
They also fear the social , ethnic and political tensions which may result , particularly in central Africa , in the short or long term .
The introduction of the single currency must not make us forget our overseas economic partners .
A better integration of Africa and the Caribbean / Pacific regions into the world economy must remain one of our highest priorities .
Monetary cooperation must be maintained in its present form , and will have the result of truly anchoring the euro .
This principle , set out in the Treaties of Maastricht and Amsterdam , does not seem to be questionable .
Nevertheless , we must remain vigilant , given the legal ambiguities of the Treaties .
Here too , Parliament has an important political role to play in global stability and the development of third countries .
I approve of the von Wogau report in all its aspects .
However , it must not make us forget that the future euro zone can help to strengthen our partners ' economies and offer us wider access to the market in general .
For many people , including ourselves , this report represents the latest political position to be taken by the European Parliament on the basis of the single currency before it is formally adopted .
Obviously other positions may be adopted later , but nothing will ever be the same as it has been till now .
This is why we treat this report as being much more important than its contents strictly indicate .
We still have reservations about ' Euro Now ' , especially as regards the fact that the Union has opted to claim that there is nominal convergence between Member States before the event , when we would have preferred to see real convergence coming first .
It has been said , and is still being said now , that real convergence will follow the event , as if in its wake . Similarly , it has been said and is still being said , that the single currency will be a panacea for the various problems facing the EU , of which the foremost is the problem of unemployment .
Being realistic , we do not agree .
On examination , this is not a bad report in itself .
Some of its statements are true , although it does add some value judgments which in our opinion it could have done without .
It justifies the political criterion for allowing two more countries to join the euro ' vanguard ' , which introduces the concept of flexibility as regards the fulfilment of the criteria laid down in a Treaty , which we can only applaud . Furthermore , it affirms the transfer of sovereignty of Member States to the Community sphere , in terms of monetary policy at this stage , which we consider represents a degree of intellectual and political honesty which many people have been unable or unwilling to express for a long time .
A vote in favour of this report , therefore , would be tantamount to saying that we have always agreed with the road we have been travelling along from the beginning , in terms of adopting the single currency , which is not true . If , on the other hand , we were to vote against this report , we would be casting doubt on the rules of democracy , and failing to recognize the efforts of so many people , particularly the Member States concerned .
In a word , it would be to refuse to give the benefit of the doubt . We have therefore abstained , without intending at any time in the future to make party political capital out of the difficulties we foresee arising as a result of the euro .
The subject is of course much more serious than that ...
That is why our abstention amounts to an additional vote in itself . Let us hope we are mistaken !
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Karl von Wogau 's report on the introduction of the single currency .
The report concludes that eleven Member States - Belgium , Germany , Spain , France , Ireland , Italy , Luxembourg , The Netherlands , Austria , Portugal and Finland - fulfil the requirements for participation in the third stage of EMU , and that these nations should be included from the beginning on 1 January 1999 .
The report by the Commission , ' EURO 1999 ' , accepts that the eleven Member States mentioned above fulfil the necessary conditions for participation in the third stage of EMU .
The Danish Social Democrats are of the opinion that these eleven nations may participate in the third stage of EMU and we do not wish to prevent these nations from entering into closer mutual collaboration .
This stance is consistent with the position of the government .
We also welcome the following key stances :
The need for democratic accountability of the European Central Bank .
It is important to secure openness in EU institutions.-Lifetime learning based on strengthening the education system is important in countering unemployment.-The report 's appeal to the Council to implement the obligations of an active employment policy that were entered into at the extraordinary summit in Luxembourg.The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament do not support sections of the report on the coordination of fiscal systems and rates .
We emphasize that Denmark 's four reservations , including the reservation concerning the third stage of EMU , are not affected .
EMU is a centralizing , high-risk project which lacks popular backing .
EMU prioritizes price stability and low inflation .
The EU is not an optimum currency area , and the economies of the various Member States are much too divergent to introduce a single currency .
There is a high risk that EMU , with its one-sided emphasis on controlling inflation , will lead to increased unemployment .
The gaps between growth regions and areas of rural depopulation may widen , resulting in increased regional imbalances .
EMU will bring about a high degree of centralization and a loss of democracy in economic , monetary and exchange rate policy which , by extension , may come to include fiscal and financial policy as well .
This also emerges from the report , which speaks of a " stepped-up coordination of tax systems and rates ' .
EMU is concerned with economic affairs , but it has considerable significance as a political project geared to greater supranationality and centralization .
EMU increases federal pressures in the EU towards the formation of a state - the EU State .
EMU and the new currency , the euro , is to be controlled by the European Central Bank , the ECB .
The ECB will have greater independence and power than any other bank in the world .
The members of the ECB executive board , who are appointed for eight years and cannot be removed from office , will have unprecedented influence on exchange rate and interest rate policy and other economic policies directly affecting people , regions and nations .
Democratic control is weak .
The Commission has put forward a recommendation to introduce the single currency in eleven Member States on 1 January 1999 .
It is what these countries have chosen .
The Swedish Riksdag has decided not to participate in the stage of EMU commencing on 1 January 1999 .
This is a wise decision .
EMU suffers from the same economic and democratic deficiencies , irrespective of how many countries are members of the currency union .
In view of the above , we have voted against the report .
I am in favour of a single currency .
I voted " Yes ' to Maastricht .
Yet I am saying " No ' to the transition to the euro , as it currently stands , and to Mr von Wogau 's report because the minimum democratic and social guarantees are not fulfilled , and because the overall balance presented at Maastricht is not being adhered to .
In its current state , the transition to the euro does not represent a transfer of sovereignty from nation states to democratic European institutions , but a pure and simple abandonment of the sovereignty of the people .
Monetary power is completely transferred to the ECB , which will be the most independent bank in the world .
The ECB draws its powers from a treaty .
The American Federal Reserve or the Bundesbank draw their powers from laws , enabling parliaments and governments to amend them at will , which guarantees the latter the power to be heard in case of a serious problem .
That is not the case with the ECB . It thus has a free hand .
The absence of a European economic authority makes the situation worse for , in view of this , the ECB will have no legitimate power of EU representation and will therefore not have to " implement government policy ' , as is currently the case for the Bundesbank .
Furthermore , Mr von Wogau 's report does not even mention the EuroCouncil , which it would be hoped might slowly evolve into this essential economic authority .
Thus , we are delivering our monetary destiny into the hands of an institution with no control and no democratic forces of opposition .
That is unacceptable enough . But the situation is made worse by the Stability Pact which sets in stone all of the decisive criteria for macroeconomic policy , placing our economies under an enduring yoke .
You could discuss endlessly the legitimacy - I would say , illegitimacy - of the levels agreed upon , and the risks they will cause to our social security systems as well as to salaries and the future of public services .
This is part of the normal debate which exists in a democracy .
But the most serious thing is that these parameters - macroeconomic choices so essential for jobs and our daily life - will no longer be controlled by governments or a European government , according to circumstance , decided on by the people through an electoral procedure .
They will be inviolable , decided once and for all , and will even be imposed in a draconian manner since rigorous sanctions are anticipated for countries which contravene them .
From now on , monetary and macroeconomic choices will no longer be subject to political arbitration .
We will pay a heavy price for rejecting the supremacy of democracy , achieved with such difficulty by those who , in the past , had to oppose the forces of money and power in favour of the common good and the sovereign choice of the people .
Moreover , at the time of the vote on the Maastricht Treaty , achievement of EMU was set in a much wider context .
At the same time as setting up a single currency , European political union was to move forward to a new stage , and the IGC was to work on decisive institutional improvements . Yet Amsterdam gave birth to a mouse .
EMU advances at an enforced rate , political Europe makes no headway and there remains only a trace of a social Europe .
The anticipated balance between economic-monetary issues and social issues has not been achieved .
Even at that time , the nagging question of unemployment and growth haunted us .
Jacques Delors presented a White Paper on growth and employment , in which he envisaged , in particular , a reflation of the economy through a large programme of works . This has never seen the light of day .
He recommended changes in taxation and social security payments to put balance back into the relationship between labour and capital , the latter always being more valued , recompensed and favoured , to the detriment of workers and producers .
Neither domestic boom nor a fairer tax system have enabled a significant reduction in unemployment to be achieved .
There is the fear that the economic policies of the Stability Pact as a whole , and the impossibility of being involved on a monetary level , may leave only one parameter with which to influence competitiveness : the cost of labour , which will be dragged down , as is already too often the case .
Similar tendencies towards dumping emerge with regard to taxation , allowing the continued existence of enormous risks for the financing of social security or public actions .
Here , the idea of harmonization emerges more or less on the horizon .
In the area of social issues , that is , defence of the workers or the weakest sectors of society , no significant concrete convergence is envisaged .
Social Europe is on hold , as it was at Vilvorde and sometimes , unfortunately , the orthodoxy of competition at all costs causes unemployment and social decline .
That cannot go on any longer .
Thus , with regard to political and social issues , the Maastricht promises have not been kept .
The euro must happen but , for it to succeed , the Stability Pact must be rejected and a new Treaty urgently drawn up to create a European economic authority that strengthens the democratic institutions and the cohesion of the EU , establishing criteria for social convergence , and harmonizing upwardly .
At the moment EMU is weakening the political and social Europe ; a balance needs to be reestablished so that the three pillars of European construction may be achieved in unison .
Because of the poor translation , Mrs Raschhofer , Mr Hager , Mr Linser and Mr Lukas confused Amendment No 11 and Article 11 .
We wanted to approve Amendment No 11 .
We voted against it in error .
Moreover , Mrs Raschhofer and Mr Lukas wanted to approve Article 12 .
With the birth of economic and monetary union , we are living through a sadly historic moment and one of unusual importance .
EMU sounds the death knell for the sovereignty , freedom and independence of our nations .
We are not owners of this sovereignty , we are only its trustees .
We received it from our fathers and it is our duty to pass it on to our children intact .
Apart from the disappearance of the CFA franc , EMU also tolls the bell for France 's cooperation policy with Africa , and it is to be strongly feared that this loss will not be made up for by a federal Europe .
It tolls the bell for many decades of relations , sometimes inept , but of great wealth and human warmth .
As Dominique Souchet noted , given that the death of the franc is a fatal blow to the CFA franc , it is thus also a fatal blow to the whole of French-speaking Africa .
By accepting EMU , the government and President of France must assume , in the eyes of history , the overwhelming responsibility for abandoning French-speaking Africa .
The Europe of the single currency is a Europe of mercenary selfishness , which ignores and scorns Africa , when it is France 's and Europe 's duty to help the black continent to develop and thereby enable it to offer a means of survival to all its children .
This Europe of money , which despises men and nations , is not ours .
The von Wogau report recommends that Parliament should approve the Commission 's proposal that the third stage should begin on 1 January 1999 with eleven Member States .
Economic developments in Europe in recent years have shown that it is possible for the nations of Europe to stabilize their economies .
Interest rates are low , inflation low and stable , and in many European nations , the level of unemployment is on its way down .
This stabilization will ultimately prove crucial to prosperity and thus to peace in Europe .
With a common currency and one European Central Bank , the foundation for further economic progress will be assured .
The cost of business transactions will fall and pricing levels will be more transparent .
All in all , a major advantage for companies and consumers alike in Europe .
I applaud the section of the report addressing the need for further reductions in large national debt quotas and I give the report my unequivocal support .
Mr von Wogau 's own-initiative report clearly has no ambition but to echo blandly and faithfully the Commission 's position and to remind us that we should peacefully , and if possible happily , play the role of recording studio for a song which goes : " Let 's all rejoice to see the same currency circulating soon from the Irish to the Aegean Sea .. ' .
We are assured that the euro will be stable , strong and a creator of jobs and that it will strengthen price stability even more .
We are basking in a forced euphoria .
All the real problems that the transition to the euro pose have been carefully passed over .
The only matters of importance are for " monetary policy sovereignty ( sic ) to be transferred to the European Central Bank on 1 January 1999 ' and " the immediate implementation of the terms of the Pact for Stability and Growth ' .
Amongst the forgotten problems , in particular , is a privileged relationship in terms of development : that which unites France with the countries of the franc zone .
The franc zone is an important factor in development , in particular because it favours direct European investment within a zone of monetary stability and it facilitates the access of African countries to the European capital markets .
What will the impact of the euro be on the future of the franc zone ?
It is a serious question which must be discussed on the basis of serious and precise economic and financial studies - an obligatory precondition - and not by begging the question in an ideological manner .
Where are these studies ?
Having noted their absence , I requested that this point be added to the Rocard report , and Parliament agreed with me .
It is , indeed , not right that up until now only the IMF has drawn attention to a certain number of risks that the move towards the euro causes for the competitiveness of the African countries concerned .
The official doctrine is that the franc zone , which was the result of a budgetary agreement and not a monetary one , will not be affected by the transition to the euro .
Is that so certain ?
How can the franc zone remain a franc zone when the French franc , the national currency of reference , will have meanwhile disappeared ?
How will parity between the CFA franc and the euro be handled ?
The franc zone is regulated within the framework of the French budget and , we are told , will not be a euro zone .
But how can you preserve a bilateral framework when France itself will have moved into a multilateral context ?

Some of France 's partners , such as Germany , suggest that responsibility for these monetary agreements be transferred to European level .
After having objected to this analysis , it seems that the French Government , at least if I am to believe Mr Strauss-Kahn 's statements on 25 March to the French National Assembly 's Committee on Foreign Affairs , recognizes the need to accept shared management , with France continuing to manage the agreements on a day to day basis , but the opinion of its European partners becoming essential in the event of a modification of the parity of the CFA franc or the admittance of new members into the zone .
What guarantee of stability will this co-management of the franc zone offer the African countries ?
Does it not risk causing serious disagreements within the EuroCouncil when the time comes ? It would result in great uncertainty about the exchange rates of the franc zone countries , about the way they are set , even about the very existence of the zone , if it occurred to one of the eleven members of monetary union to consider the zone a factor of instability impacting on the management of the single currency , even if the money supply concerned is relatively unimportant .
This is an element of uncertainty and trouble which risks weighing heavily on the economic and social future of partner countries which had , until now , placed all their hopes in a close mutual development with France and Europe .
I cannot support the von Wogau report .
It welcomes the introduction of single European currency .
I do not believe that the currencies of eleven diverse economies can be unified without either recession and unemployment in the less competitive countries or a great increase in the political and economic powers of the European Union .
This trend to political union is , of course , the reason that many people support the single currency , but I do not believe that a huge growth in the powers and budget of the European Union has public consent .
Nor do I believe that power can ever be adequately controlled in a democratic way over an area as large and diverse as that envisaged .
The European Monetary Institute 's report implies that the eleven chosen economies are truly convergent .
There has , indeed , been an impressive degree of convergence but the decision to start EMU with eleven members is clearly political , not technical or objective .
No one can doubt that if Sweden had wanted to join , they would have been admitted .
If Italy had announced that they did not wish to join , it is unlikely that they would have been told that the terms of the Maastricht Treaty legally necessitated their membership .
The single currency project has been driven by politics and is designed to end in political union .
I do not regard that end as desirable .
Nor can I justify the pain that the journey will cause .
I voted in favour of the report on the introduction of the single currency , and I am delighted with the progress that has been made in Member States of the EU in terms of convergence in readiness for the third stage of EMU . That progress has led to low inflation , low long-term interest rates , a reduction in monetary fluctuations and the clear consolidation of public budgets .
I am especially delighted that , owing to the adoption of the right combination of economic policies by the Portuguese Government , my own country has met all the necessary convergence criteria to enter the third stage of EMU on 1 January 1999 .
This has been achieved without any increase in the tax burden , and with a marked increase in both public and private investment . This has been principally due to support from Community funds and a significant increase in the level of social expenditure in the state budget .
I congratulate the Group of the Party of European Socialists on having succeeded in obtaining the removal from the report of the call for the immediate implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact , since this could have been interpreted by European citizens as a sign of a negative attitude to the euro .
EMU is a centralizing , high-risk project which lacks popular backing .
EMU prioritizes price stability and low inflation .
The EU is not an optimum currency area , and the economies of the various Member States are much too divergent to introduce a single currency .
There is a high risk that EMU , with its one-sided emphasis on controlling inflation , will lead to increased unemployment .
The gaps between growth regions and areas of rural depopulation may widen , resulting in increased regional imbalances .
EMU will bring about a high degree of centralization and a loss of democracy in economic , monetary and exchange rate policy which , by extension , may come to include fiscal and financial policy as well .
This also emerges from the report , which speaks of a " stepped-up coordination of tax systems and rates ' .
EMU is concerned with economic affairs , but it has considerable significance as a political project geared to greater supranationality and centralization .
EMU increases federal pressures in the EU towards the formation of a state - the EU State .
EMU and the new currency , the Euro , is to be controlled by the European Central Bank , the ECB .
The ECB will have greater independence and power than any other bank in the world .
The members of the ECB Executive Board , who are appointed for eight years and cannot be removed from office , will have unprecedented influence on exchange rate and interest rate policy and other economic policies directly affecting people , regions and nations .
Democratic control is weak .
Desama recommendation ( A4-0140 / 98 )
Today we must give an opinion on the Council 's common position concerning common rules for the internal market in natural gas .
Through our vote , we will endorse all the measures designed to establish the internal market for energy .
Drawing inspiration from the electricity directive , the gas market will have to respect the same broad principles of access to the network , subsidiarity , reciprocity and so on .
Whilst congratulating the rapporteur , Claude Desama , I would like to insist on an important idea : the progressive and controlled opening up of the market .
We cannot accept that a market so sensitive to competition be opened up virtually overnight , and this done in the name of consumer interest .
We do not reject the opening up in itself .
We merely want a period of adaptation for the operators .
We want to avoid an " anarchic ' situation , which would challenge the principles of public service distribution .
As far as we are concerned , it is not a question of defending monopolies , but of defending the interests of the citizen in his or her right of access to public service and , in particular , to the broad laws which regulate it .
Finally , I am also thinking of the staff of these companies , to whom I pay tribute , and I hope to be able to reassure them in the face of their fears regarding the opening up of the market .
The Council 's common position represents a good compromise ; we need to keep to it and not give in to " liberalism at any price ' .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of Claude Desama 's report .
We have done so in consideration of the desirability of a common position in the natural gas market .
The agreement now in place is a compromise between Member States and we consider it to be the best possible agreement that could have been reached , in view of the material disagreements that exist .
Furthermore , the European Parliament has had a major influence on the present proposal by the Commission .
The Commission 's proposal is flawed in that it fails to propose a time-scale for revising the application of the directive .
Thus , we welcome the tabling of an amendment to have the Commission undertake a revision three years after the directive has been adopted .
There should be great restraint in the development of natural gas if the environmentally friendly , sustainable and renewable sources of energy , such as bio energy , bio gas , wind power and solar power are to be able to grow strong .
Bloch von Blottnitz recommendation ( A4-0143 / 98 )
The ALTENER II programme is complementary to the framework programme for research and development established by the Commission which , by means of JOULE and THERMIE , provides funding for research and development programmes ( JOULE ) , demonstration programmes ( THERMIE ) and programmes of technological diffusion ( accompanying programmes ) .
The ALTENER II programme is thus situated downstream from actions undertaken within the context of the framework programme , and aims to facilitate their market penetration by increasing user confidence with regard to renewable energy technologies .
So this programme does not deal uniformly with all renewable energies , but gives priority to technologies which are sufficiently mature for their use to be developed for the market .
Last February , at the time of the vote on the Hautala report on fuel quality , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations voted for the introduction of environmental standards in the use of bio-fuels .
The ALTENER II programme must therefore include bio-fuel within its list of renewable energy sources and we are happy with the Commission 's initiative .
Nevertheless , in terms of consistency , we have a lot of questions .
Indeed , within the Agenda 2000 framework , no specific measure to allow bio-fuel development is envisaged .
On the contrary , within its reforms of the " large-scale farming ' COM , the Commission proposes a 0 % compulsory rate of fallow land , along with an alignment of the aid to oil-producing crops with that of aid to straw cereal crops , on the pretext of both the Blair House agreements limiting huge amounts of fallow land and a future possible gain in profitability in oil production using , of course , genetically modified seed .
We therefore request that , on this point , the Commission should plan specific measures to allow the use of agricultural products for non-food use , in particular with regard to renewable energy .
With regard to the Commission 's consistency , we raise questions when we find out that it is criticizing a Member State - in this instance , France - which , in order to encourage the use of bio-fuels , and thus fuels which represent an improvement in environmental terms , is implementing the incentive of a partial tax exemption .
In conclusion , on this issue as on many others , we are asking the Commission to be consistent .
Some of the actions pursued by its different Directorates-General are contradictory and cancel each other out .
In this particular case , the Commission plans to develop a programme facilitating the use of renewable energy sources , whilst preventing the Member States from taking tax measures to encourage the use of renewable energy sources and whilst eliminating all the efforts European farmers have made to create and invest in the area of using agricultural products for fuel purposes .
Castagnetti report ( A4-0135 / 98 )
We can only be pleased with the Commission 's proposal concerning systems and measures for work-linked training in Member States .
This is another approach to the fight against unemployment which hits young people in particular .
I fully support this initiative of European pathways for training , enabling young people to alternate their work-linked training between Member States .
This experience , which has been proven at the level of university education through the ERASMUS programme , must be based on close collaboration between the training establishment or body and the host partner .
The rapporteur rightly refers - within the framework of the LEONARDO programme - to the creation of an " Erasmus for apprenticeships ' .
Let us therefore give means to its existence , let us launch pilot projects without delay .
Millions of young people could benefit from apprenticeships .
We must open the European horizon to them , allowing a fruitful exchange of experiences .
Finally , let us not forget to target those who are the most interested , and I mean the SMEs .
Indeed , as creators of jobs they must be integrated into , and committed to , these European pathways for training .
I am pleased with this report , which responds to the Commission 's initiative , with the objective of encouraging transnational mobility in the area of education and training .
Furthermore , at a time when the European Council of Luxembourg has committed itself to supporting youth employment and improved training for young people , we can only welcome this proposal .
However , as a member of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I would like to repeat the comments of Mr Kerr , our rapporteur .
We must be given the means to implement our policy , unless we want to raise hopes that will not be met .
We must plan strong accompanying measures - financial , legal and social - so that the vital mobility of apprentices becomes a reality .
That is why I support this report , whilst underlining that mobility goes hand in hand with : defining a statute for apprentices , covering their rights and obligations ; coordination between the Commission , the Member States and the social partners with regard to awareness raising amongst the general public ; the availability of the necessary means - financial , legal and practical - for the people in training ; and follow-up to this training .
Monfils report ( A4-0083 / 98 )
No tenable reason has been given for abandoning the successful intergovernmental project for the ' European City of Culture ' event .
Nor is there anything to support the idea that placing it within the framework of the Community 's work on integrated cultural programmes , common financing and so on would be a better arrangement .
However , widening the selection to include cities throughout Europe is positive .
" The European City of Culture is an event which was launched , on the initiative of Melina Mercouri , by the Council of Ministers on 13 June 1985 with the aim of bringing the peoples of Europe closer together . '
Thus begins the Monfils report , as also set out in the preamble to the European Commission document .
As proposed by Melina Mercouri , in 1985 the first " European City of Culture ' was Athens , and then , in 1997 , the first in the " second round ' of the institution was Thessaloniki .
I believe that the initiative and vision of Melina Mercouri have been justified through the general success and favourable impression of the institution , which is regarded as a symbol of the viability of culture in the European Union .
The Monfils report , which we are debating today , as well as the initial proposal of the European Commission , aims to further strengthen and support the institution of the " European City of Culture ' .
In this sense , I will gladly vote for the Monfils report , in the certainty of knowing that it will shape an even stronger and more effective European cultural idea and policy .
Anastassopoulos report ( A4-0136 / 98 )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament are voting in favour of the Anastassopoulos report .
However , in our opinion , many of Parliament 's amendments are unclear , both in their wording and in relation to their anticipated results .
We have grave reservations about amendments that could imply intent to criminalize the transfer of information facilitating unauthorized access to information services - even when no commercial purpose is being served .
We cannot give our support to this rationale .
We even doubt the necessity for very restrictive regulation at Community level in this area .
Many of the problems addressed are already being solved satisfactorily within Member States .
Ettl report ( A4-0134 / 98 )
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of a proposed directive to facilitate the movement of employees and the self-employed within the EU .
Moving abroad would be simpler and easier to grasp if it were possible to maintain supplementary pension schemes set up in the home country .
This proposed directive would enable people to keep their entire pension entitlement in one place - in their home country - and supplementary pensions could also be paid out to persons living abroad .
In common with the Danish Federation of Trade Unions , we have reservations about foreign workers looking like rats in host Member States .
Supplementary pensions are part of your salary , and if workers stationed abroad do not have the same working and employment conditions as workers in their home country , they may indeed look like rats .
However , the problem is that the principle of making payments into an existing pension scheme forms the very basis of the directive .
Thus , we are voting in favour of the proposed directive .
And we hope that a solution will be found to the problem in Council .
This could perhaps be achieved by the social partners recognizing contributions paid in the country of origin and contributions paid in host Member States as equally valid .
The proposal for a directive currently under review is one of the measures announced in the Commission Green Paper relating to supplementary pensions in the EU .
The proposal is part of the more general move to strengthen private employers ' supplementary pension schemes , in an attempt to make the cuts in provision and the tightening of the conditions for pension rights through state social security systems acceptable to working people . It is aimed at tackling the extremely serious problem faced by transient workers - who see their supplementary pension rights being fundamentally eroded or lost - and at adapting the Community institutional framework to actual reality .
This proposal for a directive focuses on the issue of equal treatment for transient workers and of safeguarding the rights they have acquired when moving to another country .
However , it does not tackle the problem of the long periods of residence required to build up pension rights , or the problem of double taxation if vested pension rights are transferred to another country .
In this view , it is necessary to take supplementary legislative initiatives and , in this regard , we support the relevant amendments .
We believe that the vested pension rights of an employed person in a supplementary pension scheme must be maintained , if that person moves to another Member State , at the same level at which they would be if that person stayed in the country of origin , having safeguarded his or her pension right .
We believe it is important to ensure receipt of benefits in the country of residence and to provide for special arrangements for those workers posted abroad .
The report correctly pinpoints certain inadequacies of the proposed directive and we agree with some of the amendments .
We believe the rights of workers must be fully safeguarded even when they move to another country , and we support any measure to be taken in this regard .
I am supporting this report today as the pension rights of too many of our citizens are not adequately protected when they take up the EU ideal and move to another Member State .
So it is up to those of us with a say at EU level to put this right .
It is time that the pension rights of people who pay in to supplementary pension schemes were properly protected when they move country .
This protection should include both employees and self-employed people .
The thorny question of how to tax these contributions and benefits whilst avoiding double taxation is one that will have to be examined at European level to ensure fair play for both the public purse and the hard-working citizen .
Such international workers with supplementary pensions are in fact doing two of the things which previous generations of political leaders have encouraged them to do - ' getting on their bikes to look for work ' and not relying on the state to provide for all their pension needs .
They should no longer be penalized for following the advice of those they elected to government for so many years , not least in my own country .
Gasòliba I Böhm report ( A4-0133 / 98 )
The Gasòliba I Böhm report notes an economic recovery in Europe , and proclaims that the framework of economic and monetary union will be able to increase this in the future by creating the conditions for a zone of stability .
Our opinion is far more moderate . If there really is a recovery in Europe at the moment , fortuitously accelerated by the decline in South-East Asian capital , then on the contrary monetary unification , and the super-state soon to follow it , run a high risk of limiting growth .
Furthermore , I do not believe that EMU is going to give the European economy a stable framework . By implementing monetary unification when the conditions are not all met , we will instead be establishing a zone of European instability for several decades to come .
Another factor which is unfavourable to growth is that the European Central Bank will clearly set short term interest rates higher than they are today in order to build up its credibility , especially if the euro zone covers 11 extremely heterogeneous countries .
Finally , monetary unification is going to require tax increases , which are never favourable to growth .
The reduction in public deficits over the past few years has largely been obtained through increases in tax and social security payments , which reached a record level of 42.4 % of European GDP in 1996 .
But that is not the worst of it .
Monetary unification will structurally require new taxes .
New proof of this is to be found in the Gasòliba I Böhm resolution , approved by the European Parliament which , " strongly agrees with the Commission 's view of an enhanced need for structural adjustment - with the active and enhanced use of the European Structural Funds - after EMU ' .
Thus the European Parliament , just like the other European institutions and the governments , is convinced that , by removing the possibility of economic adjustments through the flexibility of internal changes , monetary unification is going to require a strengthened European budget with the aim of taking responsibility for a financial redistribution between countries in compensation .
We are thus going to replace the spontaneous adjustments of the money markets with extremely costly bureaucratic adjustments .
We are going to remove uncertainty with regard to internal changes by causing considerable perverse effects throughout the economy .
Thus , the positive effects of simplification achieved by monetary unification will be wiped out , and the final result will not be favourable to growth .
I am , on the whole , satisfied with Mr Gasòliba I Böhm 's report .
He holds with the Commission 's vision with regard to the economic performance of the European Union as a whole .
Growth is returning , and interest rates and inflation rates are at an all time low .
Overall , most European Union countries have managed to achieve the criteria set out in the Maastricht Treaty .
It covers so many indicators that we can be led to hope for a long term economic recovery .
This being so , as the rapporteur highlights , we cannot show smug optimism and merely drink in the good figures .
For the fact is , unemployment remains high in many of the Union 's countries . And even if we now have the basics to help us resolve the problem of unemployment and to support long term growth , they are not enough .
It must be remembered that there are important obstacles preventing us from successfully completing our venture .
Investment levels remain weak ; non-wage labour costs remain high ; overly heavy and rigid administrative formalities prevent companies from operating and acting efficiently ; the workforce is still not adapted to technological change .
On the basis of this assessment , important reforms remain to be implemented .
They must cover the above-mentioned areas , but also taxation via a minimum platform of fiscal coordination between the Member States in the euro zone and a reduction in the costs which weigh down salaries , in particular those of the less qualified .
Finally I would like to mention my approval of the report 's scepticism with regard to a reduction in the working week , which would be obligatory in the European Union and which , moreover , would go against the principle of subsidiarity .
I would also go further and say that it is a bad idea to impose it at Member State level .
Let the social partners negotiate this at the level of the individual company , for this is where the information needed to take these decisions lies .
Unfortunately , I fear that in my country , our leaders do not see it this way .
In conclusion , and following the example of the rapporteur , I will add that we should be careful before announcing our victory .
We may be witnessing a recovery , but it does not mean that it will be a lasting one .
Our economies can be affected by certain impacts , such as strong fluctuations in the dollar , or the still unmeasured effects of the South-East Asian crisis .
It is also for this reason that it would be useful for the Commission to provide a study which covers a perspective of more than two years .
I congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report , for which I will vote favourably .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted in favour of the report by Carles-Alfred Gasòliba I Böhm on growth and employment in a stabilityoriented EMU .
The report states that the rapid reduction of public deficits in many EU Member States prior to the start of the third stage of EMU has had unfortunate consequences for employment in the EU .
Thus , it is important for EU Member States to intensify their efforts in countering unemployment , just as Denmark has done .
The Danish Social Democrats are of the opinion that unemployment is one of the worst problems currently facing the EU and we welcome the following key positions :


With reference to the Luxembourg Summit , efforts should be intensified to counter unemployment.-Increased mobility of different occupations and sectors.-Benchmarking should be implemented as part of a process to develop monitoring of the labour market.-Drastic wage cuts for unskilled workers is not a viable way to create employment .
It only serves to create a new poverty and could jeopardize social interdependence in Europe.-A need to coordinate minimum levels of taxation across EU Member States to avoid countries stealing jobs from one another by means of tax dumping.The Danish Social Democrats do not support a joint lowering of taxation rates , nor do we share the belief expressed in the report that reductions in VAT would have any significant impact on employment .
This report includes several good proposals to increase employment , such as reduced taxation on work , investment to increase domestic demand and reducing bureaucracy .
EMU is not the right way to achieve sustainable growth , a good environment and regional balance .
Tax changes , shorter working hours , investment in industries of the future , such as the environment and new technology , must take place within the framework of an economy with increased regional and local diversity and reduced centralization .
The fact that at least 600 000 jobs have been " scrapped ' in the textiles and clothing sector in less than five years with a massive , continuous redundancy process is causing anguish .
It is hoped that the Council will outline a new common strategy to encourage the adaptation of the sector , on the eve of new liberalization worldwide .
The dissemination and transfer of technologies , as well as the use of the information technologies , may undoubtedly help the sector recover from the crisis into which it has fallen .
But that is not enough .
To a certain extent , it is very important to revitalize and stop the inequality of industrial growth in the sector in question , because some industries are adapting to the economic changes quickly while others remain frustrated at the starting post .
The European Commission action plan is important and welcome , but does not constitute a real strategy , for the simple reason that it does not contain any real measures that can be adapted to specific cases and , even more seriously , it does not have adequate funding .
This is even more disconcerting as the textiles and clothing sector represents the vital backbone of the development of many regions of the EU , which are already in serious economic difficulties .
We need to reconsider a new strategy in the textiles sector that can aim to achieve one of the basic principles of the very construction of the EU : the economic and social cohesion of the regions in which the industry has strong roots .
The Highlands and Islands of Scotland has a lot of area heavily dependent on the textile industry : Harris Tweed , Johnstone Mills at Elgin , Brora Mills and Shetland Knitwear .
Some of their products are adversely affected by imports and some of the exporting states do not obey international conventions in social and employment conditions .
We support the action plan and the European observatory for textiles .
I voted in favour of the proposed resolution on the competitiveness of the textile and clothing industry because , as a Member for a country where that industry is of major economic importance , it seems to me that the Commission should improve its action plan for the sector , bearing in mind that this is one of the EU 's largest industries , with 2.25 million jobs , mainly occupied by women workers , in a total of over 120 thousand companies .
When amending its action plan , the Commission should take account of the fact that many regions of the EU depend on the textile and clothing industry - many of those regions being under-developed or in industrial decline - and of the need to make more financial aid available to render those regions and the sector itself more competitive .
The action plan presented by the Commission on the textile industry is part of its more general strategy to increase competitiveness by reducing non-wage labour costs , changing labour relations and by further promoting " prosperity ' .
There appears to be little concern about the fact that this is a traditional industry which is of strategic importance for some EU countries .
Nor does there appear to be any concern about the fact that more than 600 000 jobs have been lost over the last few years , that we see the use of flexible and short term employment , that overall we have a serious fall in productivity , and that those regions which depend directly on the industry are in a state of decline .
Nor indeed is there concern about the fact that it is an industry with a large percentage of relocation in the context of the demand by large corporations for ever larger superprofits .
We are afraid that the directions taken by the Commission portend the negative direction of the debates which will take place in Council and , therefore , the people employed in the industry and the many SMEs have nothing to gain from the planned structural intervention of the EU . Even at the level of special programmes , the new proposals for the Structural Funds within the framework of Agenda 2000 provide for the abolition of the RETEX programme .
The EU bears the profoundest responsibilities for the US-inspired liberalization of the global market in textiles and for its accession to the GATT regulations .
It has not made any attempt , even in a rudimentary way , to safeguard European production in the face of unfair competition from those countries which practise social dumping .
Now , after the event , it talks hypocritically of the need for protection , when this excellent social provision was not included in the WTO agreement . Nor , of course , is any safeguard provided by the inconsistent and non-binding Singapore Declaration .
The EU must tackle the phenomenon of companies relocating which , in Greece , has assumed substantial proportions and is used by employers to threaten workers into accepting the non-implementation of collective agreements and medieval working conditions .
This phenomenon has other dimensions , if we take into consideration the strong regional character of the industry , the shrinking of which , apart from the problems it creates for the economic and social fabric of entire regions , widens the gulf between less developed economies - such as the Greek economy - and those of the more developed countries of the EU .
The EU also bears the most serious responsibilities for the policy it is pursuing in relation to one of the major raw materials used in the industry - cotton .
Instead of supporting production in this weak area of cultivation , and contributing to increased investments in the textile industry by means of regulations implemented within the framework of the CAP - reduced production and an increase in the limits of co-responsibility - it promotes de facto relocations or the placing of the initial investment in third producing countries with cheap raw materials .
The joint resolution of the European Parliament , although it contains many interesting proposals , especially concerning the funding of the industry , the implementation of international labour agreements and measures against social dumping , greatly limits its horizon and avoids setting out the enormous problems in the sector - the relocations which are fatally affecting the European textile industry , the general crisis within the industry - and the measures for com