Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 26 November 2009 .
Announcements by the President
In opening the last session of the European Parliament in 2009 , I would firstly like to offer you all - all fellow Members - my sincere wishes for the approaching Christmas season , for the Chanukah festival , which has already begun , and for the coming new year .
On behalf of all Members of the European Parliament , I would like to express similar sincere wishes to the administration , to all those who work directly with Parliament and assist us in our work .
I would also like to mention the attack on the Prime Minister of Italy , Silvio Berlusconi .
The attack deserves our unequivocal condemnation .
Political discussion must not be conducted in such a fashion .
Yesterday 's incident should never have taken place .
We hope Mr Berlusconi will be able to leave hospital soon and we wish him a quick return to health .
With your permission , I would also like to mention an anniversary which is important to me personally .
Yesterday , it was 28 years since the imposition of martial law in Poland by the then Communist authorities .
As a result , almost 100 people lost their lives , including the nine miners who were shot during the strike at the Wujek Mine .
Many thousands of democratic opposition activists were interned , and others were even imprisoned .
This was intended to break up and destroy the Solidarity trade union .
I refer to these events because I would like to draw attention to how greatly Europe has changed in the past two or three decades , but also to how we ought to strive for peace and human rights in our continent and throughout the world .
I would also like to take the opportunity to remind you that on Wednesday at 12.00 , a ceremony will be held to present the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought .
This year , the prize has been awarded to Lyudmila Alexeyeva , Sergei Kovalev and Oleg Orlov , who represent the Russian human rights defence organisation Memorial .
Our continent experienced very great suffering during the 20th century , so we understand very well the importance of striving for human rights around the world , and especially in the continent of Europe .
This event , therefore , holds particular value for us .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , apologies if I am not speaking in accordance with proper procedure , but I wanted to express my solidarity and that of my group with Prime Minister Berlusconi .
I was speaking on behalf of the entire European Parliament .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , together with Mr Sassoli and all the members of the Democratic Party within the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , would like to echo your words of solidarity towards the Italian Prime Minister , Silvio Berlusconi , and stress that this was an abominable , unacceptable and unjustifiable act .
We are ardent opponents of Mr Berlusconi , but we are political adversaries .
We do not view Mr Berlusconi , or any other opponent , as our enemy .
There is no other way to fight and win except through political and civil battle .
We will not allow anyone to force the liveliness of political debate down a dangerous road of hate and violence , which is the first step towards authoritarian and antidemocratic practices .
It is right that , once again , this Parliament shows its superior equanimity , respect and democratic maturity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , also on behalf of my group , to informally offer my truly heartfelt thanks , first of all to you , who labelled what happened in the most appropriate terms , which is to say ' undignified ' , but even more so , if possible , to my Italian fellow Members , and in particular , Mr Pittella , for their words .

I do not intend to engage in political speculation of any kind .
What happened really could take us almost to the edge of the abyss , the precipice , and so the unanimous call that came from Parliament is the only one that can guide us at this difficult time .
I therefore thank Parliament and thank Europe for their contribution to life and to democratic development in Italy .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting on 10 December pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday - no changes
Tuesday
I have received a request from the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group for the inclusion of an oral question to the Commission on the subsidiarity principle .
It was a written request submitted to the Bureau of the European Parliament .
I would like to ask a representative of the EFD Group to say something about this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have asked that this oral question be added to the agenda since we believe that Parliament should receive an appropriate answer on such an important point , and that is why we are asking for this amendment to the agenda .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
Ladies and gentlemen , please note that this item will be included as the last item on the agenda for Tuesday evening .
The tabling deadline for motions for resolutions is Tuesday , 15 December at 10.00 , and the tabling deadline for joint motions for resolutions and amendments is Wednesday , 16 December at 10.00 .
The vote will take place on Thursday .
So it is the last item tomorrow , motions for resolutions on Wednesday and the vote on Thursday .
Mr President , if we understood correctly , you referred to a resolution in connection with the motion that has initially been tabled .
However , we have not expressly agreed whether there is to be a resolution or not .
That is , in fact , quite right .
The request was submitted with the resolution .
Wednesday - no changes
Thursday
Are there any comments about Thursday ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , several urgent matters are scheduled for next Thursday .
As the third of these urgent matters , we are due to discuss the situation in Azerbaijan .
The media , including the Western media , have reported on a scuffle that involved two young bloggers and another two people in a public place .
An arrest was made and a sentence handed down and I believe it is only right to get to the bottom of the matter and ascertain whether everything has been done in accordance with the law .
At the same time , however , extremely serious events have taken place in the Philippines in recent days : 57 people in a convoy in support of a presidential candidate were massacred by an armed group , which exploited the revolutionary situation to take up arms against the government , to the point that martial law has been declared in the Philippines .
I therefore ask you , ladies and gentlemen , that the situation in the Philippines replace the ' Azerbaijan ' issue as the third item on Thursday .
There is a clear disparity between the seriousness of what happened in Azerbaijan compared ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( DE ) Mr President , I do not know whether what I am going to say still relates to the agenda , but I think that this is the most appropriate time to mention it .
One of the consequences of the Treaty of Lisbon is , of course , that the number of MEPs will change , and for Austria this means that two new Members will be joining this House .
These Members are ready , they have been elected and it is important that they come here soon .
I would like to ask you what steps have already been taken to enable these Members to take their places here quickly , either as observers or as full Members , or what you intend to do to make this happen quickly .
The first step in this matter should be taken by the European Council .
I spoke in the European Council last Thursday and said clearly that it is extremely important for Parliament that the Council take the initial legal steps to enable us to accept the additional Members and to know from which countries they will come .
This must be done in accordance with the principles of law , and that step should now be taken by the Council .
I am continually appealing for the Council to take the appropriate steps .
The next steps , after an initial decision from the Council , should then be taken by Parliament .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to condemn in this House the continual provocations , abuses of power and threats by the President of Venezuela , Hugo Chávez .
With his dictatorial method of government he is threatening , among other things , freedom of expression in Venezuela and democratic order in Latin America .
President Chávez has closed down thirty radio stations and some television channels .
He is threatening and punishing journalists in Venezuela because they do not support his autocratic regime .
Because of all this , Mr President , it should also be pointed out that while there are power cuts , water shortages and food shortages in Venezuela , and poverty is continuing to grow due to poor management by the Chávez Government , the Venezuelan tyrant is trying to cover it all up by blowing up border bridges and threatening Colombia .
He is praising international terrorists and aligning himself with the despotic dictators of the world , and his words and speeches are continual provocations and war cries aimed at destabilising the American continent .
This is why Parliament , which is always committed to freedom and democracy in any part of the world , must strongly condemn the autocratic and dictatorial policies of Hugo Chávez in Venezuela .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like further details on the consequences of the 40 % reduction in world fishing quotas of tuna .
On 15 November in Recife , the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( ICCAT ) decided that all contracting parties must reduce their fishing capacity by at least 40 % .
This measure means that the world fishing quota of blue fin tuna will reduce from 22 000 tonnes currently to 13 500 tonnes in 2010 .
Indeed , the ICCAT Member States decided to target overcapacity of their fishing fleet in order to halve it by 2011 .
The fishing season for tuna seiners will also be reduced to one month , with no possibility of extension .
These measures , which are necessary for preserving the species and which will be transposed into European Union legislation , will endanger the activity of European fishermen .
I would like to know what action is envisaged to support the fishermen 's livelihood and to halt plans to reduce the fleet .
What measures have been taken to reduce the very significant socio-economic consequences of transposing these ICCAT decisions into EU legislation ?
( RO ) As is well known , the implementation of the strategies and operational programmes for the 2007-2013 period is still in its initial stages , and Romania has the opportunity for the first time to benefit from EU funds as part of the cohesion policy .
The regional development policy is one of the European Union 's most important and complex policies .
Its objective must be to reduce the existing economic and social disparities , but in different regions of Europe .
I would like to mention the efforts made by all Member States to integrate the general priorities of the cohesion policy as part of the operational programmes .
However , I believe that the European Union must adopt a strategic role so that the operational programmes can be implemented as quickly as possible in all Member States , thereby promoting the measures intended to consolidate its institutional capacity according to the specific needs of each Member State .
Mr President , I would like to denounce the deep economic crisis that the Catalan and the European nut sector have been suffering for several years .
The continuous fall of nut prices threatens the future of our European producers .
I would like to warn you about the non-interventionist policy of the Turkish Government .
There are 500 000 tonnes of nuts stored by the Turkish public body for nut purchasing .
This body wants to sell off these 500 000 tonnes of nuts in January 2010 .
In the light of what the Turkish authorities said at a bilateral meeting with the European Union on 2 October 2009 , such a situation would seriously damage European producers , with a new dramatic drop in nut prices .
I asked the European Commission about this question two months ago , but none of the existing special safeguard provisions will be applied to protect our producers .
These are the worries I wanted to share with you .
( RO ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you are aware , Romania would like to become part of the Schengen area from 2011 .
With this in mind , it has submitted to a number of assessments , five to be exact , four of which have already been completed .
I would like to remind you in particular of the evaluation of the maritime border , which was rated so highly by the Schengen experts that Romania has even been presented as a model of good practice .
However , we have one more test to undergo , and I am sure that we will come through it successfully .
Taking the example provided by Romania , I am proposing to you that we look at the expansion of the Schengen area in a more optimistic light .
In other words , we should no longer regard this process as a threat to the security of our borders , but rather as an opportunity for strengthening cooperation between Member States in the area of justice , freedom and security .
I am pleased to note that these ideas also feature in the Stockholm Programme adopted last week by the European Council .
This programme regards the extension of the Schengen area as a priority for the European Union 's internal policy .
( ES ) Mr President , in Honduras , as everyone knows , there was a coup d 'état on 28 June .
Almost six months have passed , and Parliament has still not found time to condemn this coup .
What is more , MEPs from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Conservatives and Reformists have visited the country to endorse the consequences of this coup d 'état by their presence .
Through their support , they were confusing the European Parliament with the political groups and endorsing elections run by a de facto Government that were held under conditions that did not guarantee their legitimacy .
A perverse precedent is being created through the coup in Honduras , as from now on , moderate , temporary , relatively bloodless coups are going to be not only accepted by the continental right , but actually applauded and encouraged by the European and North American right .
What has happened in Honduras is extremely regrettable !
Mr President , I want to deplore the deeply worrying decision of the Turkish Constitutional Court on Friday to close the Democracy Society Party , which represents largely Kurdish interests , and to ban from politics its leading MPs .
This is a very retrograde step and will be used as a pretext to return to violence by extremists .
It closes off the democratic political option which the Prime Minister , Mr Erdoğan , has said he wants to pursue .
One of the problems is that the AK Party Government has failed to reform the very law which was used to close the Democracy Society Party - in fact , the law under which the AK Party itself almost got closed .
So this is not in the interests of the Government of Turkey or its people .
The ALDE Group will be calling for a plenary debate on this subject as early as possible in the new year because it is a really bad step backwards for Turkey .
Mr President , we all know the importance of recycling , and it is a given fact we would expect our paper to be recycled , once used .
I recently visited a printing company in my constituency of London , where I found out more about ink-jet printing .
The complicated process used to recycle ink-jet paper makes it an expensive operation , and the use of additional bleach means it is not environmentally friendly .
The ink cannot be separated easily from the paper , which means that much of today 's printed matter cannot be recycled .
Companies such as the one I visited in London that use other forms of printing which are environmentally friendly need to be encouraged and incentives offered to make the process economically more even-handed .
I would like to see a market-driven solution supported by Member States , a solution where the industry self-regulates with a code of practice , taking the lead in environmental agendas .
Nevertheless , the EU has an important role to play in promoting awareness of these issues and supporting alternatives to ink-jet printing when and where appropriate .
( EL ) Mr President , I asked for the floor in order to draw the attention and awareness of the European Parliament to an aspect of immigration policy which relates to unaccompanied minors and child rights , an issue which needs to be addressed by the Union as a whole and not only by the countries of entry , such as Greece .

As you well know , under Community legislation , every request for asylum or residence must be examined in the Member State first entered by the applicant , regardless of his or her actual destination .
This places a burden on the structures in the entry country and works against the rights of applicants being dealt with en masse under the briefest of procedures .
They are often sent on with no guarantee that their rights and life will be respected or remain in the country with no protection or social care and , as a result , in the case of children , they fall victim to abuse and exploitation by various gangs .
I believe that , as the European Parliament , we should work to change and adapt Community and national legislation , so that unaccompanied minors reach the country which is their final destination , are not deported , and are ensured a dignified and safe stay in the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , last week , I had meetings with various politicians from Arab states , namely the Emirates , Egypt and Jordan .
I should like to convey their concern about Iran 's nuclear programme .
I met Israelis who are extremely concerned and their main concern is the support which Turkey is currently giving Iran .
They asked what the European Union 's official position was on support by Prime Minister Erdoğan to the Tehran administration and about the statements by Mr Erdoğan that Iran 's nuclear programme is for peaceful purposes .
I have to admit that I did not know what our official position is on Turkey 's statements and behaviour in terms of Iran 's nuclear programme .
The progress report says one thing and Mr Erdoğan says another .
( EL ) Mr President , the fact that the Commissioner present , Mrs Boel , called a text on the review of the Community budget in connection with the common agricultural policy inadequate at a public meeting of the European Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is a good sign .
In my opinion , under no circumstances should the debate on the financial review anticipate the review of the common agricultural policy for the post-2013 period .
We are not simply calling for the ratio of agricultural spending to the overall Community budget to be defined .
We are calling , first and foremost , for the agricultural policy that we want to be defined , to finalise the contribution of the agricultural sector to the production of public goods , and then to decide on the resources to be made available for the targets set .
This is the message which I wish to convey and which I wish to impart to Commissioner Boel .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the free movement of persons is one of the fundamental freedoms of the European Union , and one of the pillars of the Single Market .
However , a number of Member States are still continuing to impose restrictions on Bulgarians and Romanians with regard to access to their labour market .
The arguments for maintaining the restrictions are contrary to market logic , especially during a crisis .
Even the Commissioner for Employment declared some time ago : ' The right to work in another country is a fundamental freedom for people in the EU ' .
He is absolutely right too .
Maintaining these restrictions against workers from the new Member States creates anomalies in the market and contradicts the principle of non-discrimination which is enshrined in the treaties on which the European Union is founded , thereby tarnishing the European Union 's image .
I urge the European Commission to coordinate with Member States the lifting , as soon as possible , of labour market restrictions for Member States which have recently joined .
Fellow Members , I am also asking for your support so that we can achieve a truly free market and equal rights for all European citizens .
( FR ) Mr President , I would like to come back to a recent event , namely the Swiss vote on minarets .
Admittedly , the vote was held in a country outside the European Union , but it clearly concerns an issue that is not unfamiliar to us .
I would like to come back to this event because it also provides an excuse to talk about secularism , and we can never talk enough about secularism in this House .
There is an urgent need for the principle of secularism to dominate the organisation of our society .
I would like to talk in simple terms here .
Firstly , the opposite principle to secularism is not religiousness and still less spirituality .
The opposite principle to secularism is religious communitarianism which lays down regulations and laws that are above civil law and encloses individuals into infra-societal groups .
Our European Union , as a result of its history , is multicultural and multiethnic .
It is and will increasingly be so , and only secularism can enable emancipated individuals and their communities to live and thrive .
( ES ) Mr President , clinical trials are a benchmark method of clinical research and are considered to be the most reliable source of information on which to base treatment decisions .
I would , however , like to alert the House to the fact that a recent study by the European Society of Cardiology has once again demonstrated that there are serious limitations to this methodology as a result of low levels of participation by women in such trials .
The differences between men and women , in terms of risk factors , disease presentation and response to treatment have been scientifically proven .
The result is that the spectacular achievements in recent years in terms of prevention and treatment of cardiovascular diseases have not been reflected in a significant decline in women 's mortality rates .
It is therefore essential that as European institutions , we promote research that is specifically aimed at women , either through their more extensive inclusion in clinical studies , or through designing studies that are conducted exclusively on women .
( NL ) Mr President , I , too , wish to talk about last Friday 's decision of the Turkish Constitutional Court to ban the Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) , which has resulted in no less than 22 members of the Turkish Parliament being either expelled from the parliament or deprived of their political rights for five years .
Unfortunately , these parliamentarians include Leyla Zana , to whom we awarded the Sakharov Prize in 1995 .
It is already the fourth time that a Kurdish party has been banned ; time and again , Kurds endeavour to stand up for the rights of their people under a different name and time and again they are suppressed for allegedly propounding ideas counter to the unity of the Turkish State .
Yet the essence of democracy includes freedom of association and freedom of opinion , and so this divests of all credibility the so-called ' democratic opening ' initiative launched by Prime Minister Erdoğan earlier this year with regard to the Kurdish question .
I should very much like to support Mrs Ludford 's call for a debate on this in January .
( FR ) Mr President , the following is an extract from a letter written by William Bourdon , Taoufik Ben Brik 's lawyer , to Mr Sarkozy , President of the French Republic : ' I have had the opportunity to denounce , as all his Tunisian lawyers have done , the legal farce which has resulted in Taoufik Ben Brik being sentenced , without in-depth examination , to a staggering six months in prison .
I can unequivocally and formally attest to the fact that the dossier of the proceedings which led to this conviction was totally fabricated and was based on the personal vendetta of President Ben Ali .
Throughout this year , 2009 , he has been unable to travel since the fragility of his immune system is such that he is always at risk of being exposed to serious diseases .
I believe that his family have succeeded in bringing him essential medicine , but I am not certain of this .
His Tunisian lawyers have only intermittent access to their client , and some are systematically denied any possibility of visiting him .
The only time that his wife has been able to see him was for a few minutes a few days ago , and she has been unable to see him again since . '
Mr President , please write to the Tunisian authorities to request the release of Taoufik Ben Brik .
( FR ) Mr President , I am going to follow on from Mrs Flautre 's speech and invite you to write to the Tunisian authorities .
This year , we are going to award the Sakharov Prize , the symbol of the European Parliament 's commitment to human rights .
We have a partnership agreement with Tunisia which contains many provisions relating to democracy and human rights .
Nevertheless , the presidential elections in Tunisia have just been held in lamentable conditions that are unworthy of the provisions contained in the agreement with the European Union .
We cannot remain silent .
Human rights defenders in Tunisia are being scorned , arrested and humiliated .
This can go on no longer .
That is why , Mr President , I urge you to write to President Ben Ali and to call , in particular , for the release of Taoufik Ben Brik , a committed journalist whose only crime has been to criticise the so-called democracy in Tunisia .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I had requested that the picture of a young Iranian woman , Neda Agha-Soltan , be displayed in Brussels alongside that of Aung San Suu Kyi .
Mrs Soltan was killed as she was seeking freedom and transparency in Iran and has become a symbol for freedom and , above all , for women fighting for freedom .
My request has been signed by 75 Members and five political groups .
I believe that it is particularly important that it is granted , especially at the current time , as Ayatollah Khamenei in Iran says that he intends to repress any kind of protest and any kind of opposition .
I hope that my request is granted .
Mr President , along with the approaching winter season , the threat of a new gas crisis is emerging from the east .
A few weeks ago , Prime Minister Putin made it clear to us that Russia may again violate its gas-supply contracts with EU Member States .
To avoid this , he called on the EU to lend as much as EUR 1 billion to Ukraine in order for it to be able to fulfil its gas-transit commitments .
So we may expect another round of strange political play directed by our Russian partner .
This is unacceptable .
Although particular Member States are concerned by this on different levels , the EU will have to take unified measures and adopt an assertive standpoint on this crucial issue on principle , out of solidarity .
Moreover , this is a signal to speed up our new projects for the diversification of long-term energy supply so that Russian influence can be minimalised .
( SK ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty has also had a favourable effect on the conditions for further expansion of the EU .
Nobody can now argue any longer that the Union lacks the institutional capacity for expansion and decision making , as this is now in place .
There are no reasons , therefore , for delaying or hindering the process of further expansion .
This applies particularly to the Western Balkans region .
There have recently been intensive and generally positive developments in the region .
The reports published recently on progress in the individual countries confirm this , as does the EU expansion strategy for 2010 published by the Commission .
Together with the introduction of a visa-free regime for entry into the Schengen area , a real chance is arising for the countries of the region to make progress on their European path .
It is up to them to make use of it .
The EU too , however , must not dither but must proceed responsibly and rationally , fully respecting the circumstances and the European Parliament must play an active role .
( SL ) This week , overnight from Friday to Saturday , after more than two decades , the citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , Serbia and Montenegro will finally again be able to enter the European Union without a visa .
That will be a great day and an opportunity for celebration .
However , I would like to use this opportunity to call once again on the European Commission and the Council to do everything possible to lift the visa requirement for the citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Albania as soon as possible .
We must not allow any new divisions in the Western Balkans or lose any time , particularly to the detriment of the younger generation .
It is hard to believe that the majority of young people in these countries still know nothing about the European Union .
Our responsibility is to tear down the new visa walls which came into existence in the Western Balkans after the fall of the Berlin Wall .
This also goes for the population of Kosovo .
The Western Balkans needs a clear European perspective .
Let us not give in to unfounded fears .
( RO ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two really historic events have marked the end of 2009 : the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force and the Copenhagen Summit .
I would like to use my speech to express my satisfaction with regard to the way in which the European Union is proving , at the moment , to be the main actor when it comes to finding viable solutions in the combat against climate change .
I am similarly pleased that Member States have managed to reach agreement at all and present a common position , even though reaching agreement among the 27 Member States is no easy task .
The outcome will perhaps not match up to our ambitions and expectations , but the decision made by the European Union Member States to offer EUR 7.2 billion to the developing countries is all the more important as these countries are in urgent need of financial support .
It is also possible that this example could encourage the other UN countries to take the same action .
The fact should also be applauded that even the countries in the European Union which have been severely affected by the financial crisis to date have expressed their solidarity , made an effort and are going to make a contribution , even if it is only a token gesture by some of them , as an indication of their commitment to the battle against global warming .
( EL ) Mr President , may I start by expressing my full solidarity with the fight by the trade unionists in the European Parliament and wishing them every success .
A massive wave of anti-labour measures is being unleashed by the Greek Government and flexible forms of work are being made the rule and imposed across the board .
The social security system is also being decimated and wages and pensions are being frozen .
The Greek Government , the European Union and the representatives of capital are trying to terrorise workers by brandishing the bugbear of Greece 's budget deficit and public debt .
They are engaging the workers in social dialogue , which is a set-up , in order to force them into consent , limit their justified anger and divert grassroots reaction .
The first response to the anti-grassroots attack by the government and the European Union will be the national strike on 17 December announced and organised by the All Workers Militant Front ( PAME ) .
They are demanding measures to satisfy modern grassroots requirements which can only be met by a united front of the working classes , the poor and middle classes in the towns and countryside , to confront and overthrow the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , on 8 December , the ESDP mission , Operation Atalanta , celebrated one year of existence .
According to the Swedish Presidency , the operation has demonstrated its ability to counter piracy effectively and there has been a significant fall in attacks .
That last statement , however , is highly questionable .
According to a report by the International Maritime Bureau , in the first nine months of 2009 , there were more attacks in total than in the whole of 2008 .
The number of armed attacks also rose by 200 % overall .
The financial efficiency of this operation is also highly questionable .
The cost of damage caused by piracy in this region is estimated to be USD 200 million in total , whereas the EU and its Member States are investing USD 408 million per year .

The new planned ESDP mission in Somalia , once again , will not get to the root of the problem , but merely deal with the symptoms .
What would really be worthwhile would be for the EU to set up an effective coastal watch to prevent illegal fishing ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , the SESAR programme , which aims to modernise air traffic management in Europe , is a major project .
How is the Commission going to prepare for the forthcoming SESAR deployment phase and , in particular , for the financing of this programme , which is essential both for the environment and for our scientific and technical standing ?
Will the Commission follow the recommendations of the 2007 report , according to which a highly qualified individual should ensure political monitoring of this programme ?
Indeed , a number of obstacles will have to be overcome - of a legal , psychological and technical nature - to unite national airspaces and to succeed in getting controllers from the various countries to work together .
If Europe is not able to create a single airspace , how will it be able to build a strong political union ?
( HU ) Mr President , given that both you and the Commission expressed your intention to monitor the implementation of Slovakia 's national language law , I would like to draw your attention to the following points .
The government has published the implementing provision , which not only overrides laws , but also introduces further restrictions .
The implementation proposal specifies that the law 's legitimate purpose is solely to protect and support the national language in official dealings , as well as to protect the rights of users of the national language .
It states that , in the case of natural persons and legal entities , the protection of these rights has as its legitimate aim interference with fundamental rights and freedoms .
It is therefore glaringly obvious that this is a reference to the rights and freedoms of persons belonging to minorities .
The implementing measure also points out that , regardless of whether the proportion is above or below 20 % , the minority language can only be used anywhere if a third person who is present agrees to this .
I think that this absurdity is unacceptable in Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , at the last EU-Russia Summit , the parties signed a memorandum on the principles of an early warning mechanism on energy matters .
The European Commission hopes that in future , this will allow us to avoid an energy crisis similar to the one we experienced at the beginning of the year , when the dispute between Russia and Ukraine over the supply and transit of gas resulted in Moscow cutting off the supply of gas for nearly three weeks , effectively paralysing several European countries .
The approaching winter and the associated increase in gas consumption mean that we have to develop principles which should govern the European energy market .
The European Union must understand that breaks in gas supply are not only a threat to the economy , but they also threaten the foundations of European integration , which , strengthened by European solidarity , support the free market .
I also hope that this winter will not have to be a test of the truth of the declarations made , and of whether solidarity is an insignificant , empty word or a real guarantee of cooperation between Member States of the European Union .
Mr President , as you probably know , Romania has recently concluded a two-year period in which different elections were held every six months .
The last electoral consultation was presidential and was won by the current president with the very narrow margin of 70 000 votes , coming mainly from the diaspora .
What bothers me as a citizen is that , during the entire electoral campaign , I was not able to post anything critical of the current president on my blog , the Europolis , while public access to my blog was interrupted altogether .
I consider this unacceptable , both because it represents censorship of the right to free speech and because it shows that the Internet , too , is controlled by those in power and / or their supporters .
All in all , it is regrettable that , 20 years after the revolution , in which many people died so that democracy would take firm root , such attitudes are tolerated - possibly even encouraged - by those who temporarily enjoy the fruits of democracy , being elected to power even with such narrow margins .
( FR ) Mr President , since 2007 , rail transport of goods has undergone a wholesale liberalisation of supply .
Operators that do not have a public-service mission will , from now on , face increased competition .
In many countries , this means an increase in supply in the most profitable segments of the market , namely combined transport and full-train transport .
By contrast , transport by the single wagon load technique is of little interest for private companies given its very limited profitability .
If we really want to develop rail freight as the driving force behind sustainable mobility , it is essential to support single wagon load transport .
Otherwise , transport will transfer entirely to the road , which would run counter to our aims in terms of reducing carbon dioxide emissions .
Supporting single wagon load transport must therefore be considered a public-service mission since it is an integral part of a sustainable mobility strategy .
In the context of the European Commission guidelines describing the conditions for state intervention , we believe that it is entirely possible to include support for single wagon load transport , whether in the form of compensation for public-service obligations or in the form of aid for ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) Mr President , I would like to talk about a very practical but , for my home country of Estonia , an extremely important subject .
A few years ago , the three Baltic countries - Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania - essentially lacked any railway link with Europe .
The actual infrastructure was in a bad state and it was used very little .
Since then , there have been positive developments , both in renovation of the present railway and in carrying out studies in order to construct railways conforming to European standards .
In order to implement Rail Baltica - the name by which we know this project - it is extremely important that both the European Parliament and the European Commission show considerable support for the Rail Baltica project , despite the fact that the population of this region is not exactly the biggest , and the financial situation facing the Baltic States is dire .
This project is important not only to ensure a normal railway link , but it will also have a considerable effect on all three countries with regard to regional and social policy .
Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania need a railway link with Europe , both for economic reasons and to keep environmental economy in focus , because rail transport allows for larger cargo loads to be transported with less pollution .
At this moment , the main link is the Via Baltica ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to say a few brief words about two subjects .
Firstly , the question of equal treatment is linked , with the same level of urgency , to the outstanding problem of the equality of men and women .
It ought to be a given that men and women of equal calibre with the same qualifications and in the same position should receive the same pay .
In Austria , everything is turned on its head , because the better qualified women are , the worse their advancement is compared to their male colleagues with the same qualifications .
Very recent figures show that women 's disadvantage increases with age , for example , women over 60 earn around 34 % less than their male colleagues .
Secondly , I would like to make the comment that children require protection .
I would have liked to have seen the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child enshrined in the Austrian constitution .
I hope that this discussion will soon be taken up once again in Austria and that it will have a positive outcome .
( RO ) I am delighted to announce in this House that Mr Traian Băsescu has been reconfirmed as President of Romania .
Our accession to the European Union in 2007 took place during President Traian Băsescu 's first term of office and thanks to his direct contribution .
A new mandate will allow the president to continue with the reforms and full implementation of European norms and values in Romania .
In the wake of these presidential elections , a single conclusion can be drawn : presidential elections , which complied with stringent international requirements , have passed off in Romania , as was also confirmed by the OSCE observers , as well as by the decision of the Romanian Constitutional Court and the recounting of void votes , after which the incumbent president increased his lead over his opponent .
We believe that President Băsescu 's democratic victory , supported by the Liberal Democratic Party , also marks a victory for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
Our colleagues in the PPE Group , headed by Wilfried Martens and Joseph Daul , expressed their support for President Băsescu , which we thank them for once again .
( RO ) During the second quarter of 2009 , the revenues of the 27 Member States amounted to 43.9 % of GDP , while their expenditure was 49.7 % .
During the same period , at EU27 level , taxes and social contributions amounted to approximately 90 % of Member States ' general revenues , whereas social welfare costs were only 42.2 % of GDP .
The 27 Member States ' budget deficit grew from 0.8 % in the second quarter of 2008 to 5.8 % in the second quarter of 2009 .
During the same period , the employment rate dropped by 2 % and industrial production by 10.2 % .
The sectors most affected were construction , agriculture , industrial production , trade , transport and communications .
I believe that it is imperative for the future European Commission to present a programme of work focusing on economic development , reducing unemployment and guaranteeing decent living conditions .
( SV ) Mr President , anti-Semitism is spreading across the world , even here in Europe , within the EU .
Surely it goes without saying that the European Parliament must get to grips with this hydra - which is becoming increasing prevalent and widespread - and try to nip it in the bud .
It must also be made clear that , of course , the policy of the state of Israel can be criticised - just as any other state can be criticised , because no state functions perfectly .
However , the state of Israel 's policy is a separate matter to anti-Semitism .
I assume that the European Parliament will vigorously oppose any tendency towards anti-Semitism .
At the moment , these tendencies are frequent and widespread .
( PT ) Mr President , the issue I am bringing to the House 's attention today concerns VAT arrangements for Portuguese farmers .
According to Community legislation , there are three possible schemes : the general scheme , with organised accounting ; the option of the scheme for small and medium-sized enterprises ; or the flat-rate scheme in which there is no repayment but there is a right to compensation .
Unfortunately , ever since Portugal joined the EU , this right to compensation has been 0 % .
Infringement proceedings are currently being brought against the Portuguese State .
This form of taxation affects approximately 18 000 farmers in relation to 5.3 % of their sales .
I should like to make it quite clear that a way needs to be found to make Portuguese legislation conform to the Community acquis .
Colleagues , we have come to the end of the one-minute speeches .
I would like to explain that I have a lot of names on the list - at least twice as many as we have time for .
Today we had more time than usual , but you must remember that if someone spoke in the one-minute speeches last time , one month ago or two months ago , then they will not have as much chance of speaking again today .
We must pay attention to those who have not spoken at all .
I am sorry but those are just the rules .
On the list I have the names of twice as many Members as it is possible to take .
I am very sorry that not everybody could take the floor .
Mr President , I appreciate what you say , but the fact that you have got twice the number of names of Members who want to speak shows you how important this particular part of our job - representing our people - actually is .
Could I perhaps ask you to take this back and look at some other way whereby we would not sit here for one hour and then not be called because - and I am not complaining , I know it is a difficult task you have - at least then we could be told not to turn up this week , or whatever .
You would decide beforehand how many you were going to take , and the rest of us could then come back the next time or raise our points in another way .
I think , rather than waste the time of Members , it might be good .
I think there is always a reason to sit with us and to listen to the discussions .
I do not think we should speak in such a way .
Today , almost everybody who did not speak during the last part-session was able to take the floor .
Crisis in agricultural sectors other than the dairy sector ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the crisis in agricultural sectors other than the dairy sector .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , firstly I would like to thank you for giving me the opportunity to be here today to explain the current economic situation within the agricultural sector .
The financial and economic crisis has also had an impact on the agricultural sector .
We have seen slowdown in demand , evolution of exchange rates , difficult access to credits - all of these have had an impact on the prices for agricultural products and also on farm income .
Official estimates of agricultural income will only be available at the end of this week , but we can already expect that the income will show a significant drop in 2009 compared to the previous year , given the relative development in the cost of production and the agricultural market prices .
After the initial fall that we saw in autumn 2008 , this renewed drop in agricultural income can be expected to more than write off the exceptional income increases generated by the hikes that we saw in agricultural products starting in summer 2007 and then one year later .
Mr President , if you would allow me , I shall just go through some of the different sectors .
First of all , cereals .
We saw in 2008 a significant drop in prices , mainly because of a good harvest .
However , we have seen that prices over recent months have increased specifically for wheat and corn or maize .
In the light of these developments , it would not be appropriate at this moment to take exceptional measures , such as opening an intervention tender for maize , nor to intervene with export refunds .
The situation is slightly different for feed barley , with reduced exports and low domestic prices , but intervention - as you know - has just been opened , and this should help the feed-grain markets .
In the pigmeat sector , the situation is still fragile .
The economic crisis hit it at a time when it had not fully recovered from the difficulties experienced back in 2007 .
Prices this year are lower than last year , but at the same time - and sometimes we have to look at it from the positive side - we can see that feed prices are much more stable than back in 2007 and 2008 .
Though exports are below the 2008 level , we expect them still to be much higher than in 2007 .
All in all , I do not see sufficient justification for introducing an additional market instrument at the moment , but I can assure you that we are monitoring this situation very carefully .
As regards fruit and vegetables , the economic crisis has led to lower domestic consumption , and also we have seen a certain decrease in some export markets .
This has affected the fruit and vegetable prices that producers obtained .
However , given the characteristics of the sector , we decided in the last reform on fruit and vegetables that the way to tackle the challenges faced by the sector is to make producer organisations more attractive and also make them responsible for crisis management .
Producer organisations account today for 40 % of the total output of fruit and vegetables .
They can associate into economically stronger units also on a transitional basis , which is significant , as today 's crises do not recognise national borders .
In the 2007 reform , we provided incentives for producer organisations to do this .
We also equipped them with new crisis management tools , like green harvesting or non-harvesting , which complement the traditional withdrawals .
We have also created a legal framework enabling fruit and vegetable producers to influence and stabilise the market , but there is a need for more bottom-up action , for which the Commission cannot take the responsibility .
I therefore encourage the creation of producer organisations , and I think that Member States and farmers should take a look at the number of producer organisations you have in different Member States .
It is not very wise if you have producer organisations competing against each other instead of competing against the retail sector .
Olive oil prices reached a record level four years ago due to unfavourable climate conditions .
Since then , three consecutive satisfactory harvests and the economic crisis have led gradually to very low prices .
For this reason , the Commission reactivated private storage aid earlier this year .
We saw that the market reacted immediately and prices recovered steadily .
Despite the good harvest forecasts - the fourth in a row now - stocks at the beginning of the harvest stood at a low level .
As far as we can see , consumption will recover .
To summarise , I see some timid signs of recovery .
I agree that close monitoring of the situation is needed and that this will allow action where necessary .
This is a quick run-through of the short-term measures , but let me assure you that we are also looking into the medium- and long-term issues , in particular , at matters like the distribution of the value added in the food chain , and also how to deal with price volatility .
I am sure we will come back to these important issues as well .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , last year , and this year , too , dairy farmers made their concerns known very loudly , including in Brussels .
The impression you get from the media is that it is only the dairy farmers that are in a difficult situation .
The fact is that other farming sectors are also affected by this .
In contrast to our dairy farmers , the pig producers , pig fatteners , poultry farmers , fruit and vegetable growers , wine growers and even cereal farmers are used to there being good and bad years and therefore do not make their voices heard so loudly .
Nevertheless , I think that it is good for us to highlight the situation of these farmers today , too .
Commissioner , you said that the financial and economic crisis has affected the whole of the agricultural sector and that we ought to consider how we can respond to this .
When talking with the farmers affected on the ground , I hear the same things again and again : by and large , they say they are coping with the markets , apart from situations where it is extremely difficult , like it was last year and is this year for the dairy farmers and others .
However , what the farmers do not understand is that we in Europe are burdening them with ever more red tape .
They say that they want to work their land and feed and care for their animals rather than spend the whole day keeping books and records about what they are doing .
For centuries , our farmers have produced food without keeping vast quantities of records .
The yields on the land have increased , the performance of the animals has improved and today , we inundate our farmers with red tape .
I have recently read that the agricultural ministers are discussing a reduction in red tape .
Our farmers hardly dare believe this anymore .
I hope that we can finally make some progress on this and allow our farmers to do what they do best , in other words , produce food - healthy food for half a billion people .
We should support them in so doing and ensure that they are able to achieve this in future .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , here we are once again discussing the crisis in the agricultural sector .
In recent months , Parliament has spoken several times on the difficulties that have seriously beset the milk sector , and asked the Commission and the Council to take urgent action .
We have achieved results , albeit only partial results , but on the basis of these initiatives , a special fund of EUR 300 million has been made available to deal with the emergency .
However , we must now take note that the crisis that has affected the dairy farming sector is rapidly extending to other sectors of European agriculture , with the wheat , olive oil and fruit and vegetable markets showing alarming signs , as Mrs Fischer Boel has just said .
As for milk , we are facing a cyclical phenomenon that goes hand in hand with the difficult economic situation that has inevitably resulted in a fall in demand and in the ensuing stagnation of the markets .
This crisis is starting to take on a decidedly worrying dimension , as demonstrated by the numerous protests led by farmers in many regions of Europe .
These are symptomatic of a pressing and alarming situation and of widespread concern for the future of the sector as a whole .
That is why , at the last meeting of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 1 December , we decided unanimously to invite the Commission to the House to report to us on the status of the crisis faced by our agriculture and the trends that the various productive sectors are going through .
On this front we expect , first of all , the Commission to make use of all the measures at its disposal to stabilise the market and to stimulate the recovery of consumption but , at the same time , we believe that this opportunity should also be seized upon to look to the future , and help guarantee that the common agricultural policy will continue to be an important European policy , which will look after the interests of all citizens and all European regions , from northern Sweden to southern Cyprus .
Farmers expect immediate answers , and today we are here to accept responsibility to speed things up , to tackle the crisis in a decisive manner , and to put the lessons of recent experiences to good use , thus avoiding wasting time and quickly remedying a situation that is in danger of becoming even worse .
We would like to receive an answer and also news from the Commission in this regard .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the outline of the situation .
However , I want to concentrate on just one area where we can act , and that is the low-level presence of unauthorised GMOs in feed imports and its impact on the EU feed industry , because this is an over-arching issue .
I sent a letter to President Barroso - signed by a number of MEPs - and he replied that the Commission have moved quickly to authorise three modified GM products , and a fourth on the way .
However , we are still playing catch-up .
The problem next year will be Brazil : they have streamlined their approval system down to 22 months , and the problem will not go away .
We are all aware that the agri-sector is beset by low margins , and the least , I think , that EU farmers can expect is that the cost of inputs should not be increased by the failure of the EU to act sufficiently quickly to establish authorisations .
It is one thing to have poor output prices , but it is a double penalty when inputs are not available at world market prices .
In Ireland , since May of this year , the extra cost of delayed authorisations has been EUR 23 million .
Finally , the issue of low-level presence will always be with us , and , while speedy functioning of the authorisation system will improve the situation , we still need a technical solution .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Fischer Boel , you gave a very brief response on the subject of the crises and I did not hear you mention any possible solutions to these crises .
The crisis is not only in the dairy sector , that is true ; we also have a crisis in the cereals sector , there is further concentration in the vegetables sector , and in the last ten years , we have lost 50 % of our pig producers .
This is not only due to the fact that we are experiencing an economic crisis , Commissioner , but also to the fact that the orientation of our agricultural policy has been wrong in recent years .
You would really have to say now that liberalisation has failed and that the world market approach is not the answer for agriculture .
The next few years will be crucial in terms of where our agriculture is heading .
We are therefore thankful that , in Paris , the 22 agricultural ministers have clearly indicated where it should be heading .
There is much that we agree with here .
We need reliable planning in agriculture , and agricultural policy must be sustainable .
That is something that we have also advocated for a long time .
The prices are falling for farmers , but not for consumers .
That indicates that our agricultural policy only really serves the interests of the large concerns .
You quite rightly said , Commissioner , that we need to strengthen the position of farmers in this regard , but you always refuse to give an answer to the question of how we should actually do this .
We will try to provide answers to this .
It will , in fact , be crucial over the next few years .
Farmers must not merely be producers of raw materials .
They need to actively seek market power and , in this , producers need our support .
Constant pressure on prices in the agricultural sector will lead to poor quality produce .
Ever greater industrialisation in the agricultural sector will result in the continued loss of biodiversity , and industrialised agriculture will also increase CO2 and methane emissions .
To talk of climate protection , but still continue along the path of industrialisation cannot be the answer !
Therefore , we , as Parliament , must take our job very seriously over the next few years .
We hope that our cooperation with the new Commission will be constructive .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , we all understand the concerns of many of the other sectors within agriculture , and they almost certainly thought that we were placing far too much emphasis on trying to resolve the problems facing the dairy sector .
But those of us who were involved in it knew there was no alternative , that the dairy problems had to be resolved , and hopefully we are now on the way to resolving some of the problems that part of the sector faced .
We must now focus on other areas .
We have spoken about the problems facing the grain farmers , for instance , who have suffered the lowest prices in many a long day - and in my area , potato farmers and apple growers too .
Indeed , I can give you a list of other areas where there are serious problems .
But one of the greatest problems - and here I want to come back to support what Mrs Harkin said - is the delay in approving new strands of GMO grains for imports into the European Union .
We are driving up the cost of feed , which is hitting our pig farmers , our poultry farmers and our beef farmers , and speeding up those approvals would go a long way to helping the situation .
We are in major danger of over-bureaucracy , red tape and legislation strangling our farmers ; you will see that on 1 January when you implement the CPID which , in my opinion , is a total waste of time .
The mid-term review brought us many changes , and we are about to embark on even more .
But I think we need to re-examine the effect these changes have made in the industry .
I know from experience in my area that many sheep farmers and suckler cow farmers are simply leaving the industry .
This is a very worrying trend .
We need to look at both these sectors , at how we are actually supporting them .
Can we do more for them ?
Can we keep them there ?
Because we should remember that many of these sectors , such as sheep and suckler cows , are in environmentally sensitive areas , they are in mountainous regions and areas where there is no alternative , and I think we need to have another look at how we are supporting those parts of the industry .
Madam President , Commissioner , you said that the agricultural crisis is deep , which we already knew .
Indeed , small- and medium-sized farms can no longer cope .
However , Commissioner , this is not the result of a technical problem , but of the policy of deregulation that you have pursued , of the undermining of the fundamental principles of the common agricultural policy , your refusal to return to paying minimum prices for work and your comprehensive free-trade approach that goes against the very principle of Community preference .
The time has come , on the eve of a new period of reflection on the common agricultural policy , to consider agricultural work as a mission of general interest , contributing to the common public good .
A new agricultural policy must also therefore be a food , environmental and territorial policy .
We must first identify the objectives and the direction of this policy before deciding on budgetary aspects .
In any case , this would mean paying guaranteed basic minimum prices for work done and lead to a productive agriculture industry that adds value and provides employment , encouraging agricultural development that respects food sovereignty and combats famine .
Today , all the evidence points to the fact that social , environmental and health effectiveness depends on agriculture on a human , individual farmer scale , not on an industrial scale .
These should be the subjects of our debates if we are finally to end the agricultural crisis .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the current crisis that the agricultural world is enduring is the obvious result of the rapid territorial expansion that the European Union set in motion in recent years and , above all , the excessively quick globalisation of the markets .
The agricultural sector must be safeguarded and protected , by applying the principles of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , in particular , Articles 32 to 38 , with particular reference to the objectives which , in order to be achieved , must follow specific legal rules .
In this sector , the rules that govern intervention in the event of a market crisis do not allow us to make a significant response to the requirements of the agricultural sector with specific protection of farmers , at an extremely difficult time that affects agriculture as a whole and , in particular , the fruit and vegetable sectors , such as , for example , apples and peaches , and cereals , such as wheat and maize .
Farmers must not only be helped , but they must also be guaranteed market protection , as laid down by the fundamental rules of the treaty .
Unfortunately , this currently only occurs on a limited basis .
We have seen it before with the milk crisis and with the current fruit and vegetable crisis , for example .
It is now time for Europe to take more incisive decisions so as to give truly 360-degree support to our farmers , our farms and our land , which , unfortunately , is all too often neglected .
It would , then , be better to think seriously about what is being done in the European market to promote our agricultural products in the face of those from outside the Union and , I would repeat , for fruit and vegetables in particular .
By creating specific rules , which must , though , be respected by the whole European Union and which we must ensure are also respected by those third countries with which we have significant trade in agricultural products , we will perhaps be able to begin having a market that is less distorted and could better protect our farmers and the EU 's agricultural products .
( EL ) Madam President , sectors of the rural economy are really suffering : wheat , olive oil , fruit and vegetables and cotton .
You should know that anger is rife among peach producers in Greece .
I need only tell you that , as we speak , approximately 200 000 tonnes of peach compost have remained unsold .
The situation in the wheat sector is still critical and the facility for public intervention in the Member States needs to be activated at once .
We must support protected designation of origin and protected geographical indication products .
Livestock farming is also facing a huge crisis .
The dairy sector has been mentioned and we have quite rightly taken an initiative to protect it .
Livestock farmers in northern Greece have blockaded the Evzona customs post and one of their reasonable demands is for the name of the place of origin to be included on labels for dairy produce .
In my opinion , including the place of origin protects both producers and consumers .
We need more measures to promote agricultural products , both within the European Union and outside Europe , in third countries .
We need to rationalise the markets still further and monitor the transparency of the supply chain in an effective manner and we must reduce any gap between producer and consumer prices .
As I maintained within the framework of the debate on the 2010 budget , it is especially important to maintain a satisfactory margin of agricultural spending in the budget in order to meet unforeseen requirements in other agricultural sectors .
( HU ) Almost the entire agricultural sector in Europe is in a state of crisis .
This has been caused not only by the global economic crisis and recession , along with a contraction of domestic and external markets , but also by the common agricultural policy , a neo-liberal policy which the European Commission has continued to pursue in previous years .
This has made a major contribution to the present crisis .
If the agricultural sector already has such huge profitability concerns , what will happen if the agriculture budget is slashed after 2013 , which many people want to see ?
This will raise a question mark over food supply security in Europe .
The current situation is particularly alarming for livestock farmers , pig farmers and producers of fruit and vegetables .
I welcome that the Commissioner wants to provide more money to the producer organisations , but this is still not sufficient to resolve the sector 's concerns .
Another alarming fact is that the European Union has become a net importer of beef for the last six years .
We are now at the mercy of external markets .
Madam President , if you want to know how tough it is for farmers , just take a look at the UK Government 's modified low-income threshold .
This is the level below which a family is deemed to be living in poverty .
The latest figures in the UK show that one quarter of all British farmers fall into this category .
But helping farmers is not just about agricultural policy .
We should be working here in a holistic way .
Consumers want to buy high-quality food that is produced as close to home as possible .
The European Parliament must listen to consumers ' demands for clear country-of-origin food labelling so that they can be sure where their food comes from .
We already have country-of-origin labelling on many foods , and there is no reason why mandatory country-of-origin labelling should not be extended to the remaining sectors , including the main ingredients of processed food .
We have that opportunity coming up in this Parliament early next year .
Let us make sure we take it .
( PT ) Over the years , and through successive amendments to the common agricultural policy , we have warned about its consequences and tabled alternatives .
Unfortunately , no one would listen , and today we have ended up in a disastrous situation , as is the case with Portuguese agriculture .
We warned against the consequences of liberalising international trade in agri-foodstuffs .
We said that agriculture cannot be treated like some kind of industrial merchandise , and it should be left out of the World Trade Organisation 's talks so that it does not become exposed to stock market and financial speculation .
We have always said that food sovereignty and security should be prioritised and due recognition should be given to those who work the land .
That is why we have opposed cancelling production aids and ending milk quotas .
We have always pointed out that agriculture in the southern EU countries has special characteristics that need to be respected if we are to safeguard their production of high-quality foodstuffs , including wine , olive oil , fruit and vegetables , and rice , as well as meat and milk produced under very different conditions from those prevailing in other areas .
We therefore insist that these policies must be revised to take account of the high prices of production factors , such as diesel , electricity , fertiliser , feed , credit and insurance .
We need to help farmers by adopting policies that support producers and create jobs in rural areas .
It is time to prioritise family farming and the countryside - which is becoming more and more deserted - as well as regional produce and native species .
Our farmers deserve it , because they are the ones who produce what is required to feed us .
Madam President , it looks as though I have temporarily joined Mrs Harkin 's fan club by drawing your attention to the underlying crisis in the livestock feed market with reference to minute traces of GM material that might be found in a 60 000-tonne cargo of soya beans .
If these traces are not from an EU-authorised variety , the cargo is not allowed to unload .
The cost to the shipper in such an instance amounts to GBP 2.3 million , but there is also severe disruption down the line with lorries returning empty to feed mills who then have the problem of sourcing alternative protein at very short notice .
After immense pressure on this subject , the EU Commission has approved four more varieties of GM maize that they regard as a safe contaminant .
It can take several years for such approval to take place whilst , meanwhile , new GM maize varieties are being adopted by farms in America all the time .
This problem will resurface again within a year or so .
At present there are also several GM flax and cotton products which can easily be inadvertently mixed in trace amounts amongst a large cargo of soya , and they will also cause a shipment to be refused .
It is perverse that , whilst there are small tolerances allowed for stones , soil , dead insects , metal filings and wood chips , there is no tolerance whatsoever for a single wholesome grain of maize .
The uncertainty that this zero-tolerance policy creates has resulted in steeply increased insurance premiums for shippers that get passed on to the livestock producer - to say nothing of the angst generated when a producer is informed that his feed order cannot be fulfilled .
This is a most unsatisfactory situation and creates an unnecessary crisis in the production of meat and eggs .
I urge the Commission to approach this whole issue in a more practical and sensible fashion by bringing in a tolerance level for GM admixture similar to that for other contaminants .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for her analysis , but I would like to stress how , in some productive sectors , there is now a crisis jeopardising agriculture in some areas of our great Europe .
In particular , the crisis that has been affecting wheat in recent months has now brought prices down to the point where they are too low to cover costs and , in many regions of Europe , there is a reduction in the areas sown for the current year , which should be 30 % , especially in remote areas that have limited possibilities in terms of alternative usage .
On the other hand , with regard to fruit and vegetables , the Commissioner pointed out an aspect that is characteristic of the new common organisation of the market , which leaves producer organisations to deal with the crisis .
Of course , the resources allocated to this within the framework of operating programmes are limited resources that are by no means adequate to intervene in the event of structural crises that are as widespread as the one we are experiencing .
They may possibly meet requirements , as you said , either by green harvesting or by destroying a small portion of the harvest in the event of small imbalances between demand and supply in normal years , but certainly not in the case of a widespread crisis such as the one we are experiencing .
The same could also be said for olive oil and for other sectors , but I believe that at this point , it is important to ask the Commission for a package of proposals , for an exhaustive proposal that covers all the other sectors which , apart from milk , have still not seen specific action to deal with the crisis we are experiencing .
( ES ) Madam President , the agricultural sector has not been immune to the difficulties suffered by the economy in general .
Months ago , we had the opportunity to debate the situation of dairy producers , but even then , many of us said that the crisis was affecting the other sectors of agriculture .
The whole sector is in a difficult situation : with low prices at source for the majority of products and many farms whose figures are beginning to fall below the profitability threshold .
This situation has demonstrated the imbalance that exists between those in the agricultural and food sector value chain .
The need to make the price-setting system transparent and to restore balance to the negotiating capacity of the parties concerned , within the framework of current legislation , are issues that are still to be resolved .
Another issue that concerns us in this difficult context is the decline in the competitiveness of our farmers who , unlike their competitors , face high production costs .
What I am asking is for common support measures to be put together , and for the solutions not to revolve around the capacity of each Member State to respond .
( DE ) Madam President , firstly , I would like to say that I am very grateful that we are debating this item today , because from the media , you might get the impression that the crisis has only been in the dairy sector .
That was , and is , not the case , and it is therefore extremely important for the farmers affected that we discuss their situation in the European Parliament today .
The economic crisis has hit farmers hard .
The last financial year was one of the worst of the decade .
For many farms , profits have fallen significantly , and therefore the situation is very difficult for many farmers .
Economic crises expose deficiencies - deficiencies caused by people .
Crises only become disasters if nothing is done about them .
It is precisely because economic crises expose human errors that we are able to address those errors .
In any crisis , there is also an opportunity , and it is of precisely these opportunities that we must make greater use .
In order to do so , firstly , the Commission must react quicker and more consistently in the event of any disturbances of the economic balance .
Secondly , we must create the necessary political framework to enable farmers to regulate the market themselves .
Thirdly , the legal authority of producer organisations must be significantly improved .
Fourthly , we must significantly improve and simplify the use of agricultural raw materials for the production of renewable energy by way of market regulation .
Fifthly , rather than merely talking about a reduction in red tape , we must actually address this problem at long last .
Thus , my appeal , once again , is the following : let us learn from the crisis and utilise the opportunity arising from it - we owe this to ourselves and , above all , to all of our farmers .
In this regard , I await a catalogue of measures from the Commission at the beginning of 2010 that we can then debate in detail in the committee responsible .
( PT ) Commissioner , I would like to thank you for being here in this Chamber again - that has been a constant throughout your mandate - even though the Commission is in this transitional phase .
The problems of agriculture have no sympathy for the whims of the political calendar , however , and farmers are expecting us to provide solutions to their problems , difficulties and anxieties .
As we are all aware , the economic crisis has also affected agriculture - not just the dairy sector , as the media would have us believe , but other sectors as well .
Milk , fruit and vegetables , cereals and olive oil have been hit hard in recent months , just as meat production had been previously , due to the enormous hikes in production costs that occurred then .
The situation for fruit and vegetables is likely to get even worse when the market is opened wider still to Moroccan products under the new agreement that is currently being adopted .
It is a fact , as the Commissioner has pointed out , that the markets have shown positive signs in recent weeks , but we should not get too excited about that because , if the upswing comes , as we all hope it will , it will certainly bring with it an increase in the price of oil and hence an inevitable rise in agricultural production costs .
Therefore , Commissioner , despite the political calendar , Parliament has to demand that the Commission provide answers to these questions .
Farmers are waiting for political signals from Parliament and the Commission , and therefore , the timing of this debate that we are having here today makes perfect sense , in the hope that the Commission can give some signals and say what information it has and what measures it proposes in the short term to mitigate these problems .
Madam President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for coming to listen to us once again , and I want to highlight just a number of issues which have been very prevalent in Northern Ireland within the agricultural industry over the last number of months .
You may have read , Commissioner , that in County Fermanagh , we have suffered extreme flooding over the last number of weeks .
This has led to very severe difficulties for farmers , not least , gaining access to stock in the fields , with many roads closed and impassable because of rain .
It will also affect their ability to spread slurry , and just the general losses that they have .
I would encourage the Commission to look into this issue and indicate whether there can be direct help for farmers in this sector .
I would also encourage the Commission to look at the potato industry in Northern Ireland .
A number of potato farmers have written to me recently because they have been very badly affected by the very high levels of rainfall in recent weeks as well .
They are expressing extreme concern about their ability to get potatoes out of the ground and , with frost fast approaching with the onset of the winter months , they fear that they will lose their crops .
So , again , this is an industry - and part of the agricultural industry in Northern Ireland - which is going thorough a very difficult time .
Just recently , I also met with a number of egg producers , farmers who are currently in the process of changing to the enhanced cages .
They would like from the Commission a guarantee that they will not be required to change those cages again for a considerable period of time , and again I would encourage the Commission to look into this .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the crisis that the agricultural sector is going through is extremely serious and is in danger of becoming irreversible .
In my region , Apulia , olive production is the main activity and one of the largest sources of income .
This year , the price of olives has fallen to EUR 30 per 100 kilograms , and the wholesale price of oil to EUR 2.50 per kilogram , and at these prices , producers are operating at a loss .
Extra virgin olive oil , green gold , which has always been the pride of my land , is in danger of turning into civil and social death .
There are roadblocks and demonstrations by farmers throughout the region .
You say that everything is in order and that prices are rising again , but I put to you another situation that I am aware of , because I experience it each day .
Urgent measures are required and I would ask that , as for milk , a solidarity fund be activated also for olive production and fruit and vegetables .
With regard to olive production , I would ask for additional urgent measures and , in particular , Commissioner , that Commission Regulation ( EEC ) No 2568 / 91 on the characteristics of olive oil be amended to include nuclear magnetic resonance imaging as a method of analysis .
This would allow us to reveal the ongoing fraud perpetuated on supermarket shelves by bottles bearing the wording ' extra virgin oil ' , which instead contain mixtures of rectified or refined oils .
( DE ) Madam President , Mrs Fischer Boel , thank you very much for your report .
This is an important signal to our farmers , who are having to live with this strained market situation .
In your report , you also referred to the fall in demand in the agricultural sector .
This is precisely why it is important to invigorate this sector and stimulate sales .
Now , more than ever , the Commission needs to recognise crises at an early stage , irrespective of the branch of production , and quickly and efficiently take steps to counter them .
I am convinced that such a sensitive sector as food production is in particular need of market instruments .
The added benefits of agriculture in the form of keeping open our cultural landscapes , care of the countryside , biodiversity and many other things besides are irreplaceable .
We need to retain all of this and to take it into consideration in our future debates on the new agricultural policy .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for your explanation concerning the variations in price for the different types of agricultural produce .
You reached the conclusion that we had to continue to monitor the situation in order to take action where necessary .
You did in fact put your finger on volatility - the number one enemy of the modern day farmer - and I would simply like to advocate the need to re-establish and maintain a public policy on pricing and regulation , and the need , certainly in the future , for this public policy on regulation to be established through , for example , a price and margin observatory that would set prices fairly for all those involved in production , be they producers , processing companies or distributors .
If , today , we let it get to the stage where pricing is being regulated privately , there will always be a mark-up for distributors , a mark-up for processing companies and a loss for producers , and therefore significant problems for local agriculture .
Finally , Madam President , we cannot ignore the fact , either , that we must also be able to negotiate with the United States - particularly with regard to the price of wheat , which is fixed in Chicago - because we are dealing with a global issue and not just a European one .
( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , it concerns me that frequently a lack of coordination means that sustainability criteria are not applied to agriculture .
I would like to ask two questions : firstly , at a time when we are experiencing desertification in southern Europe , which is seriously impacted by climate change , and given that land use is the most important thing , why is money being paid to pull up olive trees and vines ?
This means that Europe is paying to have more desert !
Are you going to stop this ?
Secondly , the agreement with Morocco : if Europe is conducting a common foreign policy , it must defend the interests of its citizens and of European production .
Europe is negotiating the agreement with Morocco on its knees , without taking into account the principle of reciprocity , without guaranteeing health and that insecticide and food quality programmes will be maintained .
How is it possible that this process is not only opening the door to products on top of the quotas , but that it is also putting quality at risk ?
( HU ) It is of paramount importance that we are now talking about the crisis affecting the agricultural sectors as several plans have been leaked on the manner in which agricultural subsidies will be phased out after 2013 .
Let us always think about how severe the consequences have been of the liberal measures implemented just recently .
Let us learn from these examples so that we do not make the same mistakes again .
The importance of agriculture will grow significantly in the coming years as the number of people suffering from hunger on our planet continues to rise .
On the subject of simplifications , unfortunately , farmers feel that every time simplification is mentioned it never actually happens .
They must comply with increasingly complex systems .
A succession of new animal welfare measures is being introduced .
All these increase the costs which their competitors do not have to contend with .
In addition , every single new animal welfare measure requires ever-greater energy consumption , which will mean ever-increasing CO2 emissions .

( DE ) Mr President , during the debate on his guidelines , Mr Barroso said that sustainability and the preservation of biodiversity would be priority policy objectives in the European Union in the current legislative term .
These objectives must therefore be pursued in all policy fields and , of course , in particular in the area of agriculture .
I would like to urge you emphatically today to promote and support those measures - and only those measures - that contribute to the preservation of biodiversity and to sustainability .
Mr President , I welcome this debate .
We cannot do much about many of the problems which have been mentioned , but others we can do an awful lot about .
Colleagues have mentioned particularly the problem of over-regulation ; that is something that many farmers mention throughout the European Union .
People also mentioned GM foods , and I totally agree with them on that : there is need for action in that area .
However , one area which I think is also important to us is the area of live exports .
There is a danger that we are going to put so many regulations in place that it will be cost-prohibitive , particularly for farmers and people exporting cattle from an island nation like Ireland .
Sometimes I think it would be interesting to compare , for instance , the travel schedule of MEPs coming here to Parliament today with the travel schedule of animals being exported overseas , and I think sometimes the stress levels on MEPs might be greater .
In that regard we would need to be very careful and not over-regulate and price ourselves out of the market .
Thank you , Mr Kelly .
Whereas everyone should be encouraged to speak other languages in this Chamber , let me note that you began your speech by saying ' Merci , Monsieur President ' .
I am assuming you were not asking for my mercy , but were trying to say ' thank you ' - not in Greek , I should add , which is ' Ευχαριστώ , κύριε Πρόεδρε ' !
( ES ) Mr President , the situation in the agricultural sector is not only of concern .
I would call it unsustainable : farmers ' incomes are declining and every day there is a greater difference between what farmers receive and the market price for consumers .
Succession is already a Utopia , and association agreements are repeatedly infringed , as in the shameful case of tomatoes from Morocco , a situation that has been recognised by the European Anti-Fraud Office with no decisive action by the Commission .
Plant health rules and controls are applied to varying degrees , creating entirely unfair situations .
If we add to this isolated cases , such as the decrease in duty for the banana sector , which is going to have entirely negative consequences , or the fact that it is impossible for livestock farmers to afford input costs , you will agree with me that the future of the sector is , at the very least , uncertain .
Moreover , for agriculture in the most remote regions , the future is not only uncertain but extremely worrying .
Farmers want to continue farming , but it is becoming more difficult for them every day .
The Commission must accept the importance of agriculture .
Face up to it boldly !
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is indeed the case that there is currently a crisis in many agricultural sectors .
There are , no doubt , many reasons for this .
One of them is probably the liberalisation of agricultural policy in recent years .
If we remove more and more safety nets from the common agricultural policy , then the price fluctuations will increase .
This is causing ever greater problems for our farmers .
Therefore , in the short term , the aim must surely be to find a solution to this crisis .
Above all , however , in conjunction with the revision of our agricultural policy , we need to consider what we can do about these price fluctuations .
Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we , as Parliament , have a duty to be active .
The fact that the agricultural ministers have met in Paris outside of the Council in recent days in order to discuss this issue is surely , in principle , a good thing .
However , in Parliament , it is our job to demonstrate our new role to our farmers .
We need to find democratic solutions for our future agricultural policy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I will now try to respond to some of the questions raised , but I think this discussion here clearly shows that there is a common understanding of the difficulties that our agricultural sector is facing .
First of all , I was a bit astonished to hear that we should have removed the safety net to the agricultural sector .
That is certainly not the case .
We actually have a safety net in place in situations where the farmers need support .
We have a continuous safety net , which is the direct payments .
That is certainly in place , and that is accountable for the farmers .
Then we have the different intervention systems , the private storage , the export refunds systems to enter into effect when we find it necessary to trigger these tools .
On simplification , red tape , bureaucracy - I completely agree with you that we should try to ease the situation as much as possible for our farmers , and that is the reason why , in the Council meeting on Wednesday , I will present to the Council some deregulation proposals to be discussed .
The Council presented 39 different proposals , and we can actually accept quite a number .
Others are more political , related to the period after 2013 , but I am sure that you would find the proposals extremely interesting .
Those that have raised the GMO issue , I presume you know that I think completely along the same lines , and I think that it is important to find a solution on a technical figure on the presence of non-approved GMs .
I expect the next Commission to present such a proposal .
It is true that the European Union is the biggest importer of agricultural products , but at the same time , the European Union is the biggest exporter of agricultural products .
This is because of the fact that we have an extremely good brand : European products are considered to be high quality on overseas markets .
Therefore , the idea that we should now protect our own production would be damaging for our agricultural sector .
So we need to go on being visible on the export markets , and I think that for the future - and I hope there will be full support from the European Parliament - we need much more money for promoting our high-quality products on the new emerging markets .
I think we can do much better , but we need a bit of support .
Then on the issue of the regulatory framework - I did not hear this exact phrase , but I think that is what is behind the comments on this issue .
Today , it is already possible for farmers to enter into a contract with the industry , with the dairy , for a certain volume at a fixed price .
It is already possible for farmers to do this .
And you know in the high level group for the dairy sector we are looking into some voluntary ways of improving this system .
Biodiversity : I completely agree that this is important , and that was exactly the reason why we included biodiversity in the new challenges when we agreed on the health check of the common agricultural policy in November 2008 .
So this has high priority , and I completely agree with the comments from the honourable Member .
On the measures : we can actually use all the tools that we have available at the moment .
But new initiatives cannot be presented by a caretaker Commission .
I am sure that you are aware of this problem , and therefore I hope that we will be able to see the new Commission in operation as soon as possible .
Next , I am very happy to see that the European Parliament will now have a role as an important player for the future , thanks to the Lisbon Treaty introducing codecision .
This is not only codecision on the pure agricultural issues but also on the budget .
So here , you will have a huge influence on the budgetary possibilities for the agricultural sector for the period after 2013 .
Though I might not experience it from this place , I can guarantee that I will keep an eye on you when you take upon yourselves the new responsibilities for the agricultural sector .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The economic and financial crisis has also dragged us into a farming and social crisis , and I therefore welcome this debate in Parliament , although it has come rather late .
Producers ( of cereals , pork , olive oil , fruit , vegetables , etc . ) are experiencing extremely difficult conditions at the moment due to the slump in demand , and they are getting very low prices for their products compared with their production costs .
There are also difficulties in obtaining credit .
These problems are seriously affecting their income .
Price volatility in agriculture is a highly complex issue that affects planning and the predictability that farmers need , with serious impacts on profitability and investment levels .
It is therefore essential to guarantee conditions for the sustainability of holdings as well as a degree of price stability , so that producers can safeguard their livelihoods by improving product quality , which will have a positive impact on the whole chain from producer to consumer .
Prospects for the Doha Development Agenda following the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission ( B7-0232 / 2009 ) by Mr Moreira , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on prospects for the Doha Development Agenda following the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference .
A few weeks ago , I had the honour of leading a delegation from this Parliament 's Committee on International Trade , which attended the Seventh Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organisation in Geneva .
Although the Doha Round - that is , the Doha Development Agenda - was not on the official agenda for this ministerial conference , the fact is that a large majority of the official delegations from the WTO member countries took the opportunity to announce their positions on the subject and state that they wanted to conclude the Doha Round by the end of 2010 .
It is public knowledge , however , that no progress has been made recently in the negotiations .
That is why I have the honour of asking the Commission the following questions on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , which I chair :
Firstly , can the Commission provide an assessment of the ' state of play ' in the main negotiating areas of the Doha Round , especially in agriculture , NAMA ( non-agricultural market access ) and services ?
What were the main achievements of the Commission at the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference ?
Which , in her opinion , are the issues that remain under discussion , and which are the most difficult subjects in the negotiations ?
Secondly , what impact will the WTO Ministerial Conference have on the ongoing Doha Round negotiations ?
How will the Commission ensure that the core negotiations are focused on development ?
Can the Commission provide an evaluation of the likelihood of a successful conclusion of the Doha Development Round by the end of next year ?
For my third and final question , how does the Commission intend to include the members of the European Parliament delegation in the ongoing Doha Round negotiations and in the WTO structure ?
Having put the question on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , I should like to end by emphasising that this parliamentary committee attaches great importance to shouldering the new responsibilities and making use of the new powers granted to it under the Treaty of Lisbon , and it would also like to establish closer and more fruitful cooperation with the Commission in the area of international trade .
That , of course , in return requires the Commission to be willing to cooperate with Parliament , starting with its reply to the questions we have put to it .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference in Geneva was an important opportunity to exchange views with all WTO members on their priorities for the organisation .
I think it is important to underline that this Seventh Ministerial Conference was not a negotiating conference : it was more a discussion on various topics .
Our priority list , of course , begins with the Doha Development Agenda .
If it can be completed , Doha will deliver a good outcome not only for Europe , but also for the whole world economy .
All of us will suffer if protectionism increases , just as all of us will gain if the economy picks up .
Doha is the best trade policy instrument available on both those fronts .
Doha would also deliver the development that so many of the poorest countries in the world are looking for .
It would do that through new rules on market access , farm reform and customs facilitation in particular .
In all areas of the Doha negotiations , the development element for the countries concerned has already been taken into account .
But , of course , we can conclude the Doha Round only if all WTO members are on board .
The reality is that the United States has serious concerns and constraints which it is discussing with the large emerging economies .
In a few months we will see how these discussions are evolving as the deadline for the G20 to conclude the Doha Round in 2010 comes closer .
I think we all agree that , if we want a conclusion of the Doha Round before the end of 2010 , we have to see modalities in place on agricultural and non-agricultural market access ( NAMA ) before the end of March 2010 .
That is the ultimate deadline .
Meanwhile , we will continue to push so that the interests of the European Union in areas such as trade and services , and protection of geographical indications , are covered .
Apart from Doha , the Ministerial Conference addressed some important issues for WTO members .
Our priorities included the need to strengthen the role of the WTO in monitoring and analysing protectionism ; WTO accession - such as , for instance , the accessions of least-developed countries into the WTO , which we certainly think must be promoted ; the rising number of regional free-trade agreements - here , we need to ensure that these actually complement the multilateral trade system ; and finally , there is the contribution of trade policy to the fight against climate change .
On many of these issues , WTO members agreed that the organisation can and should work .
So I expect this to go forward .
On your last question , of course we will keep Parliament closely informed on these developments , in particular , on the Doha Round .
The Lisbon Treaty actually offers an excellent opportunity to take our collaboration with Parliament a step further , and this will be a key priority for the Commission 's trade policy in the years ahead .
Mr President , we support the multilateral trade system and the World Trade Organisation as the guardian of a rules-based trading system and of a system which guarantees more effective management of globalisation and fairer distribution of its benefits .
It is precisely the WTO acquis which , during the current economic crisis , did a great deal to prevent its members from taking recourse to restrictive trade measures , at the same time leaving sufficient margin for manoeuvre in the aim of economic recovery .
As the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , we support the integration of the Doha Development Agenda on the basis of an integrated , ambitious and balanced outcome to negotiations .
We urge the Commission to maintain a firm negotiating position designed to really strengthen access for European goods and services to the markets of both developed and emerging economies .
As far as agriculture is concerned , I call on the Commission - and I should like you to note this down , Mrs Boel - to adhere strictly to the negotiating mandate received from the Council , which also makes the limits on its negotiating position subject to equal concessions by our trading partners .
I would emphasise the need for our position on geographical indications to be stoutly defended .
The outcome of the Doha Development Agenda needs to safeguard more effective integration of developing countries , especially less developed countries , into the global trading system .
Finally , we are calling for work between the World Trade Organisation and other international organisations to be strengthened , so as to safeguard mutual support and cohesion between trade and non-trade aspects , such as environmental sustainability , food sufficiency and security and decent working conditions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Doha talks were opened in 2001 to correct the imbalances , in fact the injustices , of the international trade system that was introduced following the Uruguay Round , when the WTO was created .
It was thus acknowledged that the Uruguay Round had not kept all the promises it had made concerning developing countries , and that the countries of the South were at an unfair disadvantage where trade rules were concerned , particularly in the field of agriculture , because these trade rules allow the richest countries both to protect their market and to continue to fund their production , including that intended for export , bankrupting many farmers of the South in the process .
Cotton has come to symbolise this situation .
In opening the ' development round ' , the WTO members have therefore committed themselves to amending multilateral trade rules in order to ensure that trade really does benefit economic and social development in every country , on every continent .
Thus we should always remember that this round of negotiations is not a round like any other , and that , even if , as in all negotiations , everyone is waiting for progress to be made on the issues that concern them - for industrialised countries , that means industrial products and services - it was agreed , from the outset , that this round was , first and foremost , about restoring the balance in favour of developing countries .
Today , in the wake of the Seventh Ministerial Conference , as before it , negotiations have essentially stalled on the slopes of Capitol Hill in Washington , just as they sank , in the past , in the sands of Cancún , and , back then , this was largely due to the demands made by the European Union .
Having demanded too much during the negotiations , industrialised countries have thus jeopardised the final outcome of the round of negotiations and the credibility even of the WTO .
Everyone is focusing solely on personal goals instead of on the overall goal , which is to create a multilateral trade framework that is based on fairer rules to encourage fairer trade , and which promotes sustainable development and the eradication of poverty .
The first outcome of this stalemate is the increase in bilateral trade agreements , which are often even more unfavourable to the countries of the South .
This is a step backwards .
The European Union must therefore adopt a clear position .
The priority is to conclude this round as a development round and not to try to outdo one another where industrial products and services are concerned .
These negotiations must not be approached in a conventional and narrow-minded manner , where everyone is simply out for themselves .
This leads to a deadlock and makes one lose sight of the main issue : the need to create a new way of regulating the international trade system that will form part of the new global governance that everyone has called for , particularly since the G20 , in order to address the real challenges of today , which are fair development on all continents , the eradication of poverty , food security , respect for social rights and decent work , and the fight against climate change .
During these negotiations , the European Union must show what it is doing to ensure that trade rules will help improve this situation in the future .
It is on this basis that each of the following points of discussion must be considered :
on agriculture : honouring the July 2008 commitments ; concluding the negotiations on procedures ; guaranteeing , in particular , special and differential treatment , respect for special products , and safeguard mechanisms ; developing agricultural support in accordance with sustainable agriculture and food security ;
on NAMA products : asking developing countries for tariff reductions - I am finishing here - that are in line with their level of development ;
and
on services : protecting the right of every country to continue to regulate its public services .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , two weeks ago , the Seventh Session of the World Trade Organisation Ministerial Conference was held in Geneva .
I had the opportunity , as the representative of the delegation of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , to attend the conference and , as co-author , to contribute to the present joint motion for a resolution .
There are four lessons that can and need to be learned from these experiences .
The economic and financial crisis also brought a sharp fall in world trade .
A speedy conclusion to the negotiations in the Doha Round is therefore crucial in order to give new impetus to the world economy .
The revival of fair and free world trade is something that Doha can , and indeed must , achieve .
The European Union has gone a long way to accommodate its partners , in particular those in the developing countries .
For example , we have promised to abolish all export subsidies for agricultural products .
Now we need to bring the negotiations to a conclusion .
For this to happen , we need a signal of political will .
In the ALDE Group , we are determined to achieve a conclusion to Doha .
Now !
It is therefore vital to join forces in order to bring the Round to a conclusion .
The European Union can and must play a leading role in this .
We should also take on a bridging role , for example , to bring together the United States and the emerging economies and developing countries , just as we call for in our joint resolution .
We must now also raise the public 's awareness .
We need broader support from the citizens .
We should emphasise the advantages of global trade , as free and fair world trade is good for all of us .
I do not see any alternative to Doha .
The alternative would be competition for bilateral agreements , which would put access for the weaker countries and the inclusion of human rights and environmental aims at risk .
That must not happen .
We therefore need a conclusion to the Doha Round now .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Doha Round has been dragging on for eight years now and the vast majority of developing countries did not actually want this Doha Round in the first place .
At the beginning , it was the US and Europe who wanted to force the consent of the developing countries by the use of the concept of ' development ' .
In the meantime , however , the negotiations have failed twice .
Only the large agricultural exporters , Brazil and Argentina , and perhaps India , are really interested in something actually happening here .
The EU , too , has also de facto taken a step back if we look at the EU 's routine demands over the last few years and also at what is now on the table for the next few years .
However , we really need to take an objective look at what has come out of the last few years , other than a twenty year liberalisation policy .
This liberalisation policy is partly responsible for the economic and financial crisis that we are experiencing .
We cannot behave as if we can carry on in the same way .
I do not want to mention the consequences for the world climate if we carry on as before and have no proper rules .
We have now had a conference in Geneva , where , in the midst of the crisis , everyone claimed that we have to carry on as before and we can simply wait until the crisis is over and then continue where we left off .
It is claimed again and again that the Doha Round will give new impetus to the economic recovery .
However , all of the figures point to this not being the case , and besides , the implementation times and periods will be much too long .
Another recurring claim is that the developing countries will then be able to share in the recovery .
However , if we take stock in an objective way , we have to say that it will not bring about recovery for the majority of developing countries , but rather the opposite .
Instead , the net effect for most of the developing countries will be negative .
We cannot therefore recommend to many of the developing countries that they cooperate with us in the middle of the crisis .
Even if none of the members of the World Trade Organisation or any of the large political groups in the European Parliament dare to say so , we in the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will say it : we call for an end , finally , to the Doha Round , which has been stuck down a blind alley for years and is completely inappropriate at this present time .
We believe that the WTO needs to work on a reform and that , in its present form , it is unable to help in resolving the global crisis .
In future , we need fair trade , not merely trade that is , in principle , free .
Looking at the agricultural sector over the last twenty years , what has this permanent liberalisation actually brought ?
It has resulted in an enormous pressure for rationalisation in the industrialised states .
Processes have been industrialised , and the developing countries have essentially got nothing out of it except destabilised markets .
Instead of giving the principle of food sovereignty its rightful status in the discussions , we have instead given absolute priority to the principle of total free trade .
For this reason , the resolution of the Greens calls for no further political capital to be invested in the dead Doha Round .
We call for a new start to the process .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are , of course , in a period of economic recession or crisis and it is unpleasant , but such crises come and go , they are a cyclical component of the market economy and they must not be used as an excuse for introducing excessive regulations restraining the economy , as such regulations will remain even after the crisis itself has ended , and this also concerns international trade .
The European Union must therefore avoid succumbing to the lure of protectionism in commercial relations , as we would damage not only ourselves through this , but especially those whom we seek to assist , in other words , especially the least developed countries , whose full integration into the global commercial system we must promote .
On behalf of the European Conservatives and Reformists Group , I would like to applaud the approach of the European People 's Party Group and the ALDE Group , who have drafted together with us a balanced draft resolution on the development agenda from Doha following the seventh conference of the World Trade Organisation .
Progress in international trade must serve this development agenda and if the US has problems with that , then the EU must take a leading role in the successful completion of the Doha Round and also in mediating the full participation of these least developed countries in world trade .
European integration began with free trade .
The EU or the European Community began as a trading zone and the European Commission - in both its current and future line-ups - will be aware , I hope , of where the roots of European integration lie and will return to them .
We should continue to mediate the full participation of these least developed countries in world trade and also the signing of further bilateral and regional free trade agreements as a supplement to the multilateral framework .
Mr President , Commissioner , the questions raised by the committee chair in this debate reflect global circumstances .
The balance of our global economic order is disastrous .
Two billion people live in extreme poverty .
Climate change has already forced more than 40 million people to flee their homes and the proliferation of global financial trading has led to the worst economic crisis in 80 years .
Mr Zahradil , we have here an historic task to initiate a completely new regulation of the global economy , guided by the aims of sustainability , environmental protection , social justice and food security .
Looking at Geneva , I can only say that the World Trade Organisation conference has failed in this task .
Despite all assurances , the opportunity that a gathering of the states might bring was lost .
The Doha mediators are clearly still operating within the framework of a completely out-of-date and - I think we should be honest here - failed negotiation mandate .
In the opinion of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , this needs to change as a matter of urgency , because the failure of Geneva and of Rome and the complicated negotiations now in Copenhagen are directly linked .
I therefore call on the Commission to work directly with the European Parliament in formulating a redefined negotiation mandate to further develop and transform the WTO .
This must include the importance of the world trade architecture in the creation of the world crises , and potentially also in combating them , whilst also addressing the necessary re-regulation of trade relations .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , the impasse on the Doha Round inevitably cast a dark shadow over the WTO Summit at the start of this month .
At a time of economic crisis , with an equally bleak outlook for 2010 , the successful conclusion of the Doha Round is a top political priority .
The estimates regarding substantial revenues in terms of commercial turnover and increases in prosperity give me reason to hope for the actual fulfilment of the Geneva commitments to make 2010 a breakthrough year for the Doha Round .
As a Dutchman , I am very curious to hear the Commissioner 's opinion on two proposals put forward by my government at the WTO Summit .
How do you view the formation of a group of ' green forerunners ' within the WTO , consisting of countries wanting to eliminate trade tariffs for sustainable products in order to promote their use ?
Also , Commissioner , do you share the opinion of the Dutch representative that the growth of the WTO negotiating system has not kept pace with globalisation ?
Might you work towards a solution ?

( FR ) Mr President , despite the obvious failure of trade liberalisation over the past 30 years , which has led to the wholesale deindustrialisation of developed countries and the impoverishment of underdeveloped countries , despite the financial and banking crisis , and now the Member States ' debt crisis , which all independent economists agree was caused by financial and commercial globalisation , the Director-General of the WTO , Mr Lamy , still wants to speed up the process of full international trade liberalisation .
All the statistics available to us show that globalisation has led to mass unemployment and salary cuts , which will end only when European salaries are brought into line with those in China or India .
Is this the economic development model that Europe should be proposing to Europeans ?
There is another model : the legitimate protection of European economies against unfair competition from low-wage countries .
This protectionism must go hand in hand with the creation of a new international monetary system that guarantees fair trade .
It is unacceptable , because it is illogical , to separate trade negotiations from monetary negotiations .
Mr Lamy and all those in favour of uncontrolled free trade are not defending the common good but rather the interests of the financial and commercial institutions that pay them .
If the European institutions continue in this direction , the crisis of legitimacy affecting the WTO and the IMF today will inevitably affect them tomorrow .
If this is your objective - to destroy European industry and agriculture and to transform our continent into an underdeveloped economic area - then do as Mr Lamy says .
If , on the contrary , you want to save Europe , then relocate Mr Lamy , as Maurice Allais , the French Nobel Prize winner for Economics , is insisting .
This is the only relocation that Europe could welcome .
( HU ) The European Union 's trade deficit has increased alarmingly three and a half fold in the last five years .
A trade deficit increase of this magnitude is unsustainable .
The EU 's trade with China is responsible for half of this trade deficit increase .
It has decreased significantly as a result of the global economic crisis , but half of the remaining deficit , and in fact , the entire trade deficit recorded for the first half of 2009 is equivalent to our current trade deficit with China .
I recently read a book by an American author which describes the following scenario .
Fish caught off Europe 's shores is frozen and then shipped to China .
Over there it is thawed , filleted , frozen again and shipped back to Europe .
This is done because wages are so much cheaper in China that it is worth the huge energy consumption to freeze , ship , freeze and ship back the fish to Europe .
Every single job lost in Europe is responsible for an increase in CO2 emissions of many hundreds of kilos .
The current trade system encourages the growth of CO2 emissions .
Rising European unemployment means greater CO2 emissions .
Since the signing of the Kyoto Protocol , China has trebled its CO2 emissions because there are no sanctions linked to this .
The new WTO regulations are only acceptable if they also integrate climate protection aspects .
If we want these regulations to prevent the rise in CO2 emissions , instead of encouraging them , sanctions are required .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the aim of the Doha Round was clear .
It was supposed to be a round to promote development , a round allowing developing countries to correct the imbalances created by the liberal policies implemented to date within the framework of the notorious Washington Consensus .
It is not surprising - although I deplore the fact - that during this crisis period , positions favouring equitable trade are on the retreat .
In the face of the United States , which will not move until the health reform has been passed , and in the context of growing opposition from trade unions and the main industrial lobby groups , Europe is not managing to shift the boundaries , and it is therefore unlikely that an agreement will be reached soon .
The majority within this Parliament is therefore taking advantage of the fact to return to its ideology , that of aggressive trade , based solely on the interests of gaining greater market access .
Blame the crisis .
In acting in this way , in seeking , above all , the opening up of the markets and the removal of all barriers to trade , those on the right wing are , in addition , completely forgetting that it is in our interests to have strong trade partners that are fully integrated into the system of world trade .
The reality is that no developing country could end up strengthened by such an agreement .
Together with Mr Désir , our group 's rapporteur on this resolution , we have tabled several amendments to the joint compromise text produced by the right-wing European political parties .
Of course , I would like to see my own group 's resolution adopted , but this will not happen .
That is why our amendments make several points .
Firstly , it is absolutely vital that public services remain outside the framework of the negotiations , because they relate to people 's fundamental needs and cannot be left to the markets .
Next , special treatment should be given to products which are sensitive for developing countries , particularly in the agricultural sphere .
The food crisis has been swept out of people 's minds by the arrival of the financial and economic crisis .
Let us not forget that food sovereignty should be our absolute priority , the first of the Millennium Development Goals .
Finally , we believe that the public intervention area in developing countries should be maintained , not only by ruling out any liberalisation of public contracts , but also by protecting new industries .
These few points , which are not an exhaustive list , are the absolute minimum in order to ensure that the Doha Round will truly promote development .
If they do not appear in the final text , I will call upon my group to vote against it .
( Applause )
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to point out that several months ago , outside a meeting of the World Trade Organisation steering committee , of which I am a member , a colleague from Namibia expressed his disappointment that the prices of certain European agricultural and non-agricultural products in Namibia are lower in comparison with local products .
This is one of many market distortions for which Doha must provide a solution .
In this regard , we , as the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , tabled an amendment that calls - not only with reference to Europe , of course , we are very much addressing the United States as well , as the Commissioner is well aware - for all forms of export subsidies to be completely abolished , and in short order .
Secondly , on the issue of services , among the many things to be said , I would point out that a clear distinction needs to be made between services and public services .
We need to fight and make a commitment in the context of Doha in order to attain liberalisation of services , which often means taking on veritable national oligarchies that stifle development of local economies .
These national oligarchies exist in the communications sector , the banking sector , the insurance sector and others .
We must really try to draw a distinction here from everything that instead concerns public services which , of course , must be the responsibility of the national state .
Thirdly , a point that has not yet been raised : we are now in the era of the Treaty of Lisbon and so I call on the Commission here , just as our compromise resolution does , to review the interinstitutional agreement .
We must come to a wholly new modus vivendi in relations between Parliament and the Commission so that Parliament is kept fully abreast of any negotiations and of the various stages of negotiations , so that Parliament can adopt recommendations during negotiations , and so that Parliament can play a full and responsible participating role as is the case , moreover , in other , though similar , negotiations with EU accession countries .
( FR ) Mr President , on 5 December , Maurice Allais , the economist and Nobel prizewinner , said that the true origin of the crisis lay with the World Trade Organisation and that reform was required as a matter of urgency , his analysis being that current mass unemployment was due to the wholesale liberalisation of trade - a liberalisation which benefits only the rich .
Deaf to the suffering of the people , the WTO , the G20 and the Commission persist , just to please international finance and the large capitalist multinationals , in wanting to complete the Doha Round at any price and in declaring an absurd war on protectionism .
In order to achieve this , they do not hesitate to falsify economic history , by ascribing the crisis of 1929 and the Second World War to protectionism .
They take disgraceful cynicism to the furthest degree , claiming to be doing this in the interests of the poorest countries .
As Maurice Allais and clear-headed economists show , the total liberalisation of trade causes competition that pits everyone against everyone else as well as relocations , giving rise to pay restrictions , mass unemployment , and thus a crisis in our economies .
If we do not react , universal free trade will end up ruining our civilisation much more quickly than global warming .
It is urgent and essential for us to embark on a path of moderate protectionism , which is reasonable , socially just and equitable , representing a mutually advantageous cooperation for different peoples and continents .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a revolution in democracy .
I recall very clearly that the debates that we are hearing today started ten years ago in this House .
I would appeal to you , Commissioner , to take particular account of what Mr Désir has said , but also of what the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and some of the Members on the left have said .
Do you not see that , with the approach with which the European Union has entered the negotiations , we cannot , as honest brokers , overcome the imbalance in relation to what we are currently seeing in Copenhagen , and that in reality , we need a new approach ?
In much of what they are doing today , the developing countries are no longer developing countries .
They are emerging economies , industrialised countries and very self-aware .
If we , in Europe , do not succeed in daring to start anew with fair requirements , then we will end up exactly where we do not want to be , namely with protectionism and with a repeat of 1933 and subsequent years in Europe .
( RO ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I do no want to get into an argument with some of my fellow Members who have spoken before me , but I believe that the role of the World Trade Organisation has become all the more important as the current complexities affecting the economic environment require a multilateral institution to oversee commercial practices .
The World Trade Organisation will continue , via the Doha Development Agenda , to improve conditions for global trade and investment by applying clearer rules .
Given the important role played by the Doha Development Agenda in economic growth and in the reduction of unemployment and poverty , I believe that the Agenda must be concluded during 2010 and the development criterion maintained as its central pillar .
The Agenda can then become a solid framework for coordinating the activities of numerous economic players , helping us to emerge from recession and undertake economic reconstruction .
Finally , I would like to recommend that the European Commission provide the European Parliament with regular updates about the relevant stage in the negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the Commissioner , in particular , for very clearly laying the European Union 's ideas on the table in the negotiations in Geneva , because , for us , the Doha Round is about providing a new framework for the global economy , which is undergoing this crisis .
I do not think that it is particularly easy for 153 States to agree on a common solution , but for small and medium-sized enterprises , in particular - and these form the backbone of the European economy - trade facilitation , of course , is one of the most important points that we need to get across if we want to enable worldwide economic growth of 2-3 % in future , too , in order to be able to secure employment not only here in Europe but also in the many poor countries of this world .
It is therefore also important for us to protect the products that we produce , particularly in agriculture , by means of designations of origin , so that the added value can also be duly exploited locally .
( FR ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to report an alarming fact and propose what might be a remedy for it .
Firstly , the alarming fact that I have found out is that the WTO is in the process of lamentably failing to attain the goal for which it was created and established , that of reducing poverty - in the poorest countries - as has been pointed out on several occasions here .
Now , today , a billion people are suffering from malnutrition , of whom 700 million are , paradoxically , farmers .
The remedy , from the agricultural point of view , is that we must without doubt put a stop to monoculture intended for exportation , particularly in the continent of Africa , and give priority to subsistence agriculture in these countries instead of prioritising international trade .
Either we go on in the same way and the continent of Africa will continue to go under , or we radically change direction and can start to breathe , particularly in Africa , and , I say again , this will be through subsistence agriculture , which must take priority over international trade .
( PT ) It is time to change priorities in international trade and to reject free trade on the grounds of the negative contribution it has made to the financial , economic , food and social crisis that people are now experiencing , with growing unemployment and poverty .
Free trade only serves the interests of the richest countries and the main economic and financial groups .
A profound change is needed in the negotiations to prioritise development and social advancement , the creation of jobs with rights , and the fight against hunger and poverty .
That means abolishing tax havens , investing in food sovereignty and security , supporting quality public services and respecting the right of governments to preserve their own economies and public services , particularly in the areas of health , education , water , culture , communications and energy .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to refer to what one of the honourable Members said - that the European Union should be the honest broker in these negotiations .
I do not disagree but I do not want the European Union to be the only banker in this round .
There is a broad recognition that the European Union has played a crucial role in keeping the train on track .
The reason for this is that in previous rounds , we have been very vulnerable because of our agricultural sector , and this has not been the case in these negotiations .
We have put a strong offer on the table and this has meant that we are now in a very favourable situation .
But I have to say as well - not only here , but I have said it elsewhere , including in the negotiations in Geneva - that the European Union is not going to give any further concessions in agriculture .
We have stretched to the ultimate limit of what we can do and this actually has been recognised .
The Doha Development Round was certainly meant to be a development round .
I think that the negotiating text on the table today shows that , if we conclude this round , it would indeed deliver on development .
For instance , the market-opening obligations for developing countries will not be the same as for the developed countries , and the poorest countries - the least-developed countries - will not have to open their markets at all .
The European Union has supported this flexible approach .
Today , the European Union is the only industrialised bloc that has completely opened its markets for the least developed countries with duty-free , quota-free access in all areas .
No other industrialised countries have done as much as we have , but these blocs will be forced to do the same as we have if we can conclude this round .
Regarding whether the agreement is good enough ; I think that being able to get consensus between more than 150 different countries with totally different approaches probably will mean that you would never get the best of all worlds .
But I think that the offers on the table from the European Union are strong and will certainly result in benefits to global trade .
Finally , can I just reiterate the willingness and openness of the Commission regarding the new role that Parliament will play in the future on cooperation and transparency within the discussions that we will certainly be having on trade issues for the future .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Ladies and gentlemen , trade can be the basis for lasting and fair development .
We will not eliminate poverty and hunger from the world without the help of the market .
Those who think differently sentence the poor to the perpetual use of aid , perpetual dependence and perpetual uncertainty as to the future .
Only building a true market economy can pull poor countries and their residents out of the trap of contemporary dependence .
Globalisation can be a blessing , and not a curse .
Suspension of negotiations in the Doha Development Round of the World Trade Organisation has done most harm to developing countries .
This is all the more distressing because it has happened at a time of food , fuel and economic crisis .
We should do everything possible to restore trust in the multilateral system of trade .
If a solution to this problem is not found , the poor , the excluded and the threatened will be left where they are . Thank you very much .
Concluding the Doha Round remains a problem , and the Seventh Ministerial Conference held in Geneva at the beginning of December did not create the conditions by which to strengthen the multilateral framework of international trade .
The fact is , the WTO 's work is crucial to the global economic recovery .
The post-crisis world , which will be a world of interdependencies , will thus have to protect itself from economic nationalism and excessive protectionism by focusing on the regulation and preservation of a fair trade environment .
Now more than ever , we must remember that our objective is the ambitious and balanced conclusion of the Doha Round .
Through its constructive proposals on the agricultural component ( numerous concessions and a thorough reform of the CAP ) , the European Union can be considered to have made a vital contribution that moves it closer towards an agreement .
Therefore , these numerous concessions must now be matched by progress in relation to Non-Agricultural Market Access ( NAMA ) and services .
The WTO is an international body that can help to combat inequalities and to strengthen the trade capacities of developing countries .
Nevertheless , it must be able to be reformed and to take account of the interactions between trade and sustainable development .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Sweden-Volvo ; Austria-Steiermark ; Netherlands-Heijmans ( debate )
The next item is the report by Reimer Böge , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Sweden - Volvo ; Austria - Steiermark ; Netherlands - Heijmans - C7-0254 / 2009 - .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are , in fact , once again debating a proposal for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The periods between these reports are getting shorter and shorter .
This time it relates to applications from Sweden and Austria in connection with redundancies in the automotive sector and from the Netherlands in connection with redundancies in the construction sector .
I would like to remind you once again that the purpose of this fund , with an annual ceiling of EUR 500 million , is solely to help workers who suffer the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to support them exclusively through further education and training and the opportunity to get appropriate work once again .
For us , it is once again important in this connection to emphasise on a general note that , in future , only single proposals or single reports should be submitted rather than multiple applications for the mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund as in this case , which will hopefully be the last time this happens .
We would like to point out , once again , that the assistance provided by the Globalisation Adjustment Fund should not replace measures which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or collective agreements , or measures for restructuring companies or sectors .
For us , there still remains one point of criticism - and the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs will certainly not let up in this - and that is that payment appropriations are clearly being systematically transferred from the European Social Fund , but the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is ultimately a separate and specific instrument with its own objectives and deadlines .
The total amount in question for these three applications that we are talking about today and on which we must take a decision this week is EUR 15.9 million .
In this regard , the Swedish and Dutch applications are based on Article 2 ( a ) of the legal basis , namely at least 500 redundancies over a period of four months in an enterprise in a Member State .
The Austrian application is based on Article 2 ( b ) , namely at least 500 redundancies over a period of nine months , particularly in small or medium-sized enterprises .
As I said , the Swedish application relates to a total of 4 687 redundancies at the car manufacturer Volvo and 23 of its suppliers and downstream producers .
Sweden has applied for EUR 9.8 million from the Fund for this .
The Austrian application concerns 744 redundancies in nine enterprises , of which 400 are targeted for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
For this purpose , Austria has applied for EUR 5.7 million .
The present Dutch application relates to 570 redundancies in one enterprise , Heijmans N.V. , of which 435 are targeted for assistance with a total sum of around EUR 386 000 .
In accordance with the Commission 's assessment , which , after thorough examination , we are also able to support , the applications fulfil the eligibility criteria set .
Without wanting to pre-empt my colleagues in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would like to point out that this committee , as has also been agreed in the procedure here , will issue an opinion prior to the decision by the Committee on Budgets and it will also look at the details very closely .
For example , it has pointed out that , in the Swedish case , of the 4 687 redundancies mentioned , only 1 500 are targeted to receive the assistance .
In the case of Heijmans , for example , it can be established that a further 400 redundancies have occurred , mainly involving workers with fixed-term contracts , which are not included in the application .
In this regard , there are always individual questions that quite rightly need to be asked here , but which nevertheless should not prevent us from giving the green light in general for the authorisation of the funds that have been applied for .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen of the European Parliament , I would like to thank the rapporteur for supporting the proposal put forward by the Commission aimed at releasing resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in response to layoffs in the automobile sector in Sweden and Austria and the construction sector in the Netherlands .
Mr Böge , your support was accompanied by several comments , in particular , two points of a budgetary nature which I have already had an opportunity to discuss in the previous debate and which I would like to return to today .
The first budgetary point you raise relates to funding sources .
You tell us that the European Social Fund cannot be the only source of funding .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is , from a budgetary perspective , a special instrument which does not have its own resources .
Resources must be transferred before they can be released which firstly means identifying budget items that offer suitable opportunities and secondly , proposing to the budgetary authority that the sums identified in this way be released via a budget amendment .
This activity is performed on a case-by-case basis , according to need .
It is true that the European Social Fund has been the main source of funding so far .
This is not merely a result of the similar nature of this fund .
It is largely down to the fact that the fund has significant resources at its disposal .
In 2009 , the European Social Fund has almost EUR 11 billion available in resources for payments .
By the end of November , EUR 6 billion of this overall amount had been used .
The total volume of payments to the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund represents EUR 53 million in 2009 , i.e. 0.5 % of the allocated budgetary resources of the European Social Fund .
Up until now , the method we have chosen and which was , from a certain viewpoint , logical and easier than other methods , did not delay or put at risk fulfilment of the objectives of the European Social Fund .
Nevertheless , however , I agree that it is necessary to diversify the sources of payments and I can assure you that the Commission is addressing this issue .
I hope therefore that we will be able to present a number of possible scenarios to you next time .
The second point you raise is not exclusively budget-related , but relates rather to decision making , since you ask that in future , the Commission submit its proposals for releasing resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in individual documents .
The Commission is aware of the advantages of this case-by-case approach , which would completely eliminate the risk of secret agreements or guarantees , for example .
It is true that the method originally used was an entirely normal approach which , to a certain extent , facilitated administrative handling of the problems , but in my opinion , the pragmatic and political fundamentals speak very strongly in favour of a case-by-case approach and the Commission will use this method from now on .
Mr President , unusual times call for unusual measures .
With its Globalisation Adjustment Fund , a very special bespoke instrument , Europe is matching its words with deeds .
The mass redundancy of more than 700 regular workers at Dutch construction company Heijmans N.V. - not to mention the numbers abroad , for example in Belgium and the United Kingdom - calls for targeted action .
The construction sector occupies an important place in the Brabant region , which is also my home region , and the effects of this kind of mass redundancy are palpable far beyond the region itself .
Europe 's action is rightly aimed at preserving expertise and skills .
The crisis has meant people now losing their jobs even though experience has taught us that there is a great shortage of skilled professionals , particularly in construction .
A mobility centre , along with the preservation of expertise and also of jobs where possible , is a good choice of instrument for Heijmans , therefore .
The Dutch ministries and also the regional authorities , for example , those in the province of North Brabant , are now working to accelerate highly targeted investment in projects , infrastructure and construction .
We are seeking thus to show the people losing their jobs that we are providing active input , including in financial terms .
I would again point out - this week in particular , against the backdrop of Copenhagen - that we are in particularly urgent need of energy supplies and energy measures in the fields of construction and also of transport .
We have amended the rules in Parliament in other fields - I would draw your attention in this connection to the accelerated disbursements and advances from regional funds - and so an active contribution by Parliament must be supported .
A company such as Heijmans , which always focuses on continuity and quality , would also profit from this .
It is in that spirit that we give these three proposals , particularly the one concerning Heijmans , our wholehearted support .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , applications of this fund are becoming more and more frequent .
The main reason for this is the economic crisis that our continent is experiencing .
The crisis affects fundamental sectors of European industry , as shown by these three latest requests in the automotive and construction fields , which have received a favourable response .
I would like to take this opportunity to remind you that , without the latest revision to the regulation governing the fund , during which the economic crisis was added to the eligibility criteria , many of the requests currently reaching us could not , legally speaking , have been given a favourable response .
This shows that , in the face of the crisis , within this institution of the European Parliament , when political goodwill is present , high-quality political instruments are made available to our fellow citizens .
Political goodwill can still do its work , since , on reading the report by Mr Böge , I find that the essential points for improving the fund 's operation are there : speeding up the handling of requests in order to be responsive in the face of the crisis , ceasing to present requests jointly , and using funding other than from the European Social Fund .
On this latter point , the best solution would be to allocate to the fund payment appropriations in its own right , as for other funds , but we know the Council 's position on this subject and I fully understand what the Commissioner said .
I am pleased to note the convergence of goodwill .
In this regard , I have no doubt that the undeniable usefulness of this fund , combined with the will of Parliament , will mean that our aims of strengthening this fund will be achieved .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a tangible expression of solidarity with workers who have lost their jobs due to major structural changes in world trade patterns .
As Members of this Parliament , it can give us some satisfaction that we can make a contribution to alleviating some of the more immediate effects of redundancy for these workers , indeed giving them some hope for the future .
However , our role should not just be to approve this Fund .
We have a responsibility to do our best to ensure , first of all , that all criteria are met , but also to do what is in our power to ensure that the Globalisation Fund ensures added value .
One of the relevant issues raised by the Committee on Employment is that the measures proposed by Member States complement other actions cofinanced by the Structural Funds , and really we need more than a simple confirmation that this is the case .
It needs to be demonstrated that this is the case , because this will help to ensure the added value I spoke of .
Also , the added value will come from the fact that the EGF will not replace actions that are the responsibility of companies , but are a valuable addition to measures taken at national level .
While we are evaluating the added value of the Fund within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual framework budget review , this should , in my opinion , be an ongoing process , and we need to be vigilant in the area .
Another matter which is of some concern to me is the implementation of equality between men and women and non-discrimination within the framework of the Fund .
I have taken a quick look at the gender breakdown of the three programmes targeted for assistance and they run 91 % , 72 % and 79 % male .
I have looked at some of the other programmes that we have funded before this , and there seems to be an indication that there is a much greater percentage of the funding going towards male workers that have been made redundant .
This may be a statistical aberration or it may be a situation where , for one reason or another , a greater number of the applications are for male workers .
Finally , we need to carefully evaluate all applications because it is crucial that assistance is made available as quickly and efficiently as possible .
Mr President , I should like to make clear from the outset that we can endorse the use of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) for these three applications .
The applications meet the criteria , and therefore the workers made redundant are entitled to support from this fund .
Yet I should like to seize this opportunity to draw attention to a major shortcoming of the EGF .
We are currently developing a shared vision of the future of the economy and the labour market in Europe .
The various political groupings in this House may not fully agree on how exactly to do this or how far to go in this regard , but we are in reasonable agreement on the broad lines .
More sustainability and more inclusiveness are required .
If we wish to achieve these objectives , we must seize the opportunities now .
At this very time , when tackling the crisis , we must take action that brings us closer to this sustainable economy .
In my opinion , we are letting some opportunities go to waste with the present mobilisation of the EGF .
It is a crying shame that the fund , one of our instruments to confront the crisis , is not pointing the way forward .
We must dare to make real choices .
If we ensure that people who are now losing their jobs in polluting industries such as the car industry are retrained for work in sustainable sectors with a view to the future rather than remaining stuck in the past , this will make clear what direction we want to move in , and will also bring the innovative , inclusive and sustainable economy that bit closer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today we are discussing further cases involving the release of funding from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
It is a question of whether money is available to meet requests from the governments of Sweden , Austria and the Netherlands in connection with layoffs in firms operating in the automobile and construction industries .
We have approved a number of similar contributions in the past .
In my opinion , however , this is an incorrect measure and the European Union should not continue with it .
I would like to present two arguments in support of this position .
Firstly , this is an unjust measure .
Globalisation , or rather competitive pressure , applies to almost all employees and employers in small businesses in the EU .
As a result of this , many jobs are both lost and created every day in Europe .
Support relating to job losses , however , is provided in the EU at a European level only in the case of large companies where the job losses are sufficiently high .
People made redundant from small firms cannot access this form of support and it is therefore a selective and ultimately unjust measure .
Secondly , this is an issue which , in my opinion , ought to be resolved at a national level as there are sufficient resources , information and policies at that level .
Mr President , we shall vote in favour of support for the workers made redundant in Sweden , Austria and the Netherlands .
Every request to mobilise this fund , however , leaves me even more baffled as to its fairness and effectiveness .
Firstly , as regards effectiveness , the fund supported 16 000 workers in 2009 , a mere drop in the ocean of redundancies , and expended EUR 53 million out of a possible EUR 500 million .
Secondly , as regards fairness , why is a Swedish car worker supported to the tune of EUR 6 500 , while an Austrian car worker gets EUR 14 300 ?
How can I explain this to a Portuguese textile worker , whose support was a mere EUR 524 , when her Catalan counterpart can receive EUR 2 000 ?
Worse still , why is it that in the Dutch request fixed-term contract workers were left out of any support , when they are the hardest hit ?
This fund cannot continue to be used to widen differences in unemployment or to accentuate inequalities between rich countries and countries on the margins .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the European Union has set up budgetary instruments to provide support to workers who are being made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns , many of which have been influenced directly or indirectly by the European Union .
However , this represents a piecemeal approach .
Subsidising the training of those who have lost their jobs in certain industries will not resolve the situation of the said industries , nor will it help to create an alternative industry that will absorb this workforce .
This is just a waste of taxpayers ' money .
If the European Union was really looking to help Europe out of the crisis , it should be investigating and working on the causes of the crisis , but it prefers to be seen as the charity that will come to rescue the poor .
Of course , this action will initially return support for the European Union from those affected .
Moreover , the report and the motion for a resolution being proposed for vote do not indicate what the scope of this subsidy will be - i.e. how many industries it will cover and how many companies within a certain industry .
What is most worrying is that the report emphasises the need to speed up the payments of the subsidies , without ever mentioning the need to provide evidence that the funds are reaching the right people for the right purpose .
Worse still , the report does not call for regular monitoring of the effects of the subsidy , leaving this evaluation to the general assessment of the programmes within the process of the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework .
Colleagues , we are talking about taxpayers ' money , many of whom have also lost their jobs and are getting no subsidies , many of whom are going through severe financial problems .
How can we treat their money with such contempt ?
I will reject this resolution , and urge you to do the same .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the Globalisation Adjustment Fund , the European Union has a budgetary instrument that provides financial support to workers affected by major structural changes in world trade patterns .
Now , the Globalisation Adjustment Fund is also providing direct assistance to people affected in my home country .
I have pointed out on many occasions that the Globalisation Adjustment Fund must not be wrongly seen as a backup solution for multinational companies , but must go directly to help the citizens affected .
For that reason , I am in favour of control mechanisms and would like to see regular progress reports from Steiermark .
This fund is utilised precisely where society needs it most , namely to help the affected people themselves .
That is something positive that the European Union does for its citizens .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am pleased that we are today debating how we can tackle the global crisis and unemployment in particular .
Of course , it is affecting very many innocent enterprises that quite simply have too few orders coming in and thus have no turnover .
They therefore also suffer from a lack of liquidity and with that , lose their creditworthiness .
I am grateful that the focus here is on small and medium-sized enterprises in particular .
I believe that transitional assistance is particularly important to allow them to continue working and to be able to take advantage of any appropriate new opportunities on the markets .
We should carefully analyse the results of this funding to see where we have used best practice and where we were actually able to help secure jobs and , above all , where we have succeeded in reintegrating redundant workers into the labour market as quickly and as efficiently as possible .
Now it is a question of providing help quickly and therefore I also support the mobilisation of the Fund as quickly as possible , particularly in Steiermark in Austria , where a whole region involved in car manufacture is affected and where there are many suppliers involved which , of course , are particularly important for the infrastructure .
I think it is good that this EUR 5.7 million is being made available .
However , in this regard I would like to ask that , for all cases that we take a positive decision on here today , an analysis be carried out and that the money does not merely flow out , but that proof is also provided that it is resulting in restoration or that new enterprises are being set up and that active economic activity will , in future , enable this region to regain the vigour that it has had up to now . Thank you , Commissioner .
( DE ) Mr President , the Austrian application for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) concerns the former employees of a total of nine automotive suppliers in Steiermark .
If we look closer at this case , we can immediately see that it is a classic case for the EGF , namely the provision of remedial assistance .
The EGF can provide exactly that , and that is why it was set up , in other words to provide assistance to those directly affected by the negative effects of globalisation and who , through the abrupt loss of their jobs , have to suffer the consequences of the irresponsibility of financial market speculators .
Steiermark , unfortunately , is characterised by its large dependency on demand in the automotive industry .
That means that the whole region has been badly affected by the current slump in the market and , in particular , in the demand for cars .
Car sales have fallen by 59.4 % .
In this context , the EUR 5.7 million represents an excellent investment for the reintegration of redundant workers into the labour market .
In other words , this investment will enable workers to attend local employment foundations , specifically for the automotive sector , while also facilitating the implementation of measures aimed at worker preparation and qualifications .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , this week , we must express our opinion on a European Commission proposal to release financial resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in three cases : Sweden , the Netherlands and Austria .
Again we have to decide , unfortunately , over three unconnected and very different cases .
I would like to point out that the European Parliament has already asked the Commission on one occasion for individual requests for the release of resources to be presented and discussed separately .
The requests are again accompanied by a whole series of ambiguities .
In the case of the Swedish request , for example , it is not clear what volume of resources will be used and , in the case of the Austrian request , the volume of resources requested for each person losing a job is startling .
While in previous projects , sums of several hundred euros were requested per person , Austria is asking for EUR 14 300 for each unemployed person .
We remain unconvinced that the proposals correspond to the aims for which the globalisation fund was created and we do not support the release of these resources .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to use the blue card simply to rectify one point .
The support in Austria is not being granted to just one person .
( DE ) Madam President , as you can see , this is clearly an Austrian issue , and Steiermark , one of our provinces that has been hard hit , is of great concern to us , with its above-average proportion of the population involved in the automotive industry on the one hand and , of course , a disproportionately high percentage of these products being exported on the other .
The global fall in demand has resulted in a total of 744 redundancies , as has already been mentioned , and we are very pleased that 400 of the people affected will receive support through the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
That is very much to be welcomed .
In this case - and this needs to be clarified with regard to what the previous speaker said , too - it is not about subsidies for simple restructuring , it is about supporting individual workers by providing assistance with living costs and measures for further training .
In this regard , I agree with Mrs Cornelissen , who said that this further training must be particularly geared to the future .
We need to have better trained workers for the future and retraining in the areas of technology and renewable energy is certainly a worthwhile step .
Steiermark will surely be in favour of that .
( SV ) Madam President , in a debate such as this , it is worth remembering that it is globalisation that has made Europe rich , that has created jobs and generated investments .
Exports have paved the way for new businesses and large enterprises to emerge .
Imports have provided opportunities for citizens to live a good life with cheap products and services which , taken together , has resulted in regeneration .
Change on a broad scale is a constant presence , allowing new enterprises , new jobs and new opportunities to emerge .
These wide-ranging changes leave their mark right through society and we should never try to prevent them from happening .
However , we need to make the transition easier for those who are affected .
Every Member State should have a duty to ensure that the transition takes place safely and in a way that provides plenty of opportunities .
The European Union cannot provide such opportunities from a single fund .
The changes are too great and too significant .
If we think this can be resolved by means of a globalisation fund , then we are not presenting an accurate picture of the situation .
We were against the creation of such a fund .
However , when it comes to the car industry , we realise that Europe is in a special situation at the moment , with a multitude of different kinds of support at European and national level , and we are at risk not only of the distortion that comes from giving public subsidies to individual players , but also of this distortion being increased if enterprises and industry in different regions are not able to obtain equivalent support .
In view of this , we will be voting in favour of this proposal , because we have already come so far in the subsidy process that if support is not provided , then competition would be distorted .
However , we would like to emphasise that we cannot carry on like this in the future .
( FR ) Madam President , I would like to stress the fact that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund that we have set up is addressed to workers , to improve their employability .
Therefore , it is on this point that we must truly take fundamental action .
This is the approach that we adopt in examining the cases within the group on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund to ensure that workers can be included in the world of work , and stay in employment , because there is no social integration without professional integration .
The second point I would like to stress is that the automotive sector has been very seriously affected , and I call upon car manufacturers , which are being hit hard by the crisis , to adapt their products both to the new environmental objectives and to consumers ' new needs .
The future of the sector is at stake .
Finally , I call upon everyone to back the Committee on Budgets in its proposal - and I also thank Mr Böge for his proposal - and ask , as Mr Rübig did , for the effects of our policies to be monitored .

( RO ) Last year , we approved a number of similar allocations of sums from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in order to provide additional support to workers who are suffering the consequences of major structural changes in global trade patterns .
The economic crisis has had a drastic impact on global trade .
In the region I come from , I can tell you that during the last year , roughly 2 500 redundancies have been made in the iron and steel industry , approximately 700 in shipbuilding , and an announcement has been made about around 6 000 redundancies to follow in the rail transport sector .
This is why I believe that it is important for us to be prepared in 2010 for many similar applications which will come about due to the economic crisis .
The existing procedure must be simple so that states and beneficiaries can gain easy access to it .
Sweden applied in June , Austria in July and the Netherlands in August , which shows that several months have passed since their applications .
This is why I believe that the procedure must be simple .
Madam President , having sat here a few weeks ago when Parliament voted in favour of globalisation funding for my own constituents in Limerick , who were made redundant due to Dell relocating to Poland - and also in the springtime , the Waterford Crystal workers will be looking for a similar assistance - obviously I support what has been proposed here tonight for Sweden , Austria and the Netherlands .
A number of anomalies have been mentioned and I am going to repeat them very briefly .
Firstly , I think the start date needs to be looked at .
Secondly , the time span needs to reflect the length of the course , not just the particular two years , as it is at the moment .
Thirdly , concerning administration , it is very important that it is not gobbled up , particularly by government agencies .
Fourthly - and more importantly - as much help as possible should be given to entrepreneurs .
Thirty-five per cent of start-up companies in the EU have been started by people who have been unemployed .
If they are helped , they will deliver .
Necessity is the mother of invention , and I think it is very important that we give them every assistance we can .
( DE ) Madam President , if we assume that most jobs across Europe - not just in my country , Austria - are at risk due to the effects of globalisation , then we must consider , in particular , that younger workers - some of whom have not yet been registered as unemployed because they have just come from a training course or from school - are at risk as a result .
We need to take particular care - and this applies to Austria , primarily - to ensure that we use these sorts of measures to support those workers who need to be integrated into the labour market for the first time , and give them the opportunity , including with assistance from the European Union , to enter the European labour market .
Ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the debate has shown clearly that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is functioning and we are able to state that it has now been used several dozen times and it has always brought considerable benefit to the people making use of the fund .
As a Commissioner , I have always tried to familiarise myself with results in the field , which is not proper analysis of course but merely direct experience , and I was delighted to see how positively the fund is rated in those areas where it has operated .
The debate has thrown up many questions of a serious nature which demand a response and which call for a clear and realistic opinion .
First is the idea that the fund can be used only for big companies .
Experience fortunately shows that the fund can be used by anyone , regardless of whether a large or small country or a large or small firm is involved and this was our original intention .
The newly adjusted rules clearly provide the possibility for using this fund also in the case of employees of small and medium-sized enterprises which are in areas or fields affected by the crisis .
The fund thus operates without discrimination and does not disadvantage anyone .
I would also like to emphasise a fundamental characteristic of the fund , which is to help people rather than companies and , from this perspective , we cannot therefore see it as a life support machine for companies that have no realistic hope of functioning in economic terms , but rather the contrary .
The fund helps people who have been made redundant to find work quickly in those areas where it exists .
It is therefore a fund which , in principle , implements and facilitates restructuring .
Concerns over gender inequality were expressed in one speech and I think it was the speech of Mrs Harkin .
This inequality , which really does exist at the level of reports , merely proves that the crisis , especially in its first phase , has markedly affected the male-dominated industries .
Today also , we are talking about the automobile industry and the construction industry , in other words , two male-dominated industries .
In overall figures , therefore , the fund has provided more assistance to men .
The crisis has changed the structure of the labour market in a specific way and I noted the statement of President Obama , who declared that at the end of this year , the majority of workers actively engaged on the labour market in the United States would be women .
Also in the United States , therefore , the crisis has produced a very striking result in industries dominated by men .
As far as the question is concerned , there is no gender inequality at all in the concept or the structure of the fund .
The debate also threw up a number of ideas , of course , on how it might be possible to amend and improve the fund .
I have to say that the Commission does not of course regard the fund as something immutable which has emerged like Pallas Athena from the head of Zeus .
It is a human institution , which can always be made better on the basis of experience and debate .
Thus , in my opinion , there are no fundamental obstacles here .
Another question was raised on the issue of the specific method of financing , in other words , the integration of the fund within the budget as independent budget items .
This is surely a question that will be discussed at a political level but from a financial perspective , it was not possible to achieve a result in this way and , in my opinion , the fact that we mobilised resources by a different but effective method is , in itself , valuable .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that it is undoubtedly true that the amended rules and the pressure of the crisis have led to a situation where there will be more individual cases but , as I have already stated , the Commission accepts the weight of the arguments on the side of adopting a case-by-case approach and we will therefore proceed under this method .
In conclusion , I would like to thank the MEPs from the Committee on Budgets and all of the MEPs involved in this issue because it has emerged clearly from the debate that consideration has been given to all of the contentious matters that are present in every decision of such complexity .
In my opinion , it also emerged clearly from the debate and from the proposal of the Commission that all of these cases fall within the scope of the globalisation adjustment fund .
I am delighted therefore that your debate has confirmed the view of the Commission and I expect that the vote will go in the same direction , or at least I hope it will .
Madam President , I do not need to add anything to what the Commissioner said .
I support what he said , especially his concluding remarks about the question of the future development of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund in relation to the other programmes - in particular the European Social Fund - about which we will , of course , have another intensive joint debate .
It is absolutely clear that this Globalisation Adjustment Fund cannot neutralise the consequences of structural change , nor can it accept and overcome the challenges of globalisation , and that , of course , is not its intended purpose .
However , it can certainly help the individuals affected , who find themselves in a difficult situation in terms of employment after being made redundant and it can give them the opportunity , through gaining qualifications , to have prospects once more and to find work .
That is something that , in spite of the debate about subsidiarity , which of course also plays a part in this connection , we should support and welcome as a supplementary fund to all the measures under the European Social Fund , which we also have .
At this point , I would just like to say one more thing and that is that there are certainly programmes in the national , as well as the European , budgets where there are more grounds for calling into question the meaningfulness of the expenditure than there are for a fund that provides assistance directly to people who are in a difficult initial situation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday .
European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion ( Progress ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Göncz , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council on establishing a European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion ( Progress Microfinance Facility ) - C7-0053 / 2009 - .
( FR ) Madam President , I note that , throughout the previous debate , you referred to the debate that is now to take place as a debate on Progress .
However , the decision of this Parliament , confirmed by the Conference of Presidents , is that we will only vote on the ' microfinance ' facility .
I therefore think that this clarification is an important one .
This is a debate on microfinance and not on the Progress programme .
Thank you very much , Madam President , and I am also very grateful for this clarification , as it is vitally important that we are now going to talk about the microfinance facility .
I would also like to welcome Commissioner Špidla to the following debate .
Let me begin by saying that when I became rapporteur for this programme , I thought that I would have a very easy job , given the wide-ranging consensus and support on this issue , something which was also in evidence during the debate .
This support was wide-ranging in many respects .
On the one hand , as a crisis management facility , it will also help precisely those who are in the most desperate situation , who have lost their job and who cannot access credit or assistance either due to the financial crisis .
On the other hand , this is typically a facility which does not provide people with fish , but teaches them how to fish .
It triggers precisely the type of creativity which we need most from the point of view of ensuring a positive outcome to the crisis .
The third aspect which received , and still receives , wide-ranging support is the fact that the European Union 's resources are growing , which I think is the finance ministers ' dream .
Some of the resources are being contributed by the European Investment Bank , while others are coming from other commercial banks as the European Union will be primarily covering the risk , thereby making it easier for the other participants to assume the risk .
As I have mentioned , there is wide support for the programme 's content .
I think that , thanks to these aspects , the issue which provoked debate during the discussions with the Council and Commission was to do with which resources the European Union will use to finance this particular primary risk that has been assumed .
The second point of contention was the extent of the resources which could help launch the facility and can be expected to actually attract other significant resources .
The Council and Commission originally proposed that EUR 100 million should come from the Progress programme , which is primarily used to draw up policies for combating social exclusion and supporting equal opportunities .
We , for our part , said right from the start that the Progress programme cannot be jeopardised in any way since , during the current crisis , it is needed even more than before .
It is also not acceptable for us to tinker with the Progress programme to such an extent that could really jeopardise it .
Parliament was extremely willing to compromise during the debate .
We also held three informal trialogues , one of which went on until the early hours , where we proposed that we could tinker with the Progress programme in any way that would not jeopardise its function .
We suggested that , considering the original proposal , we could envisage launching the programme even with EUR 100 million rather than EUR 150 million .

Parliament 's 2010 draft budget found resources of EUR 25 million , which will enable it to launch the programme at the very start of 2010 , and it was able to find these resources without touching the Progress programme in 2010 .
We also requested this item be removed from today 's agenda because we failed to reach agreement on it .
Another matter we felt was an issue was that the Presidency arrived during the trialogue on all three occasions without any mandate , making it very difficult for it to consider our proposals properly .
I believe it is important for Parliament to vote as soon as possible on this matter , this very week even , so that this project can therefore be launched at the start of 2010 with a fund of EUR 100 million , because this conveys the message that this is a crisis management facility where speed is a particularly important consideration .
I sincerely hope that Commissioner Špidla can help us get the Commission to withdraw its original proposal on diverting the EUR 100 million from the Progress programme so that this programme can be launched as soon as possible .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin my speech my emphasising the importance of this initiative in the area of micro-financing .
The current crisis is bringing about a significant rise in unemployment in all of the Member States , the effects of which will unfortunately fall hardest on the most vulnerable members of our society .
The micro-financing instrument is specifically aimed at assisting these groups of citizens to find alternative employment and to become micro-entrepreneurs themselves .
I would like to congratulate the Committee on Employment for the outstanding work they have carried out in this area and , in particular , to applaud the contribution made by Mrs Göncz to this initiative .
I am aware of the efforts that were made in the negotiations between Parliament and the Council aimed at achieving agreement at the first reading .
In view of the fact that both bodies support the micro-financing instrument , it was possible to make considerable progress over the essential wording of the proposal .
This progress is reflected to a considerable extent in the amendments proposed today .
Of course , the most difficult question is the budget .
Although both bodies will probably approve an overall budget of EUR 100 million for this instrument , identifying the sources of the finance continues to be the main obstacle .
As you know , the micro-financing proposal forms part of a package which includes a proposal to transfer EUR 100 million from the Progress programme .
You have decided not to vote on this second proposal this week .
The transfer of funds from the Progress programme is support by the Council and , for many of the Member States , it constitutes a fundamental element of the whole package .
Without an agreement over the source of finance in this area , we will not achieve our objective of implementing the new instrument rapidly .
Today , however , we are debating the wording of the decision through which the instrument is to be set up .
In conclusion , I would like once more to applaud the rapporteur for the work she has carried out in submitting a report and amendments that will enable both of the lawmaking bodies to concentrate on the main problem that remains to be resolved , namely the funding .
rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ( ECON ) . - ( SV ) Madam President , if we are to reduce unemployment , then both the EU and the Member States must shoulder greater responsibility .
The proposal for microfinancing is an initiative that Parliament has been pushing for .
It is about giving the unemployed a new start and opening the door to enterprise for some of the most vulnerable groups in the EU , including young people .
The proposal is intended to facilitate small-scale investments and provide microenterprises with the opportunity to grow .
Following some minor amendments and clarifications the proposal received broad support from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The issue on which there has been debate is its financing , as has also been mentioned here .
The Commission proposed that no extra funds would be made available , with funding instead being taken from the Progress programme .
It has been incorrectly asserted that this opinion is shared by the lead committee , but that is not so .
That is the current situation .
I must say that I find it strange that the Council is so stubbornly rejecting our proposal for EUR 150 million during the period - a mean and miserly approach in these difficult times !
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we could sense during the previous debates as well that the economic crisis and how to emerge from it are a preoccupation for every one of us and are being given ample attention .
As the coordinator from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would simply like to confirm that we support in every single dossier tabled before us one of the most important items for us , namely , the protection of jobs and the creation of new jobs .
Let me remind you that the PPE Group has been supporting the issue of micro-credit for a long time .
In fact , it was my former colleague , Zsolt Becsey , who first tabled this topic before the House in his own-initiative report in 2009 .
This was based on earlier and current experiences in Hungary with this facility , which was called the Széchenyi card , and had the same purpose as in the current case : providing micro-enterprises with small , short-term credits .
Let us think of butchers , bakers , greengrocers or perhaps even chemists .
They are also being affected by the crisis .
They employ a huge number of people .
In some countries , this sector even accounts for more than 90 % of employees .
This is the case , for example , in Hungary for more than 90 % of firms and enterprises .
They do not need a large amount of money and they do not want to pay a great deal of interest either .
In certain cases , they need temporary working credit and temporary assistance .
The Commission 's proposal addresses this very problem and , as the rapporteur said , this proposal really has wide-ranging support and consensus .
Therefore , I think that it is important for us to agree on the issue of funding as soon as possible as well .
We also support the 35 proposals jointly submitted by the PPE Group , along with the Socialists , Liberals and Conservatives , because we feel that this provides the guarantee that we can approve this facility at first reading and launch it as soon as possible .
Madam President , I am rather surprised .
We are going to adopt an instrument that creates an innovative tool , a vital tool , to allow those most vulnerable to this crisis to face it and to come up with their own jobs in the future .
This is an instrument to be adopted using the codecision procedure , but the Council is not here .
This must be because the Council has nothing to say to us on this issue and does not consider itself bound by the European Parliament 's position .
In any case , that is the impression that we have had at times throughout the negotiations .
The European Parliament is going to assume its responsibilities .
Thanks to the cooperation and constructive understanding between all the groups , it is going to adopt the microfinance instrument , which is consistent with its actions over many years , as Mr Őry reminded us .
However , I would also like to point to the pilot projects that we initiated .
We know that in this crisis situation , the most vulnerable people - those who do not have access to the large banks to release loans to fund their initiatives - are able , through this tool , to launch their own strategies and , in a way , to create their own jobs .
I will not go back over the content , development and scope of the negotiations that have taken place .
The negotiations were held in appropriate conditions .
The issue of funding is more serious .
When you look at the initiative launched by Mr Barroso in autumn 2008 to organise the European recovery , this tool was defined as an important one to be used in achieving the European Union 's strategy .
However , the Commission has proposed to us that we should simply finance a new project by robbing a useful project that was already on the table .
We had a project to benefit support networks for the most vulnerable - the Progress project - to which the European Parliament was highly committed , and , in order to fund microfinance , the Commission is proposing to us that we should simply tap into the funds allocated to the Progress programme .
It is this sleight of hand that this Parliament does not accept , and that is why we have not concluded the negotiations .

That is why , taking a responsible attitude , we say that we are prepared to examine our proposal with the Spanish Presidency at the very beginning of January : EUR 40 million taken from the budgetary margins , EUR 60 million taken from the Progress programme , with EUR 20 million redeployed , enabling the burden to be distributed fairly .
We will then assume our responsibilities as the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs to look at how such a programme is implemented in each of the Member States , to bring about a synergy between the various experiments to be conducted in the Member States - we are sure of this - when the package as a whole is adopted in January .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I am pleased to have the opportunity to say a few words on the proposed microfinance facility .
Earlier , we spoke about the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and how it can assist redundant workers in certain sectors .
The microfinance facility is another piece in the jigsaw where the EU , in this case , is trying to ensure access to micro-credit for those who would not be able to access that credit from what we might define as the normal or usual financial institutions .
This would enable them to set up their own business and promote entrepreneurship .
In this context , I am pleased to see that credit unions , cooperative banks and other mutual financial institutions can operate the fund , because they are often closer to those who may wish to access this particular facility .
Indeed , I do not know about elsewhere , but in Ireland , the only financial institution left standing that did not require taxpayers ' money to sustain it was the credit union movement , which is a not-for-profit institution run by its members .
When we speak of social inclusion as part of EU social policy , we need to ensure that , by our actions , social inclusion is integral to the decisions we take , and this programme has social inclusion written all over it .
In this context , I want to express my extreme disappointment that after three trialogues , we were unable to reach agreement on the source of funding for this facility .
In my opinion , the Swedish Presidency did not seem to have the facility to have any meaningful negotiations on the matter .
I do not know about you but , as I said , I was very disappointed that a figure of at most EUR 40 million over three years for 27 Member States was all that divided us .
Obviously , many finance ministers did not support real negotiation .
I could not help but think that many of those same ministers allocated billions to support banks , but were unable to support other financial institutions that would provide micro-credit to those who have lost their jobs and who would have difficulty in accessing credit from the same banks that have been saved .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , micro-credits and small loans can help people who are not able to get credit through normal market mechanisms .
As has already been said , they can also help these people to set up businesses and create jobs with their ideas .
Such credits can help people to get out of a crisis if they are capable of doing so .
Micro-credits are also an important instrument for supporting the social economy .
With its diverse aspects and traditions , it has also been a recognised local employment policy instrument within the EU since 2000 .
On account of this , in 2006 , this Parliament , in its wisdom , established that resources from the European Social Fund could also be paid out as micro-credits or subsidised loans , as laid down in Article 11 of the European Social Fund Regulation .
However , EUR 76 billion is available for the European Social Fund , and with cofinancing that becomes EUR 118 billion !
Even a tenth of that would still be EUR 11 billion that the Member States could use .
However , they do not use it for micro-credits .
For that reason , the Commission created a test phase for micro-credits with an instrument called JASMINE - also financed from European structural funds , and because this was so successful , a new instrument is intended to follow in its wake .
However , this will no longer come from the structural funds , where we have billions available to us , but from the smallest of all of the European Union 's programmes , the poverty programme Progress , for which a total of only EUR 743 million is available over seven years .
It is intended for NGOs which are establishing networks in the Member States in order to provide a pressure group for the poorest of the poor .
The European Roma Information Office alone gets 50 % of its funding from Progress .
It establishes national and regional information and advisory offices and gives the Roma minority a voice , particularly in the Eastern European States .
If this House follows the Council and names this instrument Progress , as proposed in the compromises put forward by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , then the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance will not give its approval to this instrument .
We cannot allow such conjuring tricks - on one side , taking away money from the poor and , on the other , paying out ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , in a time of continuing financial and economic crisis it is necessary to support not only banks and big companies but also small firms and self-employed people .
We all know that it is these small firms , including family-owned firms , which create and sustain large numbers of jobs .
We support the creation of the new financial instrument of the micro-finance programme for employment and social inclusion which , in cooperation with the European Investment Bank , will improve the availability of loans precisely for self-employed people and small start-ups and family firms .
We agree to the release of resources amounting to EUR 100 million for securing these small loans for a fixed period .
We regard this programme as a good and effective instrument for an active policy on employment and as a good way of spending so-called European money , in other words , our money .
We fully endorse the proposal to release the necessary resources for this financial instrument from the resources originally intended for the Progress programme .
We do not agree to funding for the micro-financing instrument being obtained from reserves or from other budget chapters .
The resources of the Progress programme , which amount to EUR 700 million if I am correctly informed , are used for building up study and analysis networks .
None of the resources of the Progress programme have been earmarked for directly supporting people who are seeking work or creating jobs .
I do not doubt that it is necessary to build up networks and produce analyses and studies .
In the current period , however , which is not easy for entrepreneurs and employees , I give precedence to using these resources from the EU budget for programmes directly targeted at employers and employees .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , a microfinance instrument for the unemployed , those at risk of becoming unemployed and , above all , for people who do not have access to normal credit markets , is evidence of good intentions and is , in principle , something that our group supports .
However , what the Commission and the Council have so far achieved in this process is quite simply inadequate and , in some respects , wrong , and our group is not able to support it .
Our first criticism relates to the question of total appropriation .
What is on the table in terms of total appropriation is not appropriate for a programme for combating unemployment and can hardly be termed a microfinance programme - at best , it is a nanofinance programme !
Secondly , we are , as a matter of principle , opposed to these types of conjuring tricks which do not have the slightest effect and which are financed at the expense of other programmes and therefore simply fizzle out .
Thirdly , we are of the opinion that mentoring and coaching are absolutely essential in order for such a programme to succeed and be sustainable .
Many new business start-ups fail , in particular , in the microfinance sector , and so this must be accounted for within the programme .
Fourthly , it must be ensured that social security payments in the Member States are not cancelled if someone takes advantage of this programme , otherwise it will have no effect .
Unemployment cannot be lastingly combated in this way .
In this form , we will reject this programme .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft decision passed by the European Parliament and the Council establishing a European micro-financing instrument in the area of employment and social inclusion is , in essence , a draft which adapts the original Progress programme to the current economic reality of a Europe marked by the financial and economic crisis .
The Commission is proposing support in the form of micro-credits for small enterprises , creating a stimulus for maintaining and developing employment in crisis-hit regions .
If we wish to achieve this objective , however , we must ensure that the financial resources provided are not spent on social benefits or consumption .
They must go only to sensible , sustainable business activities through the use of objectively measurable criteria and transparent procedures .
It is therefore very important to require of the ultimate providers of the loans that they thoroughly assess the business plans of the applicants , the risks of the business projects submitted and also the return on the resources invested .
I therefore consider it highly necessary to support and complete the amendments of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which provide a sensible framework for the Commission 's proposal .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it seems strange that there should be opposition to this excellent and important programme in this House , given the worsening employment situation .
The prediction is that there will be another 10 million unemployed people in Europe next year and that those with poorer labour status will face tougher times ahead .
This data underlines the importance of investing in entrepreneurship .
It is always companies just starting up that have the biggest problems getting bank loans .
For example , over 93 % of companies in Finland are micro-enterprises with fewer than 10 staff , and yet these small companies employ 46 % of the working population .
It is only right , therefore , that the EU should establish a microfinance facility in response to this employment crisis and , in that way , also lend support to those programmes in the individual Member States which pursue the same objective .
I wish like to stress , however , that this programme will require a comprehensive approach .
The social benefit , holiday and pension systems in small companies also need to be developed in line with other sectors .
Europe is especially lacking in high-risk funding and those individuals , the business angels , who are prepared to invest in a company in its early stages .
Entrepreneurship education and connections to work and employment should also be supported at all levels of education , and there should be more young people 's workshops and business incubators and more funds available for them .
Microfinance can only work as a component of this sort of comprehensive approach , in which the situation of new small entrepreneurs and the whole environment in which they operate is one that provides real opportunities to continue in business successfully and profitably .
Madam President , I very much welcome this initiative .
Unemployment is the biggest social problem we face right now , and anything we can do to mitigate its impact is important for the well-being of our societies .
However , a proposal for EUR 100 million over a three-year period lacks ambition , in my view , given the growth in unemployment .
I am likewise surprised that the money proposed is not new money , and that we will in effect be robbing Peter to pay Paul , as has already been said , at a time when all the money we can find should be used in the Progress programme , on existing schemes .
We must do all we can to reach agreement quickly with the Spanish Presidency so that the programme can get under way at the earliest possible date .
It is equally incumbent on the Council to get its act together and to meet Parliament with regard to our concerns .
This is no time for the Council to haggle over what is a tiny amount of money .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Mr De Rossa , has it occurred to you that unemployment in Ireland has a tremendous amount to do with Ireland 's continuing membership of the euro , which means that Ireland cannot devalue , cannot reduce interest rates and cannot do any quantitative easing ?
Has it ever occurred to you that it might be better if Ireland left the euro , rather than stretching out its begging hand to the contributing countries of the European Union ?
Madam President , I have no problem at all in seeking to answer that usual nonsense from the far right of this Parliament .
Without the euro , the Irish economy would be in hell at the moment .
As I was saying , this is no time for the Council to haggle over what is a tiny amount of money given the scale of the jobs crisis , the size of the overall budget and certainly in the context of the support that Member States , and indeed the European Central Bank , have given to the banking sector - a banking sector , incidentally , which will not lend to the people that we are seeking to facilitate .
I have every confidence that if there is goodwill on the part of the Council , we can reach agreement based on the pragmatic approach of our rapporteur .
I sincerely hope they will do so quickly .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , in light of this debate , attention should be drawn to the fact that the strategy being employed by the European Commission completely ignores employment in the maritime economy .
The lack of an integrated maritime policy has , for many years , been the cause of the systematic decay of this sector in the European Union , while we should be aware that it is an enormous labour market .
In addition , the marginalised shipbuilding industry , which has been efficiently eliminated in Europe by the dumping policy of states in the Far East , has also not gained the support of the European Commission .
In my country , Poland , alone , the actions of the European Commission have led to the collapse of the shipbuilding industry and , as a result , many thousands of people have lost their jobs directly , while it is estimated that indirect job losses have been suffered by nearly 80 000 people .
However , this sector will not disappear from the world economy .
Following the pattern of recent years , it will move to countries in the Far East , at the expense of the labour market in Europe .
The lack of a strategy to return ships to national colours is extremely dangerous .
As a result of this policy , Europe is irretrievably losing huge incomes , which will flow instead to tax havens .
Another extremely important element of European Commission policy is fishing which , not uncommonly , is the only sector that stimulates non-industrialised areas of the European Union .
The Commission is concentrating mainly on reducing the size of fleets while , at the same time , failing to curb mass imports to the European market from the Far East , such as of the highly damaging panga .
At a time of crisis , European Commission policy must create the basis for development of the economy , and not hastily treat the effects of erroneous strategy .
( PT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I congratulate the rapporteur on the work that has been done in this report and on her speech just now .
This new microfinance facility will make it possible to grant micro-credit to small enterprises and people who have lost their jobs and who want to start up their own business and create their own jobs .
That is very important at a time when the economic crisis is expected to result in the loss of 3.5 million jobs in the European Union alone .
With the economic downturn , the banks have stopped giving out loans for start-ups and job creation , and access to credit is more difficult at a time when it ought to be more accessible .
This new microfinance scheme , however , will counter this current trend of restricting access to credit , by making it easier to obtain the funds needed to set up new businesses and create new jobs .
The Commission proposal is to reallocate EUR 100 million for this finance facility out of the Progress budget .
We cannot agree with this proposal .
The financial and economic crisis is also a social crisis .
Diverting resources from Progress , which targets the most vulnerable groups , is certainly not the most appropriate solution .
We are therefore in favour of creating a separate budget line to finance this facility , as well as increasing its appropriation to EUR 150 million .
We also agree with the need to make it clearer in the legislation itself that the target group is all vulnerable groups who are finding it difficult to enter or re-enter the labour market and who are facing the threat of social exclusion .
The reference to specific groups should therefore be deleted .
To conclude , I would stress that it is essential that the people who receive financial support should also be given appropriate training .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , against a backdrop of serious economic crisis , characterised by very severe effects on employment , with many workers standing to lose their jobs and , at the same time , countless young people not able to enter the labour market for the first time , it is essential that the European Union and the Member States take action , both with global strategies and with targeted instruments .
The microfinance facility is precisely an instrument targeted at people , the aim of which is to provide a response to all those individuals who , excluded from the bank credit market and having difficulty entering the labour market , intend to start a project , an economic activity , which , nonetheless , can generate individual income and thus contribute to overall growth .
In particular , if we want the micro-credit instrument to be effective and to yield lasting results , the Member States must prepare themselves sufficiently , including by establishing links at local administrative level , which is in more direct contact with situations of social crisis , and by taking an active role in making this new facility easily accessible .
It is important to stress that the long-term effectiveness of activities financed by micro-credit instruments and the possibility of fully achieving social integration largely depend on simultaneous guidance , mentoring and training programmes , which must accompany microfinance .
At the same time , given the objectives to be achieved with the micro-credit instrument , it is necessary to emphasise one crucial action , namely actively promoting equal opportunities for men and women in access to microfinance programmes .
In fact , it is women who are particularly discriminated against and disadvantaged , in terms of access to both the labour market and the conventional credit market .
Generally speaking , it is reassuring to note that the European Parliament is united and agrees on the issue of micro-credit and against such a socio-economic backdrop as this .
It is up to the Council and the Member States to show that they are serious and committed , and pave the way so that the financial situation can be set right .
( ET ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has made a proposal to create a new means of financing - micro-credit financing .
The initiative is a good and important one , but the fact that it has been suggested that the resources needed for this should be taken from the already running Progress programme is not acceptable .
I would like to remind the Council and the Commission that the people did not elect us in this chamber in order to be a rubber stamp .
At the end of 2006 , when we adopted the Progress programme here in this chamber , the Member States set their respective aims and began work .
The results from the programme were well executed , and there is no reason to think that the programme will not therefore continue running until it ends in 2013 .
The programme was and is aimed at all those groups of people finding themselves in an unfavourable position , and there has been help available for them from this programme .
Today the economic crisis is growing into a social crisis .
Unemployment is increasing month after month , and today the Progress measures remain necessary .
At the same time , however , the Commission is going forward with its desire to reduce funding for the measures , which are still being implemented .
Such an approach is not responsible , and it is unacceptable .
I am sure that we in this chamber cannot approve micro-credit financing until it is clear where the money for these measures will come from - until it is clear that the funds will be found somewhere other than from plans targeted at all those people who are suffering .
( LV ) Madam President , the economies of the EU States are still experiencing the effects of the global economic crisis , but the crisis is having the hardest impact on young entrepreneurs and managers of small enterprises , whose entrepreneurial ideas are , at the moment , not receiving support from lenders .
Economic growth takes place when new jobs are created .
New jobs are created when businesses have access to finance in order to make their ideas into a reality .
Unfortunately , in the current crisis situation , the banks do not want to lend money to enterprises because they are frightened of risk .
Private capital has also dried up .
In these circumstances , it is usually micro-enterprises and young entrepreneurs that suffer the most .
They have ideas for development , but no finance , and it is clear that if these enterprises cannot develop , then new jobs will not be created ; the creation of jobs is , however , a prerequisite for emerging from the economic crisis .
One solution to this problem is the European microfinance instrument , which plans to allocate EUR 100 million to the development of micro-enterprises and new enterprises , reallocating resources from existing sources of money .
In contrast to the large stimulus packages which , over the last year , have been set up predominantly to rescue the financial system as such , this programme is aimed directly at entrepreneurs , not banks .
That means that this money will help in the most direct way to create new jobs and will stimulate the real economy .
I call upon my fellow Members not to hesitate in taking the decision to establish this microfinance programme .
The countries of the European Union are experiencing the crisis now ; Europe needs new jobs now ; support for new entrepreneurship initiatives is needed right away .
( EL ) Madam President , the mere fact that the European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Integration won the consent and agreement of all the political groups proves how necessary this mechanism is .
It is very important that a person who has lost his job or is in danger of losing it and cannot find a solution to his problem on the conventional banking markets is able to obtain a micro-loan or micro-credit .
However , in order for the idea of microfinance to work in practice , it needs to operate properly and it needs to operate soon , meaning that on Thursday , when we vote on the 2010 budget , we need to say ' yes ' to the first EUR 25 million which will come out of the budget .
However , that is not enough .
There is another EUR 75 million which I think needs to be found from the budget because , if we take the money from the Progress programme , then it is very simply as if we were taking from the less poor and vulnerable in order to give it to the more poor and vulnerable .
If this were to happen , it would mean that the mechanism of micro funding had essentially been abolished as a concept .
If we bear in mind that ' Progress ' fundamentally means progress in taking the social face of Europe forward , and if this does not happen and the money is taken out of ' Progress ' , then we have regressed .
That is precisely why I believe that the Council should approve the European Parliament 's position .
( BG ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has been adopting a variety of measures to combat the economic crisis for more than a year .
Unlike the other measures , the microfinance facility is actually intended to assist the most vulnerable groups in society who find it difficult to enter and return to the labour market .
Solidarity , which is one of the European Union 's fundamental principles , dictates that they should receive special attention .
There is now a great deal of interest in this instrument , especially in Bulgaria , and I assume that this is the case in other countries too .
I have kept myself informed on this issue , right from the very start of the debates , through the media , many representatives of which are following its development .
It is in the European institutions ' interest to demonstrate to the EU 's citizens that our immediate task is to look after those affected by the crisis and the poorest members of society .
This will convince people that the institutions are effective and close to them .
There is some doubt about whether the facility will be able to reach and serve all its potential customers .
The lack of credit is huge and has contributed to the rise in unemployment .
EUR 100 million will not be sufficient to help all the unemployed facing the threat of social exclusion .
After all , not everyone has the skills to expand a business ; not everyone could be successfully trained .
What is important is for a decision to be made more quickly and for the microfinance facility to start operating on as large a scale as possible , so that those with ideas and a flair for enterprise can get started now when the crisis is still severe .
Next year has been declared the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , so let us adopt proper measures and not delay the start of the recovery process .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we can undoubtedly see promising signs of the stabilisation of the economy and the financial markets in 2010 , and I would also like to remind you that this was only possible because it was coordinated at a European level .
However , we are , of course , seeing a rise in the unemployment figures and we have to assume that they will rise still further over the next year .
I therefore welcome this new financing instrument for people who want to go self-employed .
It is , of course , common knowledge that small and medium-sized enterprises create jobs .
For many years , we have been discussing financial support for these enterprises .
However , every year , we discover that the funds have not gone where they were supposed to go .
I was able to follow the end of a pilot project last week , but as a result , there was not time to put the experiences gained from it in this report .
I would therefore like to mention it here .
The pilot project used participants who are self-employed or who want to go self-employed , and they were supported for a year along the path to self-employment .
It was so successful that I would like to call for it to be included in this project , in other words , that the project not only provide finance for people who are going self-employed , but also for those who support these people .
That is necessary because the banks , which will not , of course , give them credit , perceive a certain amount of risk in this regard .
I think we can neutralise this risk with this financing .
The second point that came up again and again in discussions in this regard was that we must not put a lower limit on the credits .
Up to now , someone could only receive credits of EUR 5 000 or more .
Sometimes , people do not need that amount .
In these cases , much smaller amounts are sufficient , and that is something that we should take into account in this programme .
( LT ) I would like to underline that currently , one of the most important tasks for the European Union is to curb the mass unemployment caused by prolonged inactivity and the social crisis .
It is unfortunate that it was not possible to reach agreement on a microfinance source of funding during the trialogue .
During this difficult social and economic period , the Commission 's proposal to reallocate EUR 100 million from the Progress budget would be an unsatisfactory solution , as it would not reduce the social isolation of the most vulnerable groups .
I am convinced that the microfinance facility will be more effective and will achieve its goal if it is coordinated by taking national , regional and local programmes into account and receives sufficient funding .
It is also important to take into consideration the fact that European social well-being is directly linked to employment and opportunities provided to find employment .
Therefore , I suggest that the Commission consider not only those people at risk of losing their jobs , but also those who are finding it difficult to enter or return to the labour market .
Even before the onset of the economic recession , many educated and hard-working citizens had no real opportunities to find employment and therefore , a large number of them emigrated beyond the European Union .
As for socially disadvantaged people , I urge the Commission and the Council to bear in mind that apart from young people , there are other socially disadvantaged groups , including women , the disabled and the elderly , who need additional guarantees of employment .
Thus , there is no other way but to find additional funds for microfinance facilities .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
( DE ) Madam President , we have now listened to three or four speakers from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament who have said that they do not want to take any money from Progress .
However , the amendments state that the instrument is to be called Progress , and Mrs Berès has also said that EUR 60 million will come from Progress .
That is two thirds !
I would be interested to know what the Socialists ' position actually is .
Should the instrument be financed from Progress - yes or no ?
( LT ) I would like to answer that the best solution would be for us to find additional funds , because the Progress programme is essentially targeted at the same groups and this would mean that , if there is no additional funding , the effect will certainly not be achieved .
Therefore , let us sit down together and find a solution , because unemployment is growing at a painful rate and this is really affecting many people who are already struggling .
Madam President , three and a half million people lost their jobs in the European Union in the past year .
EUR 100 million is not going to turn that situation around .
In fact , when you consider that one hundred million people are employed by SMEs , it only comes to one euro per employee .
Nevertheless , it is a start , and it is to be welcomed because , as Commissioner Špidla pointed out , financing is the biggest issue at hand .
To illustrate that : I became aware at the weekend of a situation where a company , which had a significant order delayed for three months , went to its bank - the bank it had been dealing with for 15 years - for bridging finance .
It was refused .
The company director was told that if he took out a mortgage on his own dwelling house , then they would allow him .
He did this , and a week later he got a letter withdrawing the overdraft facility on the grounds that they were now in a high-risk situation .
The result was that the company closed down and 10 more people were made redundant .
That brings me to a point which my colleague , Marian Harkin , mentioned , that , as far as possible , this funding should go to non-commercial banks like credit unions which , in my country anyway , are in every town and do tremendous work , whereas all the anecdotal evidence would suggest that the commercial banks , even with the finance they were getting from the European Investment Bank , are not giving it out but rather keeping it to shore up their own financial situation .
For those two reasons , I think we should be very careful of not so much where the money comes from , but where it goes to .
If it goes to the right people , then it would be the best money we will spend perhaps for a long time here at European level .
Finally , I would like to respond to the rather ill-advised comments by the Earl when he spoke about the begging hand .
This is not about a begging hand .
This is about helping those to help others to create employment and to stay in employment .
We are very proud and glad that we joined the euro , and we will be staying .
( FR ) Madam President , the clause in the Treaty of Lisbon on social policies requires the European Union to take into account employment , social protection and the fight against social exclusion .
The economic and financial crisis which has overrun Europe has led to a very serious human and social crisis , and this will have consequences that are impossible to assess at the moment .
Until now , the majority of efforts have been devoted to stabilising the banks and preventing bankruptcies .
In addition to measures to prevent unemployment , we must create a mechanism to give renewed impetus to the European Union 's economic growth .
The mechanism used by the Commission is designed to create an infrastructure which , in turn , will enable citizens to work .
At the practical level , it is possible to move from a temporary strategy to a long-term strategy .
This mechanism must be put in place quickly , in January 2010 .
Our debate today and our decisions are heard by many people who are suffering from inequality and by many young people who want to enter the working world and to whom we should just give a helping hand .
I would mention again the proposal already made to create a separate budget heading of EUR 50 million for this mechanism .
That will enable approximately 6 000 European entrepreneurs to start their own businesses , to develop them and thus to create new jobs .
In addition , and this is the most important thing , it is vital to improve access to resources and , above all , to provide better information to citizens about all the projects to which they can apply .
( PL ) Madam President , hundreds of thousands of Europeans have felt the effects of the economic crisis in a way which has hit them hardest , for they have lost their jobs .
In every country of the European Union , the rate of unemployment has risen , and this is the feature of the crisis which most disturbs our citizens .
Essential help is reaching financial institutions .
Unfortunately , help is not reaching people at risk of losing their job in time , and it is they who will feel the effects of the present crisis the longest .
Therefore , I , too , am pleased about the establishment of the European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion .
Especially worthy of note is the combining of this facility with the general objective of support for entrepreneurship .
Funds supplied with the help of this facility will stimulate the establishment of new businesses .
This is good news for our economy , because it is small and medium-sized enterprises which are its foundation , and it is SMEs which create jobs .
The facility fits in perfectly with the concept of support for entrepreneurship presented in the Charter for Small Enterprises .
It is important that businesses also receive that help at a later stage , and not only at the setting up stage , because financial resources from this facility will bring benefits to the people who use them and to economies only when the businesses which are set up are able to survive in the market .
I also hope that entrepreneurship , particularly as it concerns SMEs , will not just be the subject of our debates during the crisis .
We should adopt a comprehensive approach to entrepreneurship , because these businesses provide jobs for our citizens not just during a crisis .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it would be very important for 2010 , the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , to mark the birth of a new Community financial instrument , dedicated to microfinance , aimed at those who are disadvantaged in accessing the banking system but who have micro-enterprise plans .
As we are aware , micro-credit has proved to be an extraordinary tool for creating self-entrepreneurship opportunities and widespread social value in developing countries , particularly for women .
It has become a new strategy of the United Nations and of the World Bank , but it has also been trialled with positive results in many countries , in many European Member States , including Italy , particularly for immigrants , women and young people .
By adopting this report , Parliament is providing , in the midst of a serious economic and financial crisis , not only a strategic opportunity for social inclusion but also a positive challenge to the banking system , since it is developing a new approach and new powers , in collaboration with non-profit bodies and local and national institutions .
I welcome the adoption of many amendments , which I will not go over again , but I would like to say that today we are asking not just for micro-credit resources , but we are also asking that micro-credit ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the last month , the Commission has presented its new EU Strategy 2020 as a continuation of the Lisbon goals and , among other things , has called for a more social Europe .
If we are striving to ensure lasting employment for Europe 's citizens , then , particularly now in this difficult economic situation , we need to ensure that people can implement their own good ideas themselves in order to generate their own income .
The EU microfinance facility for employment is intended to provide the opportunity for a new start and to smooth the path to entrepreneurship .
The path to self-employment often goes in stages .
Initial small investments are easier to cope with than to pile up large mountains of debt .
A more manageable risk for starting out in self-employment is something that women , in particular , seek and they often ask for start-up capital in order to secure the start of the business and then , when the business is going well , to expand .
Women want to grow with their businesses .
Therefore , citizens need to be offered credit amounts that are as small as possible .
By that I mean amounts significantly lower than EUR 25 000 , which is the amount generally provided for micro-credits .
Particularly during the economic crisis , the necessary liquidity needs to be provided to the population at large .
If this provides a way to help to keep the often high rates of interest and administrative fees for micro-credits low , then it would give us an opportunity to give new impetus to the economy .
I welcome the idea presented in the Commission proposal .
The European Parliament committees disagree about the financing .
Questioning the jurisdiction of European policy is certainly permissible in this area .
The Member States have the prime responsibility .
As I see it , however , funds from the Community Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity ( Progress ) , particularly as proposed here , will enable people to go self-employed .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this evening we are discussing issues that are truly at the social heart of our society today - discussing mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund earlier , and , let us hope , of Progress in the coming days - and this European fund for microfinance is the ideal and essential instrument .
I believe that it is pointless to keep reiterating that this is what solves or attempts to solve the problems of the most needy citizens , which makes them more confident and more hopeful with regard to entrepreneurship and with regard to the future , so I believe that here we are not thinking of the damage caused by this perfect storm of crises and we are hearing much talk of the exit strategy , of how to get out of this crisis .
We will only get out of it if we solve the problem of employment , which is our tragedy , so we should seek to ensure that things move as quickly as possible and ensure that firm guarantees are in place regarding the resources for this facility since we should mobilise much larger resources than those we have heard discussed this evening and certainly should not divert money from one instrument to another , since all three need this money .
I believe that this EUR 100 million absolutely should not be taken from Progress since it also has the same objectives , but it should be a completely distinct and different budget line and must guarantee the mobilisation of much larger resources .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for the work she has done , and our fellow Members for their hard work in creating this new microfinance instrument .
This European instrument will make it possible to grant micro-credits to small enterprises and to people who have lost their jobs and want to set up their own small businesses .
In this time of financial crisis , the most vulnerable people , especially the unemployed and young people , have been the worst affected .
In fact , over 3.5 million job losses have been recorded this year in the European Union .
The adoption of this new tool will make it easier for these people to access the capital required to set up or develop a business and make their dreams of entrepreneurship come true .
We should not forget that over a third of micro-enterprises are created by unemployed people .
In my region , I am often approached by citizens wishing to obtain aid to set up their own business .
I am convinced that this new initiative will bear fruit in preserving jobs and that it will create new jobs too .
The proposal will facilitate investments of low sums and will give micro-enterprises an opportunity to grow .
Madam President , I would like to welcome the real added value of micro-credits , which will go hand in hand with new support measures , such as training and mentoring , which will enable the youngest people and the unemployed to obtain guarantees and assistance for their investment plans .
I hope that this new instrument to promote employment will be adopted as soon as possible and that an agreement will be reached between Parliament and the Council on making this tool , which is vital for our fellow citizens , and particularly so during this crisis period , a permanent one .
Ladies and gentlemen , let us not forget that it is small and medium-sized enterprises that create jobs .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the microfinance facility for employment is part of a set of initiatives that have been adopted at European level , and it gives the unemployed an opportunity for a new start and opens the door to entrepreneurship for some of Europe 's most disadvantaged groups , including , of course , the young .
The new facility should extend the range of targeted financial support to new entrepreneurs in the current context of a reduced credit supply .
Individual entrepreneurs and founders of micro-enterprises will also be assisted by way of mentoring , training , coaching and capacity building , in addition to interest-rate support from the European Social Fund .
It is clear that , given the currently reduced level of bank lending and given the difficulties that now exist in accessing credit , if the weakest sectors of our society , the unemployed and disadvantaged groups , want to undertake an action , an entrepreneurial activity , all this must be supported robustly , because it is one of the instruments that can help us combat what is the natural epilogue to the financial crisis , namely an endless employment crisis .
Although we are seeing signs of economic recovery , the signs are still negative with regard to employment .
It is , however , necessary that the transfer of Progress funds remains unchanged , in the sense that we cannot give the signal to divert resources from the Progress programme .
These resources need to be found from other sources and , above all , need to be associated with other European initiatives , so that we project a strong image and make a strong effort in favour of the unemployed in Europe .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to draw your attention to the fundamental importance of micro-credit in these times of crisis for jobs .
Micro-credit allows the unemployed to make a new start , thanks to risk-sharing and financing instruments , making entrepreneurship accessible .
Given the financial crisis and the significant drop in the number of loans being granted , I support the proposal by the European Commission to establish a microfinance instrument targeting the most vulnerable groups , and particularly women , young people and the unemployed .
I would like to give my backing to my colleagues in the Group of the European People 's Party which , together with the other groups - socialists , liberals and conservatives - have tabled compromise amendments in order to set up this microfinance instrument as quickly as possible , starting in 2010 .
I also call upon the Council of Ministers to take responsibility for finding , in the current crisis situation , a swift solution to combat unemployment and provide a lasting solution to the funding of this micro-credit .
( PL ) Madam President , the Progress programme is an important initiative intended to help Member States effectively implement objectives in the areas of employment and social affairs .
Last week , I had a meeting with the members of the programme committee concerning implementation of the Progress programme .
My conclusions are as follows .
Firstly , the advertising campaign , which should introduce potential beneficiaries of the programme to the scope of its operation , is not being conducted in a sufficiently visible way .
Secondly , most of the information about tenders and competitions is available in only three languages : English , German and French .
This constitutes a functional barrier for people who do not speak any of these languages .
I think a review of the principles of the promotional campaign is called for .
We should , as quickly as possible , increase recognition of the Progress programme and disseminate knowledge about it throughout the entire Union .
( RO ) The Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion supports and must support the application of simple procedures so that those affected can benefit from this in an effective manner .
However , I believe that the microfinance facility should be focused more on people who have lost their jobs and are at a disadvantage in terms of access to the traditional credit market , and who want to set up or continue to develop their own micro-enterprise , including as a self-employed activity .
I think that special attention must be focused on young people who , unfortunately , going by the recent European statistics , are facing ever-longer periods of unemployment or are hired on a temporary basis .
In addition , an annual report on the use of the budget allocated will enable a serious analysis to be carried out in the near future and , if necessary , a top-up to be provided for this budget .
If we transfer sums from one programme to another , we run the risk of undermining both .
( DE ) Madam President , today we have discussed the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund and now we are talking about micro-credits .
Both instruments are absolutely essential to combat the effects of the financial and economic crisis in the EU and to stimulate the European labour market .
We need both instruments , as not everyone is destined to be an entrepreneur .
Neither should it be the goal of our employment policy to make new self-employed entrepreneurs out of former employees and the non-self-employed workforce purely for business reasons .
For such people , the term ' putative self-employed ' would be more appropriate .
The Member States must also take appropriate precautionary steps in this regard .
However , for all of those who want to accept the challenge of self-employment , the resources must be made available to allow them to start or expand their business .
Along with this , however , it must be ensured - and this is the duty of the European Parliament and the Member States - that normal social security continues to be provided .
We need new money for new ideas .
( LT ) I believe that today , MEPs are completely unanimous in their opinion that this microfinance support facility is now very necessary .
Living and working conditions have changed fundamentally and the scourge of unemployment that has affected almost every state is forcing us to put forward certain proposals that certain support facilities should be amended .
Until now , most financial support was earmarked for large companies and organisations and on many occasions , it has been underscored that until now , ordinary European Union citizens have had little or no hope of financial support .
I believe that the Commission 's future solution to seek agreement together with the European Parliament is absolutely essential .
100 million is the very beginning .
It is a first attempt , but I am convinced that this attempt may be successful .
Ladies and gentlemen , the discussion has clearly shown Parliament 's support for the micro-financing instrument and I believe there are no fundamental disputes as far as the substance of the issue is concerned .
I also believe that there is considerable proximity to the position of the Council as far as the substance of the issue is concerned .
It is the issue of financing that remains open .
Of course , the issue of finance is also part of the codecision process , which means that it will be highly necessary and desirable to look for a compromise and I am delighted that the debate has signalled a great willingness to resume negotiations with the Council without delay .
At the same time , the debate has indicated the possibility of compromise in some areas .
The debate saw frequent mention and frequent criticism of the Commission over the issue of the Progress programme and its use within the framework of this new instrument .
I have to say that the Commission was not faced with a simple issue because it had to move within the framework of the existing budget or within the framework of the interinstitutional agreement .
It was only able to use money which was available .
When weighing up our decision concerning the use of Progress programme resources , we very carefully considered the consequences and came to the conclusion that although it was not an ideal solution , it was probably one of the possible solutions .
It was repeatedly asserted in the debate that this involved some sleight of hand or shifting of money from one pot to another .
That is not the case , since all of the analyses show clearly that resources used within the framework of the micro-credit principle are subject to an estimated five-fold multiplier effect .
In the other programme , these resources would achieve an index of 1 while in the micro-credit programme , they can theoretically achieve an index of up to 5 .
From this perspective , it is not a matter simply of transferring from one pot to another but of a new use for the resources .
I would like to reiterate that it was no easy decision , and I do not even think that it was the only decision and , in the debate over a compromise , a decent basis will surely be found , or at least I hope so .
The idea of micro-credit is based on a clear statement that the current financial system does not provide sufficient sources for small and very small enterprises in particular , in other words , that the system does not make use of the human capital that is present in people who belong to so-called vulnerable groups .
I consider this to be a great waste of an opportunity and I am therefore delighted that the Commission has proposed this instrument and I am also delighted that Parliament rates it so highly .
As I have already said , the idea is to make use of the human capital that is in people who would normally not be able to make use of their capital in this entrepreneurial way .
However , it is also very important to make use of time .
In my opinion , holding an unduly long debate would be against the very sense of this instrument which is particularly needed in a time of crisis .
I also believe that it will be needed in times when there is no crisis and that it will become a permanent component of European labour market and economic policy .
Thank you for the supportive remarks and comments .
Allow me to share the view of those who expressed their disappointment due to the Commission 's lack of willingness to compromise .
I must also say to the Commissioner that if we reallocate what are exclusively Progress resources , this conveys the message that , when it comes to resources for social inclusion , we can only envisage support for the most vulnerable if we take the resources from places serving the same purpose .
We are unable to find any other kind of resources .
I think that this is unacceptable .
The codecision procedure also means that everyone , each party , must take steps .
Parliament came up with a number of suggestions and proposals on this matter , whereas there was no such proposal forthcoming from the Council and Commission which would have helped reach agreement .
I must say to Elisabeth Schroeder that the fact that we are defending the Progress programme here conveys our conviction - which is a shared conviction that we are still willing to come to a compromise on this - that this programme must be implemented as soon as possible .
The assistance provided will only be effective if the facility can be launched at the start of 2010 .
If Parliament actually votes on this matter this week , then it will have done , for its part , what it can to ensure that this programme is launched at the start of 2010 .
As Parliament will presumably vote for the EUR 25 million from its own resources for next year , and if Parliament votes for the entire amount , this will be sufficient for the Commission to sign the agreements which can facilitate the programme 's launch .
I believe that this reflects Parliament 's constructive approach .
At any rate , I consider that this programme is extremely important from a social inclusion perspective .
I would also like to ask those of my fellow Members who supported this to agree for us not to take the entire resources from the Progress programme and to lobby their own governments as well for resources , given that these countries ' governments are the members of the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The economic crisis has become an acutely felt social crisis for which we have not yet found a solution .
Unfortunately , one of the indicators which could help launch a recovery , the level of lending , has reached a record low in the euro area since 1991 and is experiencing an unprecedented collapse in the new Member States , as is the case for Romania .
This is one of the elements which cast doubt on the prospects for beating the recession .
Against this background , I appreciate the welcome proposal from the European Commission on setting up the microfinance facility .
However , in order to ensure that social inclusion measures are effective , the facility needs to be entered in a separate budget line .
The reallocation of the funds from the Progress programme would affect its specific guidelines for community action and send out an alarm signal concerning the social openness of a European executive , which has been extremely reluctant until now , unfortunately , in terms of displaying sufficient social involvement .
The crisis is affecting every category of vulnerable people , but we cannot ignore the severity of youth unemployment .
The fact that one young person in five in Europe does not have a job may have numerous repercussions at an economic and social level , as well as from a demographic and crime perspective .
This is why I think that it is appropriate to have a greater focus on boosting young people 's chances of entering the job market .
Since autumn last year , more than 5 million European citizens have lost their jobs , giving a total of 22.5 million unemployed in Europe .
In this context , we cannot ignore the serious level of unemployment among young people .
It is deeply concerning that one young person in five in Europe does not have a job , which has repercussions at an economic and social level , as well as from a demographic and crime perspective .
In some countries , the percentage of young people out of work is even higher in proportion to the national unemployment rate as well .
For instance , one young Latvian in three is unemployed , while approximately 43 % of Spanish citizens under the age of 25 are affected by this problem .
I think that more attention needs to be focused on young people .
In this respect , the initiative put forward by the European Commission on microfinance programmes which are entered in a separate budget line will help encourage and motivate young people to enter the labour market , thereby reducing the unemployment rate which has risen among this group .
The current efforts being made at both EU and national level must be stepped up in order to boost the offer of micro-credits .
The European Microfinance Facility must provide useful assistance to the unemployed and vulnerable people who would like to set up or run micro-enterprises .
I believe that the European Microfinance Facility must have a separate credit line as the beneficiaries of this scheme are different to those for the Progress programme .
Progress programme funds must not , under any circumstances , be reduced during this crisis period as they are targeted at the most vulnerable groups .
I also believe that the European Microfinance Facility should have a sufficiently large budget to make it really effective in achieving its objectives in terms of employment and social inclusion .
Member States and the EU as a whole must continue to implement the Progress programme effectively at a time of global economic crisis
Toy safety ( debate )
The next item is the statement from the Commission on toy safety .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Madam President , honourable Members , we always discuss toys just before Christmas , and quite rightly so , as this is the time when people are most interested in toys .
I am grateful that we are doing so once again this year , as the safety of toys is a matter that is of interest to Parliament , the Council and the Commission and for which we all set the highest requirements .
The debate this evening has been triggered by media reports in one particular Member State - Germany .
They originate from the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment and from the Technical Supervisory Association ( Technischer Überwachungsverein ) .
Neither institution has approached the Commission directly .
The German Government has not , as yet , come to the Commission with regard to this matter either .
Thus , we do not know any more than what was stated by these two institutions in their press releases and what could be read in the German media .
Nevertheless , it is a subject that needs to be taken so seriously that , even if all we have to go on is reports in the press , we still need to address the matter .
The analysis in the reports we have before us indicates that we need to deal with four different issues .
The first is a question that is very easy to answer .
According to the statement by the German Technical Supervisory Association , a considerable proportion of the toys on the German market that were tested did not comply with the European Union 's current legal provisions .
In this case , ladies and gentlemen , the rules are perfectly clear .
If a Member State makes such a discovery , it is obliged to inform all the other Member States and the European Commission of this immediately and put the necessary measures in place .
They can go as far as taking these products off the market immediately , and indeed this means throughout Europe , and also imposing an import ban if these products are manufactured outside the European Union .
I hope that the German authorities will very quickly notify the other Member States and the Commission accordingly via RAPEX .
Should import bans be necessary , then I assure you here and now that the Commission will approve such bans directly and without delay .
However , as I said , as yet , no such information has been submitted to us by the German authorities .
Market surveillance - and I have to say this very clearly at this point - is the sole responsibility of the Member States .
Neither the European Commission , Parliament nor the Council have any market surveillance instruments at their disposal .
These are the sole preserve of the Member States .
However , they are obliged under law , including under the current Toys Directive , to carry out this market surveillance .
When I read news from Germany that it is doubtful that the country 's market surveillance is in a position to meet the requirements of the new Toys Directive , then there is only one thing I can say , and that is that the German Government is under obligation to ensure that the German market surveillance authorities can meet these requirements .
Thus , I think the answer to this question is fairly clear .
The second question is simple , too .
It is an old topic on which Parliament has had intensive debates in connection with the adoption of the Toys Directive and where the crucial vote in this Parliament resulted in a clear and unambiguous majority decision in a roll-call vote .
It related to the question of mandatory certification of toys by a third body .
This proposal was put forward by Germany .
The German Technical Supervisory Association was behind the proposal , which was quite rightly rejected because certification by a third body would not provide any additional safety at all in the case of toys , which are normally not technically complicated , as it would be the prototype that would be certified in this case .
When it comes to toys , however , the problem is not the prototype , but , as we know from experience , the problem is whether the high requirements that we set are actually complied with during the entire manufacturing process by all suppliers and all of those involved in the supply chain .
As in all other areas , when it comes to toys , we abide by the principle that the manufacturer must take full responsibility for a product being in compliance with the law in force .
Regardless of where in the world they are , we must not release manufacturers from this responsibility .
If there is a problem with reliability in a particular country , we need to talk to this country about improving its production conditions , and that is exactly what the European Commission is doing .
I am talking about China .
We are in close and intensive contact with China with regard to the question of how we can actually ensure that the production conditions in this country , which is by far the largest toy manufacturer in the world , meet our requirements .
Progress has indeed been made here , but there is certainly still more that needs to be done .
The third complex of issues relates to chemical substances and heavy metals in toys .
This is an extremely difficult and thorny issue .
The political guideline that I gave to my colleagues when work was being carried out on the Toys Directive was to lay down the most stringent rules possible - the most stringent possible !
This view was also shared by the Council and by Parliament .
As a result , the limit values that we included in the new Toys Directive , which will be introduced in stages from 2011 onwards , represented the state of the art in terms of scientific knowledge at the time the directive was adopted .
However , we were aware that this is an evolving process - science is , of course , always progressing and there are always new research results and new findings - and , together , we deliberately framed the directive in such a way that new scientific findings that there are risks that we had not previously observed and that limit values have been set too high can very quickly be incorporated into the directive in a comitology procedure involving Parliament .
According to the current legal situation , adopted by the European Parliament , the involvement of the competent scientific committee is needed for the assessment of the risks posed by products .
There have been indications twice this year that new findings may be available .
The first was via a letter sent to me by Germany 's Federal Minister for Food , Agriculture and Consumer Protection in the spring of this year .
The letter concerned cadmium .
I immediately arranged for this issue to be submitted to the scientific committee , not only with regard to cadmium , but with regard to other heavy metals , too .
We are expecting the results of their examination during the first half of 2010 - by the end of June at the latest .
If their examination does indeed reveal new findings , we will immediately bring forward a proposal to tighten up the directive , which has not yet entered into force , so that it enters into force in 2011 with the more stringent limit values in place .
The second case is rather complicated and difficult to explain .
It relates to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , known as PAHs , which surround us all in our daily lives - we are not even aware of what we are coming into contact with .
In this case , too , we received information that the limit values for these polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons may possibly be set too high .
The scientific committee is looking into this .
The results will also arrive in good time to allow us to make corrections .
At this point , let me point out that we are dealing with a problem here that , as politicians , we are not really able to solve .
These are technical issues that are extremely complex .
I will quite openly admit to you that I do not always understand the extremely complicated scientific analyses that are presented to me .
I do not imagine that there are many Members of this Parliament , even if everyone were here this evening , who could claim to understand them .
We cannot understand them because we have not received the relevant education .
To a certain degree , therefore , we have to trust our experts .
This is where the problem lies .
We all know , of course , that the history of science is full of examples of cases where the generally accepted teaching has turned out to be wrong .
It is also full of examples of so-called minority opinions ultimately proving to be correct .
As politicians , how can we decide when scientists disagree with each other ?
We cannot , and this is a risk that comes with our jobs as politicians and it is one that we cannot avoid .
The rule that we have in this regard in the European institutions is that we follow the recommendations of the competent scientific committees , and that is what we have done in this case , too .
However , I would like to say quite openly that I take this issue so seriously that any indication , however small , that there may be new findings available - and even if we only find out about them in a newspaper report - is taken so seriously by the Commission that the issue is put to the scientists .
The last point is quite an annoying one .
In this regard , I have to say that I really would have expected an institute belonging to the government of a Member State to observe the minimum requirements of good scientific conduct .
The claim by the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment , which has been widely taken up by the German media , that , when it comes to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , we have a limit value for tyres that is a hundred times more stringent than the limit value for children 's toys is simply scandal mongering .
It is pure scandal mongering and the scientists there know that .
The truth is that the rules applying to the manufacture of tyres , in particular , to the oils used in this process , originate from the time before REACH and before the Directive on the safety of toys and that , in this case , one of these substances is taken as a reference value .
However , this substance represents a group of around a hundred others .
Thus , you need to multiply the reference value by one hundred .
You then come to exactly the threshold value that also applies to other products within the European Union .
In other words , since the threshold value applying to the use of certain oils in the manufacture of tyres is based on the smallest content of these substances that is still measurable in the product , it is exactly the same for toys , too .
The content is defined in terms of the smallest measurable content .
I can only urge the Federal Institute to withdraw this misleading and indefensible claim .
It really is intolerable that we have to deal with such things .
In summary , as regards the Toys Directive , we have produced a document which , to the best of our knowledge and belief , corresponds to what was possible at the time it was adopted .
We have also framed it in such a way that new findings can be incorporated at any time so that our safety requirements for toys will always reflect the state of the art in science and research .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to thank you sincerely for the clarity and credibility of your statement with regard to the limit values under discussion here .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) - we also provided the rapporteur for the Toys Directive at that time in Marianne Thyssen - I would therefore like to make it clear that we , too , want to achieve and maintain complete protection in respect of all hazardous substances .
We know that , in this regard , we have a particular responsibility for the health of our children and therefore our future .
Particularly before Christmas - you mentioned this , Commissioner - it needs to be possible for parents and grandparents to be certain which toys are safe for their children or grandchildren and which toys they can buy for them .
Like you , I , too , call on the market surveillance authorities in the Member States , in particular , in Germany , to fulfil their obligations and remove dangerous toys from the market .
I believe that we made the right decision at the time not to implement certification by third bodies as a general evaluation criterion for toys .
As regards the limit values , a similar appeal was made a year ago - as you mentioned .
At that time , I wrote a letter to you asking you to refer the matter to the Commission 's scientific committee , and that is something for which I am very grateful to you .
I tried , back then , to obtain more scientific opinions from Germany and I have since received these .
I would like to quote from one study by the Chemisches und Veterinäruntersuchungsamt Stuttgart ( the Stuttgart Chemical and Veterinary Testing Office ) : ' Comparisons of the higher migration limit values in the new directive with the fifteen year old values in DIN EN 713 are ultimately difficult to evaluate from a technical point of view . '
With this , I believe I can explain that it is not a cheap way of palming the issue off on to science and saying ' we do not want to examine this any closer because we do not want to understand it ' , but it is a genuine and difficult dispute among experts and one institute in Germany is clearly putting its point of view across particularly strongly .
However , I urge you , Commissioner , to do everything possible to bring together the scientific institutes involved to enable them finally to agree on a scientifically objective opinion .
Madam President , at this time every year , parents intervene to ensure that letters are received by Father Christmas .
Children ask for toys in these letters .
One of these toys might be this one here , just as this one here might be one of the 104 toys controlled by the Federal German institute responsible for identifying dangers in consumer goods .
I have just listened to the Commissioner basically blame the institute for doing its work .
I have listened to him heaping blame on scientists .
I have listened to him heaping blame on the Member States , who are responsible for supervision .
I have listened to all this with a great deal of interest , just as I have listened to him constantly telling us , with a great deal of honesty and solid data , that every previous directive is improved every now and then with new data .
That fact alone confirms that the Federal German institute has done its job properly .
So we need to bear that in mind .
As far as the directive is concerned , it is due to be applied in 2011 and , for chemical substances , in 2014 , as you know .
And another thing : on 17 December , in other words , the day after tomorrow , each Member State will go to the Commission in order to present its draft in connection with the market supervision regulation .
These relate directly to the Christmas market .
These relate directly to the health of our children , who play with the toys that we buy them .
Finally , it is very important that the debate on toys should not be held at this time every year .
The debate on toys and safety should really be held throughout the year .
That is the Commission 's responsibility .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe supports the views expressed in the opinion of the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment to the effect that the ALARA principle , in other words , the principle of ' as low as reasonably achievable ' , should apply in the assessment of carcinogenic substances .
Secondly , there is consequently a need for the Commission to examine whether this principle is also satisfied by the limit values laid down in the Toys Directive .
Thirdly , if this does not happen , we call on the Commission to ensure that , until the Toys Directive has been transposed by all the Member States in 2011 , the limit values are laid down in the Toys Directive in such a way as to rule out any risk to the health of children from softening agents in toys .
Fourthly , the principle enshrined in the Toys Directive , whereby chemicals that are potentially carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic to reproduction are impermissible , must be implemented with regard to accessible parts of toys .
This must actually be achieved by the limit values set , as otherwise such a directive is worthless .
Fifthly , this calls , in particular , for better and more efficient market surveillance , because it is usually toys that have been imported into the EU that exceed the limit values set by the Union .
However , efficient market surveillance would also enable toys manufactured within the EU to be tested to see whether they , too , comply with the limit values .
Sixthly , it is totally unacceptable , should this be the case , that lower standards should apply to imports into the EU than , for example , into the US .
However , the threat by the German Federal Minister for Food , Agriculture and Consumer Protection , Ilse Aigner , to go it alone and prohibit so-called ' toxic toys ' herself is , in my view , completely the wrong way to go about it and totally counterproductive when it comes to creating confidence in the European internal market .
Merely cultivating national popular opinion not only destroys confidence in the European Institutions ; it also damages the German Federal Government , because it approved the Toys Directive .
Madam President , Commissioner , we requested this debate in order to correct and clarify exactly what in these claims is true and what is merely cheap populism .
That was the background to this .
We would have expected the Commission to go to the press sooner , but if the matter can be cleared up through this debate , we will be very happy with that .
I welcome the announcement that you are going to carry out tests with regard to heavy metals and softening agents .
I believe that is urgently needed .
I would like to point out that the number of new cases of cancer in children under 15 years of age rose by more than 50 % between 1980 - when data began to be collected - and 2006 .
Malignant tumours are the second most common cause of death in children .
We therefore need to act , we need to check whether these figures are correct and we need to respond accordingly .
If this latest study by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment shows that the revised Toys Directive does not provide sufficient protection from carcinogenic softening agents , we will have to take action .
It cannot be the case that children can take up many times the quantity of carcinogenic substances in just one hour of skin contact than are contained in the smoke from 40 cigarettes .
These substances can be avoided .
The study shows that this is technically possible .
Seventy percent of toys sold are below these thresholds .
Therefore , it is possible at any time to require the other toys to meet these limit values , too .
It is presumably a question of price , but that cannot be regulated by the market alone when the safety of children is at risk .
Political action needs to be taken to adjust and raise the threshold values accordingly .
Of course , Member States are responsible for market surveillance , not Europe , Parliament or the Commission .
We have also called on Germany many times to take its duties in the area of market surveillance seriously and to take the relevant action .
However , that does not , by any means , mean that we do not need to take action where there is doubt as to whether our threshold values reflect the latest scientific findings , and therefore it is my hope and request that the new Commission will present proposals to Parliament as soon as possible so that we can then adjust the relevant limit values in the comitology procedure .
( NL ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the safety of children - our smallest and most vulnerable consumers - has always been a priority for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and indeed for everyone in this House , and it was for this very reason that , one year ago , we adopted a new , strict , Directive on the safety of toys .
Thanks to the excellent cooperation with the Commissioner and his services , with the Council Presidency and with my fellow MEPs across all the political groups , we were able to complete that mammoth task ; and quickly , namely in a single reading .
All our institutions were convinced that we had drawn up legislation that was the strictest in the world and was being followed attentively as far a field as China and the United States .
Parliament acted sensibly as far as third-party certification was concerned , and took a particularly strict line concerning the standards on chemical substances such as allergens and heavy metals .
With regard to the substances that are carcinogenic , mutagenic or toxic for reproduction ( CMR ) , we opted for a total ban , with a few exceptions under very strict conditions .
This legislation provides for a transitional period , but that goes without saying - it is inherent in the system - and , in any case , this transitional period is shorter than the industry had said it could cope with .
Ladies and gentlemen , either we got it completely wrong and failed with regard to this act , or science and technology have evolved to such an extent that the act already needs amending , which can be done very quickly through the comitology procedure , or there is nothing wrong , in which case we cannot play unnecessarily on people 's fears and on their justified concern for their children 's safety .
I have listened to and believed the Commissioner , and I see that the European Commission is doing what it has to do .
If further infringements should come to light in this field , I believe this shows we can rest assured that market surveillance is in place and that it is working .
We have two questions , then : is the legislation still up to the minute , and is the market surveillance adequate ?
If the answer to both questions is ' yes ' , we must absolutely avoid giving way to populism and must make clear to people that there is no need to worry .
( DA ) Madam President , thank you , Commissioner , for your introduction .
If I have understood you correctly , you wanted to ensure that a study was started into whether there are , in fact , too many toxic substances in children 's toys in Germany , as the study indicates .
If I have it right , then I would say that your idea is a good one .
It is extremely important for us to act quickly .
If we have any reason to suspect that our children 's safety is at risk , then we must act .
Furthermore , we would , of course , appreciate it if the Commission could get back to us here in Parliament very quickly to let us know whether or not there is anything in these claims .
However , I would like to point out that , when it comes to softening agents in toys , there are , in fact , a number of researchers who are saying that there is no safe limit .
The only safe thing to do is to leave the softening agents out of our children 's toys completely .
I really think that we should take a stand on this and consider whether we should not have tightened up the rules .
I am not sure that the rules are good enough , even those in the new Toys Directive .
However , there is another matter that I would also like to raise in this regard , and that is that , a month and a half ago , we received a Commission study into how the new market surveillance legislation had been implemented in each Member State .
It is indeed right that it is the task of the Member States to ensure that market surveillance functions properly . However , this study showed that , despite the fact that we have tightened up the rules , only two Member States chose to put more money into market surveillance .
We ought to be able to do better than this .
It is precisely to prevent terrible stories of unsafe toys on the market that we need significantly better market surveillance .
I therefore also hope that the Commission will ensure that the Member States achieve this .
( SV ) Madam President , I would like to thank Commissioner Verheugen for coming here to tell us about this important matter .
We have a huge responsibility to ensure that our children are not made unwell or put at risk .
I would like to take this opportunity to put a couple of questions that I have concerning the commitments made by the Commission in connection with the negotiations ahead of the first reading vote on the Toys Directive , as well as ahead of our plenary vote .
The party groups that were involved in the negotiations agreed to remove certain limits on noise levels because the wording approved by the Committee contained specific decibel levels .
The Commission said that these levels might be too high and promised instead to produce a standard based on maximum levels for sustained noise and short noises .
How far has the Commission got with its work on ensuring that toys do not cause hearing impairment ?
When can we expect a standard stating maximum noise levels for toys ?
I would also like to highlight the issue of the font size used for warning texts .
Once again , we were told that this would be resolved via standardisation .
What is the Commission 's view on the rules that should be applied here ?
When can we expect a standard that includes minimum font sizes for warning texts ?
( PL ) The subject of toy safety arouses very great interest , especially during the pre-Christmas period , when we are thinking about which toys to buy for the youngest among us .
In the previous parliamentary term , we prepared what is , in my opinion , a very good solution for increasing the safety of the toys our children play with .
Unfortunately , we have to wait for the effects of these provisions .
I do , however , believe they will bring tangible results .
I would like to thank , here , the Commission services for organising the Toys Road Show , because it is a very important initiative which is helping businesses to prepare for the changes which result from the directive .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am , however , disturbed by another piece of information .
At the end of November , in the United States , the Consumer Product Safety Commission decided to recall over a million children 's cots from the market .
Another million will be recalled from the Canadian market .
A cot is an item of everyday use , and children come into contact with cots more often , perhaps , than with toys .
In view of the scale of the operation , I would be grateful if the Commissioner could comment on this matter .
Can we be sure that the children 's cots available on the European market are safe ?
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , I , too , would like to thank you most sincerely for the clarity of your words .
Essentially , it should be said that , overall , the Toys Directive has brought a considerable improvement in the protection of our children .
We all approached it with the intention of producing the most stringent legislation anywhere in the world .
However , many parents and grandparents are now concerned - as you said - because of the studies by the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment .
We now need to ask ourselves whether or not the Institute 's statements and opinion are right .
In any case , we need to examine the facts of the matter very closely .
It is a question of the protection of our children .
At this point , I would like to thank you most sincerely for having stated that you are willing to do that .
However , I think that things need to move more quickly .
Not until next year , you say , during the first half of the year , will the findings of the scientific committee be available .
It must be done quicker than that .
It is a question of the protection of our children .
I really cannot understand why the Federal Institute left it so long to come out with these statements .
I want to make that point here , too .
( EL ) Madam President , dozens of instances have been recorded over recent years - 36 in 2000 alone - in which children needed immediate surgical intervention due to harmful substances in toys .
I would also remind the House that just last week , a report was published in America which says that one third of toys in circulation contain dangerous chemical substances .
We should therefore understand that the European mark of conformity ( CEE ) is not enough to guarantee toy safety .
It is awarded following submission of a file by the company in question and not following preventive and spot checking of the product and , as a result , we cannot assume that toys are safe .
In order , therefore , to ensure that our children - I do not have any , but I hope that one day I shall - receive gifts from Father Christmas , as mentioned earlier , which are completely safe and need not cause parents to worry , we must put pressure on the Member States to carry out more thorough checks and , of course , to strengthen current legislation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted at the broad consensus that this debate has shown .
Allow me to make a preliminary comment .
We are dealing with a scientific institute , the German Federal Institute for Risk Assessment , which I have been aware of for some time as a result of its tendency to make alarmist announcements to the public without informing the Commission or any other European institutions of its findings .
You can judge that for yourselves .
The only thing that I know about this is that the continued funding of this institute from Germany 's Federal budget is under discussion .
Perhaps that is one explanation for the institute 's intensive public relations activities , while it clearly sets no great store by allowing us to examine its findings in any appropriate way .
Nevertheless - and it seems I have been misunderstood on this point - even if we only read something in the media , we still regard it as an indication of possible new scientific findings and I have already passed this on to the scientific committee .
The call for me to do this that has been expressed here is not needed .
The moment that I receive an indication that there may be new scientific findings available concerning the safety of toys and the limit values that we have set , this information is sent to the scientific committee .
However , I must reiterate that you cannot expect me , and likewise I cannot expect you , to make a decision in respect of the disagreements among scientists regarding methods .
You cannot do that .
I cannot do that and neither can you .
I can do nothing more than say that the question of methodology in the measurement of possible limit values has been rigorously debated here in Parliament , in the Council and the Commission .
Furthermore , the opinion of this German institute is not shared by any other scientific institute in Europe - not one !
If you believe that I am obliged to follow the opinion of a single institute and ignore that of all the others , then please tell me so and you can reprimand me for this .
I cannot assume this responsibility .
Not one of you can do that either .
However , I will say it once again : if any new findings come to light , the process will be set in motion .
Mrs Weisgerber , you said that the process should go quicker - unfortunately , it cannot go any quicker .
These are very complicated scientific issues .
Tests are needed .
You are perhaps not aware of this , but extensive animal tests are needed , for example , in order to be able to verify this sort of claim .
You cannot force scientists to produce findings within a particular timeframe .
I am sorry , but that is not possible .
I must therefore simply ask you to be satisfied with me telling you that the scientific committee has told us that it will be able to provide substantiated results by the middle of next year , and it will indeed do so .
On the basis of these results , the Commission will immediately prepare new proposals if it should emerge that there are indeed new findings .
I hope that makes it clear .
Mr Creutzmann , the principle of using the lowest possible risk is valid .
I do not need the help of the Federal Institute for Risk Assessment to find that out .
The requirements that you derived from this are therefore also met .
Mrs Rühle , you say that I should have gone to the press sooner .
It will surprise you when I say that I did exactly that .
Just as I do not think that what I have said here this evening in Parliament will make it into the European media , and particularly not the German media , so my factual and , I thought , calm statement of the facts was not taken up by the German media .
However , I issued the necessary statement and explained the facts of the matter .
I would be happy to provide you with the text .
Mrs Davidson , we have the most stringent legislation in the world .
That is something we can take pride in .
This Commission will not allow itself to be outdone by anyone in the world when it comes to providing the highest possible level of safety for toys .
Mrs Schaldemose , I can only agree with you , and say that the responsibility of the Member States for market surveillance must not be called into question .
I agree with you entirely that the question of implementation is crucial here .
In this regard , too , we have made appropriate preparations .
The last question from Mrs Hedh is a very important one .
With regard to the standards for different areas , you mentioned two examples , one of them being sources of noise .
The relevant instructions have been sent to the European standardisation organisations .
However , for standards , it is no different than for other scientific work .
You cannot expect them to be available in a week or in one , or indeed several , months .
It takes time .
However , all of the standards that we have talked about are in progress and will be available in good time , and they will also allow us to develop an exact comparability of the products and to strengthen market surveillance .
There is one last point I would like to address .
Baby seats , which have been mentioned here and with regard to which there have been some safety problems in the US , are not toys .
They do not , therefore , fall within the scope of the Toys Directive , but rather within that of the General Product Safety Directive .
We need not hide from the Americans in this regard .
The system that we have in Europe with regard to the general safety of products has continued to prove its worth over the last few years .
If unsafe products appear on the European market , we can now assume with a degree of certainty that all the other Member States and the Commission will , in fact , be informed about them and that the appropriate steps will also then be taken .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - I welcome the fact that the new Directive 2009 / 48 / EC on toy safety will come into force in 2011 , although it is regrettable that the directive will not be in force for the Christmas 2010 period next year , when the majority of toys made or imported into the EU , are sold .
I hope that Member States will see fit to transpose all elements of this important directive before the final deadline for implementation in order to give parents , as consumers , greater peace of mind .
Taking the opportunity of this debate , I would like to draw attention to the need to improve the functioning of the European Union 's register of consumer accidents , which anticipates , among other things , collection of information about fatalities and bodily injuries resulting from the use of various products intended for children .
The register should be an important element of the mechanism of the system for protecting consumers , including the youngest and most helpless .
Unfortunately , according to an expert from the Technical Committee on products for small children and toy safety of the Polish Committee for Standardisation , rapid exchange of information between Member States and the European Commission on products which pose a hazard , and steps taken in particular countries to prevent or restrict their coming onto the market , is still not functioning satisfactorily .
I would like to ask that this matter be thoroughly investigated .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was suspended at 22.50 )
Opening of the sitting
Announcement by the President
First of all , I would like to read out an important piece of information .
On 2 December , I received a Communication from the Commission , addressed to the European Parliament and the Council , concerning the consequences of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon for ongoing interinstitutional decision-making procedures .
By virtue of this communication , Parliament as an institution deems that all the proposals listed in the communication for which the Treaty of Lisbon granted it competence have been resubmitted to Parliament .
Parliament has also taken note of the fact that , by virtue of the communication , the European Commission has withdrawn certain proposals .
In the case of legislative proposals pending as at 1 December 2009 , the date on which the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force , the President of the Commission has invited the parliamentary committees to which proposals have already been submitted in the current legislative term , as recorded in the minutes of the part-sessions , to verify the legal bases and procedural modifications proposed by the Commission , along with any other amendments to be made in the light of the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon , and to decide whether they intend to adjudge positions already adopted under the consultation procedure to be ordinary legislative procedure first readings or to constitute approvals .
It is understood that Parliament reserves the right , in all cases , to request that the Commission submit a new proposal .
In the case of proposals on which Parliament had not been consulted prior to entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , it falls to the Commission to forward new proposals under the ordinary legislative procedure or other appropriate procedure .
It is a communication about our legislative activities in the near future - a communication concerning mutual relations between the European Commission and the European Parliament in the legislative process .
As you know , we are in a transition period - we are moving from the Treaty of Nice to the Treaty of Lisbon and , at the same time , we are beginning a new Parliamentary term .
The new Commission still has not been approved .
This all requires rather arduous work , which must be carried out in accordance with the law , between the Commission and Parliament , and this is the subject of the communication .
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Oral questions ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) - Draft amending budget No 10 / 2009 of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , Section III - Commission - Mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument - Amendment to the multiannual financial framework 2007-2013 : financing energy projects under the European Economic Recovery Plan ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on the following :
the report by Mr Surján and Mr Maňka , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) ( 11902 / 2009 - C7-0127 / 2009 - , and Letters of amendment Nos 1 / 2010 ( SEC ( 2009 ) 1133 - 14272 / 2009 - C7 - 0215 / 2009 ) , 2 / 2010 ( SEC ( 2009 ) 1462 - 16328 / 2009 - C7-0292 / 2009 ) and 3 / 2010 ( SEC ( 2009 ) 1635 - 16731 / 2009 - C7-0304 / 2009 ) to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 ,


the report by Mrs Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the draft amending budget No 10 / 2009 of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , Section III - Commission ( 16327 / 2009 - C7-0288 / 2009 - ,
the report by Mr Böge , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on mobilisation of the Flexibility instrument : in accordance with point 27 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management ,
the report by Mr Böge , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the financial framework 2007-2013 : the European Economic Recovery Plan , second revision ( amendment of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management ) - C7-0305 / 2009 - .
Thank you for the floor , Mr President .
Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , right at the start of this budget debate , I must say that I would like not so much to cause an argument as to express my thanks .
I wish to thank the Council and Commission for the fruitful cooperation which has enabled us finally to reach an agreement and now table , in a sense , a joint proposal before this House .
However , I must also extend this expression of thanks to the various groups in the House , because had these groups not been able to cooperate and jointly represent the values which are important to Parliament and Europe 's citizens , it would not have been possible at all to prepare the budget .
I was entrusted a year ago with the task of being the rapporteur for the 2010 budget .
We got started immediately on formulating Parliament 's political expectations and directives .
These matters were discussed by Parliament in the spring of this year .
It was extremely important , looking ahead to the future as well , that a decision was made from which lessons could be drawn , because we preceded the preliminary draft budget by several months .
In other words , the EU Commission was aware of Parliament 's opinion and more or less took this into consideration as well when preparing the preliminary budget .
I think that we should also adopt the same timing in subsequent years .
What did we want to achieve ?
We knew that Europe 's economy was in crisis .
We felt and still do now that this budget must play an instrumental role in the management of the crisis .
We discussed this point with the Council because another obvious solution to the crisis is for us to spend less on Europe .
It is not a solution , but it may help the situation .
If we spend the money wisely here and place huge emphasis on the good use of resources , the EU budget may then appear not as a burden but as part of the solution to the crisis .
In light of this , we wanted to boost competitiveness , using research and development programmes as one means of doing this .
We also wanted to lay the foundations for and contribute to a common energy policy .
More than EUR 11 billion are being allocated for these purposes .
We wanted to boost the economy , mainly via the cohesion policy .
This facility is worth EUR 36 billion .
It became clear over the course of the year that there were serious problems in the dairy sector , for instance , which were not a consequence of the general economic crisis .
However , Parliament felt it necessary to stand up for the farmers , which resulted in the creation of a EUR 300 million dairy fund which , although not a permanent fund , still represents a EUR 300 million increase .

With total funds of some EUR 750 million available , more assistance can be given to the dairy sector .
However , Parliament would also now like to stress that this must be accompanied by a complete review of the dairy sector 's problems and its restructuring .
At the same time , we also had to face the fact that we had insufficient room for manoeuvre .
Some headings have no margin , which makes a mid-term review of the multiannual financial framework inevitable .
There is a huge need for this , but there is also a huge need for Member States to use the funds which they have available in a much more targeted and prudent way in order to encourage growth .
Only then will we be able to look Europe 's citizens and taxpayers straight in the eye , as it is their money we are spending in an attempt to make the EU operate more efficiently and successfully .
Mr President , Commissioner , Secretary of State , ladies and gentlemen , today I do not have to worry about failing to mention something important from my report .
Everything that has been drafted over a whole year with colleagues and fellow workers has already been sufficiently discussed in the budget committee , the plenary sessions and the conciliation proceedings or in trialogues .
Most importantly , there is sufficient support for everything in this chamber .
When we began work on drafting the budget at the start of the year , I was curious as to how far my advisors , coordinators and political group would allow me to go , since I had been told that I had already gone too far .
I saw many unused opportunities and shortcomings that I wanted to sort out .
Further opportunities and suggestions for improvement emerged from dozens of discussions with senior representatives of the institutions , departmental directors and other staff .
Staff at the institutions have themselves begun to come forward with information and suggestions .
I have the feeling that they hope and believe that we can sort things out together .
On the one hand , I was pleased that they showed me such trust and came forward but , on the other , I would be even more pleased if their direct superiors could listen to their opinions and resolve the problems .
I believe , of course , that most of the units carry out high-quality and professional work , but at this point , and in this place , I would like to emphasise the importance of personnel work .
On the basis of the documented shortcomings , we managed to implement more systemic measures .
However , it is not the rapporteur but the Secretary General of the European Parliament or the senior representative of the European institution involved who can uncover and resolve everything .
I therefore warmly welcome the agreement from the arbitration proceedings with the management of the European Parliament concerning implementation of an organisational audit .
For the first time in the history of the European Parliament , there will be a functional audit next year in two of its important units , the INLO Directorate-General and the security service .
The aim is to bring about a more efficient use of resources .
In the past , the Court of Auditors was the only institution to agree to external inspections of its work . The outcome has been beneficial .
The Court of Auditors has managed to reduce its administrative costs and has achieved higher productivity levels .
I would like to applaud the great professionalism of the Swedish Presidency .
In April already , before our mandate actually came into effect , we met with government minister Hans Lindblad and his colleagues .
We agreed on the priorities very quickly and together managed to introduce rational elements and points of departure .
We are submitting a joint declaration in the plenary session today on the policy on buildings , which form a significant item in the administrative costs of the institutions . I believe that together , we have managed to initiate a process that will bring cost savings in this area .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is only through joint efforts at a European level that we will manage to meet the greatest challenges of the 21st century : climate change , the risks and cost of raw materials and energy , economic globalisation and threats to our security .
If Europe is to overcome these problems , it must have effective and complex instruments at its disposal .
The Lisbon Treaty will bring us these instruments .
In the initial phase of the treaty coming into effect , the EU will need to have adequate financial resources at its disposal in order to implement new policies .
Even if today 's discussion on the EU budget for 2010 really proves to be the last one this year , the work of both rapporteurs on the 2010 budget will not end but will continue for at least another three months for reasons connected with the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
I believe that this work will produce successful results .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , when we debated this year 's budget in December of last year , we were already aware and , as general rapporteur for the 2009 budget , I mentioned in the discussion that the impact of the financial market crisis and its repercussions on the real economy would be felt in all the Member States .
This is exactly what has happened .
In April 2009 , Parliament and the Council agreed on the funding for the first part of the economic stimulus proposed by the Commission .
In order to make the EUR 2.6 billion available , we needed what was referred to as a minor revision of the financial perspective .
How would we have been able to find the funds otherwise , given our tight budgetary constraints ?
The remaining EUR 2.4 billion , which was missing from the total of EUR 5 billion , was to be found this autumn .
This is where we are now .
Autumn is here and , because Parliament and the Council have come to a sensible arrangement on the 2010 budget , we have a solution .
The 2009 budget is also making a significant contribution to this solution .
The 2010 supplementary and amending budget cuts the payment appropriations by more than EUR 3.4 billion .
In line with this , the margins of the unused areas under the different headings will be reduced by almost EUR 1.5 billion .
All of this applies to the 2009 budget , which consists of EUR 133.8 billion in commitment appropriations and EUR 116.1 billion in payment appropriations , and is therefore not exactly on a lavish scale .
If we take a look at the budget lines where the Commission found the necessary money , it becomes abundantly clear that the Commission simply does not take the budgetary authority 's resolutions seriously .
I would like to remind Parliament that in 2008 , when we adopted the 2009 budget , our priorities were also the competitiveness of the European Union , growth and employment .
This is why we allocated more money than proposed by the Commission to budget lines which promoted the social dimension by creating more and better jobs and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises .
However , it is precisely these budget lines which are being plundered for transfers or amending budgets . Would it be asking too much to call on the Commission to implement the resolutions of Parliament and the Council and to make an effort to ensure that the money reaches its intended destinations where it will have a positive impact ?
The draft budget submitted to us by the Commission has not been accurately calculated or carefully estimated .
In 2009 , we had more than 50 transfers and 10 supplementary and amending budgets .
It is not possible to talk about budgetary accuracy and clarity in this context and this situation must improve .
Our fellow Members in the specialist committees must pay greater attention to the implementation reports in the course of the financial year and the Commission must finally live up to the good reputation that it still has of being an effective European administrative body .
I hope that we will all work towards this .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the agreement on the 2010 budget , we are talking in terms of EUR 141.4 billion in commitments and EUR 122.9 billion in payments .

First of all , I would like to thank both rapporteurs very warmly for their dedication and I would also like to say at this point that everything that Mrs Haug has just said about the 2009 budget is absolutely right .
If we take a look at these figures , we can see that EUR 11.2 billion remains below the payment ceiling for the multiannual financial framework .
This means that , if required , and if there is the political will , the multiannual financial framework leaves us some leeway within the agreed limits .
In recent years , we have , on several occasions , found the solution to necessary changes in the economic and political environment by using reallocation , repeated squeezing of margins and multiple revisions .
These instruments are in place , but with what we have done in 2010 , they are definitely reaching the limits of their possibilities .
This also applies to heading 2 , where , after 2010 and given the possible margins , the air will be much thinner and actually should not be available at all .
Now we have integrated the second tranche of funds of EUR 2.4 billion for the so-called economic recovery package into these agreements .
It was the right thing to fund the second half , consisting of EUR 2.4 billion , in 2010 and not to postpone part of it until 2011 .
Of course , it was not an economic recovery package .
In fact , it involved correct supplementary political priorities with regard to energy and the provision of broadband in rural areas .
The use of the flexibility instrument has enabled us to find an additional EUR 120 million for energy projects and EUR 75 million for the nuclear power plant in Kozloduy .
I would like to point out to the Commission that the way this was handled was very strange and I must also say clearly at this point that this is not the end of the matter .
We are expecting a total of EUR 300 million .
In that context , we are also expecting you to include the funds which have yet to be found for the development of the nuclear power plant in the mid-term review of the budget and not to finance this by means of more cuts in category 1 B. It is important that this is stated very clearly .
In addition , we have carried out a revision for unused funds from 2009 so that a total of EUR 1.9 billion for energy and an additional EUR 420 million for broadband Internet in category II could be put in place .

At this point , I would like to say that this decision on the total amount was the right one , but , of course , we must also make it clear today that our next task is the budgetary implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We surely cannot wait until 2014 , as then we will be faced with further political priorities , which the European Union has to resolve as part of the globalisation process , and with other new tasks .
The resolution to be submitted on Thursday states clearly that we are calling on the new Commission to publish a report on the implementation of the interinstitutional agreement as soon as possible , as provided for in the agreements .
At the same time , and I would like to put particular emphasis on this , the Commission must commit to adapting , reviewing and modifying the current multiannual financial plan for 2007-2013 and to extending it until 2015-2016 .
In addition , it must set in motion the process for the next multiannual financial framework in order to be able to hold a proper open and public debate about the subsequent financial framework .
This is the job of the new Commission and we will , of course , use both the hearings and the debates during the next quarter to call forcefully on the Commission and the Council to take on board these political priorities .
We have an exciting time ahead of us .
Mr President , it is an immense honour for me to be here today for your debate .
The budgetary procedure for 2010 has been demanding and I am pleased with the agreement that was reached between our institutions during the conciliation meeting in mid-November .
This agreement serves two different , but equally important , purposes .
On the one hand , it creates the framework for establishing the 2010 budget with the goal of enabling the European Union to function as smoothly as possible and to implement policy in the way that we want it to be implemented , while guaranteeing a controlled increase in payments , particularly in the times that our Member States are currently facing .
On the other hand , it provides , among other things , for the complete financing of the second part of the recovery plan .
It is a significant contribution from the European Union to dealing with the current economic and financial situation .
I would also like to express the Council 's satisfaction at the agreement we reached with regard to the common foreign and security policy .
I believe that the 2010 budget as a whole represents a balanced compromise between , on the one hand , the requisite budgetary discipline and sound financial management and , on the other , our duty to meet the expectations of our citizens .
The budget also represents a compromise between the different political groups , the different Member States and the different interests of the Council and Parliament .
It is not entirely the budget that the Council would have wished for at the start , nor is it entirely the budget that Parliament would have wished for at the start .
However , I think that it is a good compromise that balances our goals and priorities in the best way possible .
In this connection , I would like to say how proud I am that we , in other words Parliament and the Council as the budgetary authority , with a great deal of help from the Commission , were able to demonstrate the required leadership and sense of responsibility and reach the general agreement that we came to in November .
I think this sends out the right signal in connection with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It would not have been possible without our joint efforts , as everyone involved played their part .
Nor would it have been possible without the excellent and constructive atmosphere that , in our opinion , characterised the whole process .
I would therefore like to take this opportunity to thank the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Lamassoure , for his strength , openness and skills as a negotiator .
I would also like to thank the two rapporteurs , Mr Surján and Mr Maňka , for their constructive cooperation and express my gratitude to my colleagues in the Ecofin Council .
In particular , I would like to thank Commissioner Šemeta , who fulfilled his role as an honest broker to the full .
Last , but not least , I would like to thank all of the staff in the three institutions who , in a very professional manner , helped to make this possible .

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am very happy to have the opportunity to speak to Parliament before it finalises its second reading with Thursday 's vote on the 2010 budget and on amending budget No 10 / 2009 , which has , in part , contributed to the successful outcome of the annual budgetary procedure .
The negotiations on the 2010 budget have required compromises and - may I dare to say - even sacrifices on all sides to achieve our common goal .
This would not have been possible without the constructive and responsible role played by the European Parliament and the Council throughout the negotiations .
I would like to highlight four main points .
Firstly , let me point out some key elements of the conciliation outcome .
Since the joint declaration agreed last April , we knew that we had to strike a delicate balance to find a source of financing for the EUR 2.4 billion of the European Economic Recovery Plan still outstanding .
That could only be achieved through a compensation mechanism and by using all budgetary means existing in the multiannual financial framework .
This was indeed a difficult constraint .
Despite such a difficult constraint , we succeeded in financing completely the Recovery Plan in 2010 and , as the general rapporteur points out , in agreeing on an EU budget that can be a tool to help overcome the economic crisis .
In times of difficulties , I believe the message to citizens is even stronger as we have also been able to respond at the same time to the unforeseen specific needs of milk producers , with the substantial support of Parliament .
Last but not least , the two arms of the Budgetary Authority have acknowledged the need for further assistance in 2010 to Bulgaria 's efforts relating to the decommissioning of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant , through the use of the flexibility instrument .
Secondly , as regards the reserves , let me thank Parliament and particularly the general rapporteur , Mr Surján , for taking into account the responses given by the Commission in reaction to Parliament 's first reading , in the so-called ' letter of executability ' .
That has led to an important reduction in the reserves entered in the 2010 draft budget at the time of Parliament 's first reading .
Thirdly , I wish to stress the importance of a smooth transition to the Lisbon Treaty .
We are now definitively rooted in the Lisbon Treaty as regards the budgetary procedure .
Despite the uncertainties relating to the entry into force of the new treaty , we have been able to secure a smooth transition into the new legal framework .
The period ahead of us will be a challenge for all the institutions , as it will imply a modification of their approach and behaviour , with the need for reinforced dialogue from the very start of the budgetary procedure .
The Commission is ready to play its part and to reconcile positions in the new conciliation committee , while respecting the rights of the two arms of the Budgetary Authority , on an equal footing .
Today , we know that efforts are still to be made to put in place all the new legal instruments stemming from the entry into force of the treaty .
Nonetheless , by building on the loyal interinstitutional collaboration developed over the last two decades , we have been able to agree on a set of transitional measures that will allow the 2010 budget to work effectively .
Finally , there is amending budget No 10 / 2009 , revision of the financial framework and mobilisation of the flexibility instrument .
I take note that Parliament has also agreed to adopt the proposals on the revision of the Multiannual Financial Framework and , as already mentioned , on the flexibility instrument and amending budget No 10 .
I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Böge , for endorsing the results of the conciliation .
This shows that , to achieve our goal , we have been able to make the best use of the tools provided by the current interinstitutional agreement .
I would like also to express my thanks to the rapporteur for the 2009 budget , Mrs Haug , for her work throughout the year on the implementation of the 2009 budget and her support for amending budget No 10 / 2009 , which is part of the ' package ' linked with the revision of the Multiannual Financial framework and the financing of the Recovery Plan .
I have also noted your critical remarks towards the Commission about the need to improve its performance in terms of budget implementation .

This year 's amending budget foresees a reduction of EUR 3.2 billion in payment appropriations , which is significantly lower than the EUR 4.9 billion reduction of last year , and points to an improvement in the execution of a budget which , after the proposed reduction , is set at EUR 113 billion for 2009 .

However , there is still room for further improvement , and I can assure you that the Commission will continue to do its utmost to make best use of the authorised budget appropriations in 2010 .
As to the issue of the simplification of procedures in order to accelerate the implementation of expenses , while this avenue can be explored , I believe a careful balance needs to be struck between real simplification and the need to abide by the rules in order to safeguard the EU 's financial interests .
Once again , I would like to express my thanks to Parliament 's negotiating team and , in particular , to the Chair of the Budget Committee , Mr Lamassoure , and to the rapporteurs for the 2010 budget , Mr Surján and Mr Maňka .


I would also like to thank the Council 's negotiating team and , in particular , the State Secretary , Mr Lindblad , for the constructive work done during the budgetary process .
I hope that today 's debate will be constructive and productive and will lead to a positive vote on the 2010 budget this Thursday .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this budget represents a response to the economic crisis , with its focus firmly on Europe 's citizens .
It is a budget designed to fight unemployment and kick-start the economy .
We are therefore prioritising the European Economic Recovery Plan , with financing of EUR 2.4 billion for the coming year .
It should also be noted that we are promoting economic recovery when we increase the payment appropriations for the main budget headings .
With regard to unemployment and youth unemployment , I would like to highlight the proposal to review the Erasmus programme .
We welcome the granting of EUR 300 million of additional support to the dairy sector but I would stress that a budget heading should be created to establish a permanent fund for this sector .
We also consider it very important that the current multiannual financial framework for 2007-2013 be revised and extended to the 2015-2016 financial years , as we proposed .
I must point out that tackling climate change , together with energy security , are EU priorities that do not feature prominently enough in this budget .
As for the budgets for Parliament and the other institutions , which have now been tabled for second reading , they are the same as we approved at first reading .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) repeats that rigour and transparency are paramount , and therefore it supports a long-term buildings policy , the implementation of a zero-based budget at the beginning of each parliamentary term , and a cost / benefit analysis of policies such as Parliament 's communications policy .
As for the new demands that have arisen with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we support excellence in lawmaking and the demand for adequate resources to achieve this objective .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Surján for the positive outcome of the negotiations .
As others have done , I would like to express my satisfaction at the fact that we , in Parliament , have been able to retain our important priorities in the second reading , too , even if we have had to make some cuts in connection with the agreement that we had with the Council .
In addition to the energy investments in the recovery plan , we have also succeeded in allocating extra money to budget headings that are aimed at research and innovation in the field of energy .
We have succeeded in safeguarding our pilot projects and preparatory actions , which are new initiatives that are being instigated by Parliament and , on a personal note , I would like to say that we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are pleased that we have succeeded in securing funds for the Baltic Sea Strategy .
As others have done , I would like to highlight two things .
Firstly , the lack of flexibility , with regard to which I would like Mr Šemeta , who is , of course , continuing in another post within the Commission , to take note of the fact that we do indeed need this mid-term review of the budget and I would like the Commission - the new Commission - to take this seriously .
Secondly , we need to look at things closely and ask ourselves whether there are any new priorities that we need to set within this framework .
Are there any programmes that are not working very well ?
Can the priorities be changed within the existing framework , or do we need to revise the framework itself ?
We are , of course , in the position of having had resources as a result of the fact that plenty of money was allocated to agriculture to start with within the multiannual financial framework .
However , this is no longer available , so now things will get difficult , as Mr Böge pointed out .
Now comes the moment of truth .
The next few years , when we will need to be flexible , will be very , very difficult if we cannot get the finance ministers to provide more money , and I think this will be more difficult than usual in the current economic climate .
There is another issue that I would also like to raise , and that I would also like you to take into account in your future work , Mr Šemeta .
Mr Maňka has done some very fine work with regard to administrative expenditure and we are now seeing very populist politicians saying that we must not give the EU 's staff the pay rises that they are actually entitled to .
In my group , we do not advocate the contravention of existing agreements .
If people are dissatisfied with the system , they must change the system .
It is no good simply to be dissatisfied with the result of the established system .
I think there are good grounds for examining the conditions of EU employees and , first and foremost , examining whether the rules that we have in place for staff in the EU system also provide the leadership opportunities we need in order to attain the effective implementation of the EU 's policies .
It is several years now since the Kinnock reform .
It is five years since enlargement .
It is now time to review things once again .
This is just something for you to think about , Mr Šemeta .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lindblad , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance also believes that the budget for 2010 which we have negotiated and agreed on is a reasonable compromise .
At the beginning of the budget discussions , there were still several open issues and gaps which had not been funded .
We have now more or less resolved these problems .
Parliament will pay one third and the Council two thirds to fill the gaps , so from our perspective , this is a reasonable compromise and we are in a position to start the new year .
Nevertheless , I would like to begin by looking at the problems relating to the structure and inflexibility of the European budget .
We have already heard about the political symptoms .
The fact that we had 50 transfers and 10 supplementary and amending budgets in 2009 must make it obvious to everyone that the objectives of this budget , with its tight constraints and rigid structure , are clearly no longer up to date .
We must all work together to change this if we want to do things better in future .
Therefore , I will now move on to the questions concerning the forthcoming review .
The budget which we are now adopting is a budget for times of crisis .
This was a motto coined by Mr Surján .
In this context , crisis refers to both the financial crisis and the economic crisis .
However , while the conference in Copenhagen is still underway , I would like to add the following point .
We are , of course , faced with a crisis which threatens our very existence , in other words , the question of whether we , by which I mean people all over the world , will be able to save our planet and limit global warming to 2 ° C. To achieve this , we must all act together with regard to our budgets , our management of resources and the way in which we live and manage our finances .
We must move over to renewable energy sources .
We must reduce our CO2 emissions dramatically .
We must become a low-carbon economy .
Of course , we must also spend much more on research into sustainability , new materials and new products .
This is the only way to create new jobs .
We must do this in such a way that the European internal market benefits from it and that we open up new opportunities for the European Union on the world market with green technologies and environmentally friendly products .
This is our only hope of convincing the citizens of Europe that the European project has a future .
This also means that we - the Member States and the European Union - must jointly invest more in education .
This is the main resource that we have in the European Union .
We must provide support for it in quite a different way so that our young people have opportunities in Europe and also throughout the world .
There is one thing that I would like to add .
We must also change our agricultural policy and our agricultural export subsidies dramatically and focus on the Structural Funds .
These must also undergo significant change with regard to the restoration of old buildings and sustainable transport policy .
What is it that I want to say ? The 2010 budget represents a step in the right direction , but it is by no means enough .
We in the Verts / ALE Group have coined the term ' the green new deal ' , because we are convinced that only a joint effort by the Member States , the Commission and the European Parliament in the spirit of Europe will generate the political strength and conviction to bring about major changes , to transform our economy and to create new jobs .
Only when we can generate the political strength to make real changes will we be able to modify the European budget and the national budgets in the same way .
With regard to Copenhagen , in the next few years , we will hopefully also be able to make funding available to enable the poor countries and , in particular , those in sub-Saharan Africa , to put in place new growth models .
It is important that they do not copy our mistakes , but instead that we all cooperate - the industrial nations , the emerging economies and the developing countries - on moving towards a new way of living together and a new type of economy .
This is the only way in which we can be successful throughout Europe and on a global scale .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , the EU budget has been suffering from a number of structural problems .
It is too big and it keeps growing .
There are built-in automatic increases for many items , especially for the operating costs of bureaucracy without any apparent improvement in output performance .
All budgets are supposed to be mirror images of some economic policy considerations .
The EU budget is an exception .
It does not reflect any consistent set of common values .
Instead , it tries to justify an EU-wide policy of neo-Keynesian demand management by spending more on a great majority of items without any underlying structural reforms .
Take the example of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Half a billion euros is supposed to be spent on mitigating the negative impact of globalisation .
Instead , Member States are having a hard time putting together rational proposals for a couple of tens of millions .
On the one hand , it is a tremendous waste of scarce resources ; on the other hand , it is a prime example of distorting the rules of creative destruction in capitalism .
The Committee on Budgets was unhappy to see a new item - the cost of decommissioning the Kozloduy nuclear power plant - coming up at the last minute .
It was a sign of bad planning .
Nevertheless , not only the decommissioning of Kozloduy , but even support for the construction of a new power plant , would be more important than spending in the milk fund with this untimely and inefficient increase .
As if it were part of a beneficial demand boost , the EU bureaucracy gets undeserved and unnecessary wage increases .
When the EU is struggling with a once in a lifetime deep recession , it is just not appropriate to shield ourselves and our own administration from the negative consequences .
Would it not be more appropriate to accept even a nominal wage decline and hence boost employment in the name of European solidarity ?
It is also a worrying sign of inadequate planning that the disparity between commitment and payment appropriations is growing in the case of a large number of items .
Since we cannot incur a deficit , we push more and more commitments to the future .
It is tantamount to mortgaging the future of the EU and undermining prospective discretionary spending beyond repair .
Many MEPs are concentrating on pet projects and pork-barrel spending .
The budget should not be used as a backward-looking tool preserving the status quo , but as a forward-looking instrument to sharpen the institutional regulatory framework of the EU which , in turn , should aim at strengthening the single market .
Less protection for vested interests is the key for the EU to avoid sinking into irrelevance on the world stage .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think we are in danger of not seeing the wood for the trees with this budget .
The question I put to you , quite frankly , is this : if there were no crisis , would this budget be very different from what it is ?
We all know it would not .
That is the crucial issue .
That , in fact , is why the report on which we are going to vote on Thursday recognises that the Council is not prepared to increase the funds available to tackle the crisis , is reducing the appropriations for the Structural and Cohesion Funds precisely when the crisis is happening and is severe , and , I repeat , does not give climate change the prominence it deserves .
The report itself adds further criticisms , like those made by Mrs Haug .
For example , there is an enormous disparity between the level of spending authorised and the payments made ; spending remains below the planned limits ; and we basically do not even know whether what is spent is spent well .
In view of such a damning assessment , how can this House approve such a budget ?
There is only one explanation : Parliament is the weak link in the budgetary authority .
Even children know that he who pays the piper calls the tune , and it is the Member States who pay .
Ladies and gentlemen , today we are also talking about the future , because within a year , Europeans will be confronting the greatest budgetary adjustment programme in living memory in each of our Member States .
It is quite simple for the ordinary citizen : when one crisis ends , another begins , this time ostensibly to restructure public accounts .
This policy is irresponsible and , in the meantime , it keeps the zero deficit in the European budget .
The difficulties cannot continue to be borne by the same people as ever : the unemployed , casual workers and pensioners , through cuts in their pensions .
The Union will only stop being part of the problem when it starts sending the bills to the right addresses .
Without closing offshore tax havens , without taxing financial transactions and without issuing bonds , we will never be able to attack the crisis with the only response that can really put an end to it : social justice .
You can therefore count on the left for a robust , radical and redistributive revision of the financial perspective until 2016 , but do not count on the left to tart up a mediocre budget that neither addresses the social crisis nor shows the ambition needed to fight climate change .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the proposal for the second reading of the 2010 budget still represents a 6 % increase in respect of 2009 .
That proposal appears to come from another planet - a planet where there is no financial crisis .
Following the conciliation meeting in November , Parliament still deplores the Council 's refusal to increase the financing of programmes under the grand heading of ' Competitiveness for Growth and Employment ' .
The Council must know all too well how such funds are used .
Parliament also criticises the Council over the reduction in payments , alleging that this does not contribute to reducing the disparity between commitments and payments .
The Council must know all too well that this disparity is due to the lack of intelligence and of consultation that characterises the budgeting process .
The Court of Auditors recently brought to our attention that the amount of unpaid commitments presently stands at EUR 155 billion - or 126 % of the current annual budget .
Does this say something to you ?
Parliament welcomes the increase in administrative expenditure - an increase which also includes Members ' salaries .
It is obscene for us to vote for an increase in our own salaries , all of which are to be paid by taxpayers who are losing their jobs and social securities owing to the reduction in national budgets .
In the current circumstances , we should renounce any increases .
The European Parliament rejects the budgetary cuts introduced by the Council in the structural and cohesion funds .
Colleagues , are you aware that these are the areas where the Court of Auditors has found the highest levels of errors ?
Does the European Parliament think we should be injecting more money into programmes where we are certain abuses are taking place ?
In addition , the public should know that this budget does not cover the costs of implementing the Lisbon Treaty , which will be added through amending budgets - i.e. through the back door .
One might ask how much this will amount to .
' Who cares ? ' comes the answer , ' It is taxpayers ' money ' .
As I advised back in October , British citizens will see their contribution to the European Union raised from GBP 45 million a day to GBP 50 million a day , while the British Government will be reducing public services so as to allow a cut of GBP 12 billion in the national budget .
That is almost the same amount that the United Kingdom contributes to the European Union .
There is no question that this budget is a burden and not a way out of the crisis .
Colleagues , listen to your conscience and vote against this budget .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regardless of whether we live in urban areas or in the countryside , we all form part of an information and knowledge society .
Those people , businesses and organisations which are able to use modern information technologies most effectively have a significant competitive advantage .
However , this also requires the necessary funding to be made available for developing and extending the technological infrastructure in the form of broadband Internet in rural areas in particular .
This is where the second part of the European Economic Recovery Programme comes in and logically , this also supports the Lisbon strategy .
Energy security , both now and in future , is an important issue at a European level .
Bulgaria has decided to close the Kozloduy nuclear power plant immediately .
This will cost hundreds of millions of euros , but the radioactive waste will remain a permanent risk factor which will endanger the health and safety of future generations .
I am interested in the real , external costs of using nuclear power and how they should be calculated .
It is high time for us not only to research and promote alternative renewable energy technologies , but also to implement them more widely .
The joint declaration on building policy emphasises the importance of a medium- to long-term approach to building .
For me , three things are important in this area .
Firstly , energy-efficient buildings can result in a reduction of up to one third in CO2 emissions .
Secondly , the use of building materials which are harmful to health , such as asbestos , must be avoided at all costs .
Thirdly , I am , as always , in favour of policy being transparent and manageable , and this applies also to building design and planning .
( FR ) Mr President , I , in turn , would like to express my satisfaction with the agreement reached in conciliation .
It required the intelligence of the Swedish Presidency , the effective contribution of the Commission , the competence of our rapporteurs and the sense of compromise of the political groups ' representatives .
May we thank them all .
In my view , however , the big news of the day is not this agreement .
When it comes to the future of the European budget , the week 's major event is not taking place here in Strasbourg , but in Copenhagen .
There , our great national leaders have taken two days to agree to find EUR 2 400 000 000 to finance so-called EU aid for disadvantaged countries affected by climate change , and this is just for 2010 .
We MEPs would have been considered irresponsible had we failed to make EUR 81 million in EU budget cuts , and here we see EUR 2 400 000 000 being plucked out of thin air .
I welcome this outcome , but no democrat can accept a procedure that is so obscure , so devoid of all democratic control - all the parliaments , the European Parliament and the national parliaments , are going to be presented with a fait accompli - and which has such unfair consequences for certain Member States , since some will pay two or three times as much as other , equally wealthy , States .
Nevertheless , let us welcome this first : our Heads of State or Government are recognising that common EU policies can no longer make do with a budget that is limited to 1 % of gross domestic product .
They are reinventing the European budget , but in a kind of parallel form .
I am counting on the new European Commission and on the Spanish Presidency to help us lay the foundations of the new budgetary Europe , which no one now disputes is necessary .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we reach the end of a budgetary procedure and it is possible to assess the work carried out as a whole , I think that we need to ask a very frank , straightforward question : is this a useful budget ?
This budget is a transitional budget , one marking a shift towards the Europe of Lisbon , a shift within the major economic and financial crisis which has affected the entire world .
This budget is therefore awkward in two respects .
It needs to respond to the crisis , but reflect awareness that during a crisis , the resources available are scanty .
It needs to make a positive contribution to economic recovery , but also cut , reduce and contain spending where possible .
This budget will make EUR 141 billion available for next year .
That is not much more than was available in 2009 , but huge efforts have been made , a great deal of work has been done on the priorities and on channelling the available resources to the current priorities .
The focus is on two budget lines : competitiveness and the environment .
Competitiveness , because it contains social policies , employment policies and the delicate challenge represented by the Structural Funds , which still constitute the cornerstone of redistributive policies within Europe .
This budget line will be allocated about EUR 65 billion for next year .
The environment too , which encompasses agricultural policy , will be allocated approximately EUR 60 billion .
This 2010 budget , however , relates , above all , to the economic recovery plan .
This plan attracted strong support last year , but it was not fully financed in 2009 .
Today , thanks to significant efforts to redeploy resources , EUR 2.5 billion can at last be invested in energy infrastructure and broadband .
Substantial efforts have also been made , however , to shape this budget in accordance with the Lisbon strategy , to provide even more resources than those provided by the Commission in the draft budget for the Erasmus programme , for lifelong learning , because there is a question which we must ask ourselves honestly , namely , whether this is a useful budget , but , first and foremost we have a fundamental yardstick : the usefulness of the budget must be tailored to Europe 's citizens .
It must be a useful budget for every constituent citizen of Europe , and it is on the basis of this usefulness , tailored to the people , that I believe we must initiate and continue a sensitive debate on the review of the margins of availability and the resources that we wish to give to Europe for its policies .
( LV ) Mr President , I would like to speak about Europe 's Structural Funds .
These account for approximately 35.5 % of Europe 's total budget .
Specifically , the European Regional Development Fund and the European Cohesion Fund from 2007 to 2013 total EUR 308 billion .
In 2010 , they account for EUR 39 billion in commitments , and approximately EUR 31 billion in payments .
What risks and problems can be seen ?
The most recent information is as at 1 October 2009 : we are at the end of the second year , linear implementation might be 28.5 % , the payments rate is 24.35 % , and here are the first problems .
55 % of Member States are under this average .
The indicator in the worst state is 40 % less than the average , and the difference between the best and the worst states in the uptake of funds is 370 % , i.e. a factor of 3.7 .
If we look at the individual funds , then in the reconstruction and regional development fund , 22 % of the Member States are below the average , with the worst figure being 50 % below the average , and a difference of 500 % between best and worst .
There are countries where the uptake of resources is five times worse than those that have the best uptakes !
In the European Social Fund , 22 % of countries are below the average figure , with the worst being 43 % below the average , and differences of a factor of 3.7 .
For the European Cohesion Fund , the worst country is 68 % below the average and the difference between the best and the worst is 300 % .
Where is the risk ?
If we look at this in comparison with the 2000-2006 period , when there was no crisis , then we can see that the states that are now lagging behind in the uptake of resources are among those countries that did not take up funds previously .
Specifically , we have unpaid money of EUR 16 billion for the old fund for the 2000-2006 period .
In the reconstruction and development fund , EUR 2.4 billion overall has been lost .
That means that 20 % of the Member States have not taken up this money and will not now receive it .
In the European Social Fund , this figure is EUR 1.9 billion , since 16 % of the Member States have not fully implemented the amounts .
Altogether , that means that EUR 4.3 billion was planned for ...

Mr President , we are all aware of the remaining EUR 2.4 billion for the European Economic Recovery Plan that has been committed in the 2010 budget , and I welcome the attempt to get Europe through this difficult economic climate in this regard .
I feel the focus of this plan should be on innovation and employment and essentially limiting job losses .
I hope that this will be money well spent and not wasted .
These resources must be properly allocated and used in an effective and efficient way by Member States .
I am glad that the promised EUR 420 million for broadband in rural areas has been secured .
This will be a very important initiative in many rural areas and , if properly implemented , should encourage the development of small and medium-sized enterprises in those areas .
I welcome the fact that the milk fund has been established .
I think this was very much needed and it is a good example of this Parliament 's achievement in the formation of the budget , with funds being used , let us put it this way , that were not being used in other areas .
I want to speak a little bit on what I would like to see in the budget for the future .
I want to see that the people it has helped are the victims of violence , the victims of terrorism , because I think we can do more in this area .
These are people who have not been helped .
They are not getting enough nor receiving enough help from their national governments .
Where I come from , there are many areas whereby they are being helped at the moment through existing funds , but there are other areas where we could do more .
After 2014 , there will be no funds available to them and I appeal to this House to begin now to look at how we can actually help the victims of the violence of terrorism .
I hope the incoming Spanish Presidency will be able to help me in this area .
Can I take this opportunity to briefly express my concerns about the administration of EUR 60 million of funds in Northern Ireland .
I hope the Commissioner for budgets here will take on board this particular point .
The Northern Ireland Assembly has the responsibility of administering the funds .
They are about 18 months behind in distribution of these funds .
I would ask them if they are going to administer these funds that they do it efficiently , that they do it effectively and that they do it wisely at a time when people need to go to work .
( FR ) Mr President , in our Union access to a reliable and low-carbon electricity supply should be recognised as a fundamental right for every European citizen .
To this end , our Union must conduct a genuine European public energy policy , and not finance , by way of a budgetary procedure , the decommissioning of a nuclear power plant in Bulgaria .
Building a Europe of energy for all means recognising that energy is a public right of mankind , not a commodity .
It means repealing all the directives on deregulation and liberalisation of competition in the energy sector , guaranteeing the public regulation and ownership of the entire nuclear sector , including on issues relating to decommissioning and subcontracting .
It means creating a European energy agency that would coordinate and pool all the Member States ' research and security efforts in the energy sector and guarantee equal access to energy for all EU citizens , and setting up an economic interest group bringing together all European businesses , public and private alike , that operate in the energy sector .
This EIG would enable major projects - projects relating to distribution networks , to low-carbon energy production , to research and security - to be undertaken within a context of cooperation .
Therefore , Europeans ' money would be put to good use ; it would promote development , and not just increase the return on capital invested .
( NL ) Mr President , the 2010 budget is being adopted against the background of the economic crisis , and additional care must be taken when budgeting EU funds .
In this context , the Council has forced the European Parliament to set priorities .
The ailing economy and investment in sustainability have been placed high on the agenda , and rightly so .
In his report , Mr Surján consistently gives expression to the priorities of economic growth and employment .
These priorities are reflected in the shifts between the various headings of the Multiannual Financial Framework , and can also be seen in the financing of the European Economic Recovery Plan , which rightly puts a heavy emphasis on new technology .
Particularly relevant here is support for projects involving sustainable energy sources and the improvement of energy-network links with third countries .
To this end , we are to help bring about the badly needed diversification of energy suppliers .
This is a successful set of priorities .
I should like to make one observation in this connection , however .
We should have been rather stricter .
If the European Union wants its work to be credible , it should be confining itself to its core tasks rather than inflating its own role in combating the crisis .
Matters not falling within the European domain include education , culture and citizenship .
Yet the request for more disposable funds , which recurs every year , is at odds with this .
It should not be necessary to mobilise the flexibility instrument to make up for the shortfall in funds .
A stronger set of priorities , on the other hand , would make us a constructive partner for the Council , particularly at a time of economic crisis , when Member States are experiencing shortfalls and are having to make drastic cutbacks .
In short , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Surján , for taking this step in the right direction and putting the emphasis on economic recovery , yet without losing sight of the social aspects of EU policy such as care for children in homes , particularly in Bulgaria .

( NL ) Mr President , with one minute to speak about a budget of EUR 141 billion , one must of course confine oneself to the essentials , namely that , at all levels - Community , national , regional and even lower - so-called ' European ' money is really spent less efficiently and less carefully than money from closer to taxpayers .
To give an example , the European Court of Auditors itself reported that , until recently , some 11 % of the huge Cohesion Fund was disbursed completely erroneously .
For 2010 , the figure concerned would be some EUR 4 billion ; no negligible amount .
This is objectionable and unacceptable .
Now we are allocating an additional EUR 2.4 billion in the 2010 budget for the economic recovery plan .
I do not oppose this , but I continue to wonder whether the European level is really appropriate , and whether Europe would perhaps do better to confine itself to the efficient coordination of tangible , determined action at national level .
Finally , I continue to oppose the colossal waste that is commonplace in all the European institutions .
( ES ) Mr President , I would , of course , like to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mr Lindblad , for the Council , and particularly the Commissioner , Mr Šemeta , who has only been responsible for the budget for a few months .
I sincerely believe that he has done an excellent job and he has succeeded in finding a significant consensus solution for the conciliation in November .
For this , I would particularly like to congratulate the Commissioner .
It is the last year that we will be drawing up budgets in this way .
I think the system has reached the end of its life and I think the political groups need to think very seriously over the coming months about how we are going to arrive at a new budget procedure that is in line with the realities of Lisbon .
I will give you an example .
This year we have had discussions in the area of agriculture , which have been virtual discussions , but which have had a real result .
Next year , the discussions will be real from the start in that we have the ordinary legislative procedure , and therefore it will be an exercise in responsibility for all MEPs .
Finally , it will be a real budget and , as Mr Lamassoure said a moment ago , it will be a budget in which it will not be possible for the Council to brilliantly decide on new budget lines in a few summits outside of Parliament , after which the European Commission and the European Parliament will have to do some financial magic tricks in order to be able to introduce these new and brilliant promises made by the Council into the budget .
That has come to an end , and what we hope from 1 January of next year is that everyone in the institutions will exercise their responsibilities in order to genuinely draw up budgets that reflect the political reality and the economic and financial situation of Europe .
( ES ) Mr President , I believe we should be pleased with the result of the negotiations between Parliament and the Council for the final adoption of the Union 's budget for 2010 .
We should also be pleased because we have managed to maintain the funding for the dairy sector that we adopted in Parliament at first reading , which could help our farmers to ride out this crisis period .
I hope that we will manage to find a permanent solution and that they will soon be able to see the light at the end of the tunnel .
We can also be pleased that an agreement has been reached to fund a microfinance mechanism for the European Union with fresh money .
We can also be pleased because of something that seems obvious but is scarcely talked about : agricultural expenditure and expenditure on cohesion , which are the two most important European Union policies , have not been questioned .
The truth is that today we can consider this to be a success .
We can be especially pleased because we have found EUR 2.4 billion of fresh money to fund the second part of the European Economic Recovery Plan .
Hidden underneath all this celebration , however , is a much less pleasant reality .
There is no money to fund the policies that we have all allocated to the Union , or rather there is money , but there appears to be an unshakeable dogma in the Council : not a single euro more than what was approved in 2006 for the current financial framework .
President-in-Office of the Council , this is not budgetary austerity , it is economic and political short-sightedness .
Just over a year ago now , the European Commission proposed an Economic Recovery Plan for the European Union .
It was a relatively modest plan compared with what there was in the Member States , but it was focused on boosting the future sectors of our economies .
The Council was opposed at first because it was proposed that the financial framework be increased by EUR 5 billion .
Following long negotiations and discussions , you accepted the plan , but we have had to do it in two years .
You have forced the European Commission to do some clever creative accounting so that this money can be used without it hardly being noticed in the financial framework .
All we can talk about is transparency and simplification , but the Commission had to draw us a wonderful diagram in order for those of us who work on the budget to be able to understand its proposal .
I challenge you , President-in-Office of the Council , to explain this agreement to a citizen who is still interested in what we do in the European Parliament .
This means that we are not creating the Europe that is close to the citizens that we all want .
I am not saying this to be critical , but because until the Council changes its policy , European integration will be weak .
We have just signed a treaty , but we need a new spirit .
Either we stop thinking that every euro spent in Europe is a waste or we join the eurosceptics .
On Thursday , we are going to adopt a resolution asking for a review of the financial framework in order to serve the new needs of the Union .
I completely agree with this point of view , but I warn you that a review of the financial framework must be an increase .
The new needs cannot be funded by cutting back on the current priorities .
To make myself clearer - and I will finish now - we are not going to accept cuts in the cohesion policies or in the agricultural policy .
( NL ) Mr President , we are discussing the last budget under the Treaty of Nice .
Next year , things will be very different : for the first time , Parliament will be able to get its teeth into agricultural policy and fisheries expenditure , for example .
This part of the budget will finally come within the reach of Parliament , and I am looking forward to that , I can tell you .
Anyway , we are now talking about the 2010 budget .
I should like to make a couple of brief remarks .
The additional money for energy and research and also for decommissioning the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in Bulgaria are positive aspects , but what I take issue with are the broad lines of the EU budget .
Will the European contributions really make our economy fit for the future ?
The answer is ' no ' .
Let us not fool ourselves .
Let us use the forthcoming review of the financial perspective to set our sights on the future .
I call on the Council and the Commission to really take this review seriously , then , rather than regarding it as a bit of a joke .
The current budget is still investing too much in yesterday 's economy : there is too much of the old support for agriculture and the regions and far too little investment in what is really important , namely sustainability and innovation .
We are at a turning point .
Do we want to turn Europe into an open-air museum where Americans , Chinese and Indians can experience fine culture and good food , or do we want to make it into a dynamic , progressive region , one that the rest of the world regards with envy ?
In other words , do we choose stagnation or progress ?
My answer goes without saying .
Let us also take a close look at the financing of the European Union .
We are going to have to move over to a system of own resources no matter what .
In response to a request by our group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe , the Commission will be presenting a proposal on this .
I am looking forward to this .
The current system gives the Union too little elbow room and has the perverse effect of making Member States more interested in how much they can get back than in whether the European contribution is really effective .
I also take the view that we need to do much more to halt the decline in world biodiversity .
( EL ) Mr President , we do not agree with the political approach of this budget , because it increases military spending and because it slowly but surely merges its policy with NATO policy .
Essentially , this permanently excludes the potential for an independent EU foreign policy .
The five-year financial framework cuts agricultural spending and fails to support the household economy , cohesion and the fight to maintain the climate .
We want a European Union which passes legislation to protect consumers from speculation and citizens from the indiscriminate eye of authority .
We have all been turned into prima facie suspects .
I want to make one thing clear : we are against the budget , but our arguments are completely contrary to those we heard earlier from the non-attached members from the United Kingdom .
We believe in linking national interests and we do not accept that it is right for each nation to retreat into its shell .
That just leads to hostility and ultimately to conflict .
( HU ) The European Commission is planning to divert considerable resources to two areas in the modification of the 2009 budget .
One area is competitiveness , which includes the research and development framework programmes , even though this was regarded as a priority until now .
If we blame the candidates in this sector , this makes reducing red tape an even more emphatic requirement .
The other area is the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development , which has suffered a EUR 1.6 billion reduction .
This fund is intended to be used for rural areas to retain or restore their population .
Hungary is hit particularly hard by this problem .
Hungarian agriculture is dominated by large holdings . They are the ones which receive the area payments , while their use of labour is fairly small .
The rapporteur had some harsh words for the modification .
He said that the Commission was raiding the main areas .
My question is the following : why does he still support the approval of this modification ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Lindblad , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to pick up on the call made by Mr Garriga for realistic budgets .
What are the costs of the Treaty of Lisbon ?
This has become a very urgent problem .
Why can we not be more realistic with regard to the Structural Funds ?
They have become our sacred cow .
We already have outstanding appropriations from a period of two and half years which have not been discharged and we are piling up at least a further EUR 30 billion on top of these appropriations .
We have a problem in the Balkans , where countries are preparing for accession to the European Union .
As a result of negative resolutions from the socialists and liberals , we have little interest in finding out what is really happening in the Balkans .
How are the different EU institutions in Kosovo , for example , of which there are now large numbers , working together ?
These were all important amendments which this House has rejected and which I believe we should all follow up on , because we have a job to do there .
Where is the progress in the progress reports ?
We have voted in favour of the report of the Court of Auditors in which we called for a traffic light system , but the Committee on Budgets later refused to lend its authority to this system with corresponding reserves .
All of these things are contradictions and , in my opinion , the House is not yet prepared to be realistic or to lend its authority to its own resolutions .
I would like to call for a realistic approach to Kozloduy .
The special report from the Commission on the use of EU funds in Bulgaria until this summer did not mention Kozloduy , although it has received money from PHARE .
Up to the end of 2009 , at least EUR 602 million was spent on Kozloduy .
I have tried to find out what happened to the money and I have discovered that nothing has yet been closed down .
Plans have simply been made for managing the decommissioning process .
Kozloduy has demonstrated to me how little the Commission knows about what is happening with our money .
It also demonstrated that the numerous subsidiary budgets which have come into existence make it more difficult to control the situation and also result in the Commission losing its overview .
Therefore , we should at least stop pressing for the subsidiary budgets , because the result is that we ourselves no longer have any idea what is happening .
( HU ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , during the current financial and economic crisis , particular attention must be focused on growth , competitiveness , jobs and a more efficient and simpler implementation of the Cohesion and Structural Funds .
Other priority objectives , apart from these , include increasing the security of the energy supply and its transportation , internal security , demographic challenges and the issue of climate change .
This is precisely why we welcome the major parliamentary successes achieved in the draft budget tabled before us , connected with the economic recovery plan and support for energy investments .
We also welcome the minor successes , such as the support granted to dairy producers or the microfinance facility for SMEs , achieved after lengthy debate .
I would also like to mention the intelligent energy projects and support for lifelong learning .
We must emphasise that it is a real result that we have managed to raise the EUR 2.4 billion for economic recovery .
I am also delighted that we have managed to guarantee confirmation of the Galileo budget .
Almost EUR 2 billion has been allocated to energy projects , which is perhaps the most significant result that the European Parliament can credit itself with .
We have also managed to provide support for the safe closure of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in Bulgaria , and I would particularly like to emphasise the safe aspect in this matter .
We have managed to get support for dairy producers included in the budget at the European Parliament 's request .
We must also stress that Parliament has made responsible decisions and acknowledge that we have allocated the budget margins sensibly .
However , our margins are dwindling .
Parliament can be proud of the 2010 budget .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for this , Mr Surján and Mr Maňka .
Our task for the future is to ensure that the Treaty of Lisbon not only strengthens Parliament 's remit , but also that the EU budget , thanks to its reform , will also make life easier for Europe 's entrepreneurs and citizens .
In order to achieve this , I wish us great strength and perseverance in the coming years . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is my turn to pay tribute to the imagination shown and the efforts made by our institutions in order to release - via some budgetary techniques , as Mr Lamassoure mentioned , by some miracle - the very substantial sums of money that correspond to the second phase of the economic recovery plan , that is , EUR 2 400 000 000 .
I should also like to say how pleased I am with the EUR 300 million that we have managed to find in order to respond , in the short term , to the very serious crisis affecting farmers today .
I hope that this sum of money and these difficulties will mean that we take a pragmatic approach with regard to their future .
We should also pay tribute to the pilot projects and the preparatory actions which , as Mrs Jensen stressed , breathe new life into our budget .
Beyond these remarks , which have been made very effectively , I should like to stress two points .
I should like , firstly , to ask a question and , secondly , to adopt a political position .
The question is this : I should like an official explanation as to how our Union is going to stand with regard to cohesion policy and the Structural Funds , elements which seem to have been caught up in the eye of the storm affecting certain EU partners .
I believe that this is evidence of what is happening in Europe .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has come out well in these negotiations .
I would like to thank all my fellow Members who took part in the negotiations and who clearly stated their opinion to the Commission and the Council .
Now it is important for us to do full justice to all the issues relating to the Treaty of Lisbon , including the entire budget area .
We have shown that Parliament must be taken seriously and that it makes sense to take Parliament seriously .
These budget negotiations have made that very clear .
Many of my fellow Members have already mentioned the fact that we have achieved our most important objectives .
As rapporteur for the agriculture budget in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , I can say that although our budget - the agricultural part - has been squeezed very tightly , we are still within our margins .
We have pulled in our horns .
We have achieved this ourselves in our committee and I attach great importance to this .
It is a success for Parliament to secure EUR 300 million for the milk fund in the face of all the arguments against this made by the Commission over the years and by the Council , especially given the difficult situation which dairy farmers find themselves in .
Other sectors of agricultural production are also having problems at the moment .
This affects not only agriculture and farmers but also many jobs in downstream areas .
Given the current situation , this creates even more difficulties .
We need a permanent budget line for the milk fund and we aim to achieve this in future .
We have allocated more money to the 2010 budget than we did in 2009 .
That is the result of the current situation and we are aware of this .
We will act accordingly and do everything in our power to ensure that our agriculture policy is sustainable and innovative .
( FR ) Mr President , in essence , the vote on the budget is a profoundly political act , and we must learn a political lesson - a major , fundamental political lesson - from the budget being proposed to us .
The European Union budget , and particularly this one , reflects the lack of a European political project even though , against a backdrop of crisis and at the start of our new mandates , European citizens need it more than ever .
This budget marks the absence of a global vision for Europe .
The Council and the Commission have chosen to let the Member States develop their own , often rival , recovery plans , and have abandoned efforts to coordinate an economic , social and environmental recovery at EU level .
There has been no leverage attempt , no encouraging of European solidarity .
The Council and the Commission are easing their consciences by applying a recovery plan bit by bit .
Indeed , the 2010 budget provides funding for the second part of the recovery plan totalling EUR 5 billion , a derisory amount .
Admittedly , it will allocate EUR 300 million to the milk fund , but this is insufficient when we know that in France , for example , the net income of farmers fell by 34 % in 2009 .
The 2010 budget earmarks EUR 25 million for microfinance and , against the advice of the Council , allows the draft budget relating to Cohesion Fund interventions to be kept .
It is therefore somewhat through the lack of an alternative and by default that we shall vote for this budget , because Europe - the citizens - cannot do without its interventions , however inadequate .
Nevertheless , together , we must question - and this is urgent - the methods of financing the ambitious policies with which Europe must equip itself and of extracting the EU budget from its current restricted and unsuitable framework .
Above and beyond major political declarations , the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , must tell us how he intends to finance the future European policies about which he talks so much , particularly those relating to the new strategy on growth and to climate change .
From now on they will be unable to make do with such a feeble budget as the one we are being offered .
( GA ) Mr President , I completely support the European Parliament 's decision to prioritise funding for the European Economic Recovery Plan .
A recovery plan of this kind is necessary to increase economic demand and to re-establish the competitive capability of the region .
As a result of the economic crisis , unemployment levels are rising in Europe and this is seriously affecting the European economy .
Unfortunately , young people who are looking for jobs for the first time in their lives are the worst affected .
It is essential that measures be taken to protect those who are under the greatest disadvantage .
We must establish retraining plans so that those who lose their jobs today can quickly find another job in the future .
The plan is designed to work with the European Social Fund and with the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund
Since 1973 , when Ireland agreed to take part in the European Economic Community , the European Union has repeatedly taken a central role - when necessary - in tackling the country 's unemployment problem by means of the European Social Fund .
The Union has again taken on this positive role in Ireland and the recovery plan is vitally important in relation to this .
Thank you Mr Gallagher .
As the Vice-President responsible for multilingualism , I would like to say how glad we are to hear you speaking Gaelic in Parliament .
Mr President , I should like to make four points .
Firstly let me emphasise the need to use our 2010 budget and , in particular , the European cohesion policy financial instruments , with the utmost expediency in order to stimulate economic activity in all of the Union 's regions and cities and create the leverage necessary to revitalise Member States ' economies .
Cohesion policy is providing a strong and necessary bridge between recovery from the crisis and long-term structural transformation of the European economy .
Secondly , it is for this reason that the Committee for Regional Development has encouraged the Commission and Member States not only to use the financial resources available to invest in what are Cohesion Policy 2007-2013 priorities - climate change , knowledge and innovation , energy efficiency , renewable energy , broadband , sustainable urban transport and renewal of skills - but also to promote the leverage function of the cohesion policy ; which is to efficiently use all the financial engineering tools which the cohesion policy has created in collaboration with the European Investment Bank in order to assist small and medium-sized companies not only to survive this difficult period but first of all to go the distance , to adapt to the changing face of the global economy , which is transforming itself , and to rise up to the challenge - and the opportunity - of climate change .
Thirdly , let me inform Members that all payment applications for the European Regional Development Fund and the Cohesion Fund from the 2009 budget , totalling EUR 25.5 billion , have been fully used , thus contributing to recovery , structural change , growth , employment and to climate-change energy efficiency .
Lastly , in this context , I regret the cuts in support for candidate countries , the IPA regional development and human resources instrument , which addresses areas such as unemployment , social exclusion and education investment - a cut of EUR 7 million , which is 0.5 % of the available operational credits that go to administration - without regard to the need of ensuring good local administration and without regard to the basic principles of good financial management which is so dear to this House .
( RO ) I would like to begin by congratulating the rapporteurs for the results they achieved in negotiating the 2010 budget .
Europe 's citizens need now more than ever a substantial European budget to tackle the economic crisis and their problems .
Member States ' budgets are currently experiencing major difficulties in tackling the economic crisis , especially when many of the problems they are contending with extend beyond a national scope .
These are global difficulties and require coordinated responses at the highest level .
For this reason , I am delighted that we can present in this House today a budget which will finance entirely the second phase of the European Economic Recovery Plan , to the tune of EUR 1 980 million .
We are likely to see the first shoots of economic recovery in 2010 , however , national budgets will be hit extremely hard by the efforts that were made during the last year .
In addition , unemployment is set to reach a record high in Member States .
The future Commission will have a huge responsibility in helping Member States and the European Union 's citizens overcome these hardships .
However , I wish to draw Member States ' attention to their responsibility in accessing European funds .
It is pointless us making all the effort to negotiate to obtain money for the cohesion policies if these funds are not used .
I join my fellow Members in calling for the 2007-2013 multiannual financial framework to be reviewed as urgently as possible , failing which we will not manage to return here with a budget for 2011 .
I would like to emphasise one further last point .
The 2010 budget will still introduce an innovative feature , which may seem of minor importance to many , but this is not the case .
I am referring here to the launch of the preparations for creating a common European framework for the Black Sea .
This action represents recognition of the Black Sea as an important European issue and lessens the discrepancy between how the Black Sea and Baltic Sea are treated as part of the European Union 's policies .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs and our Chair of the Committee on Budgets , my friend , Mr Lamassoure .

I have five observations to make .
The first concerns research , in particular , the sixth and seventh framework programmes .
For the sake of legal certainty , we in the Committee on Budgetary Control repeat that we want the European Commission to refrain from recalculating , via new interpretations of the eligibility criteria , financial statements for completed projects that it has already approved and paid for .
We repeat our request for the Commission not to deviate from international accounting and auditing standards .
The second point is the inclusion of EU staff pensions in the budget .

We propose that the claims against Member States in respect of staff pensions - EUR 37 billion as at 31 December 2008 , an increase of EUR 4 billion since 2007 - be entered in the accounts as an asset , and we propose a study on the creation of an EU pension fund .
The third point is that the Anti-Fraud Office should be supported .
It should be strengthened so that it can do its job better , particularly where interventions outside the EU are concerned .
The fourth point is that we would like the Commission to provide the resources to enable us to hold an interinstitutional conference with the aim of obtaining a positive statement of assurance from the European Court of Auditors . This conference would bring together the national courts of auditors , the European Court of Auditors , the national parliaments and the administrations concerned .
The final point is that the European Union does not invest enough , and this is a personal proposal : is it not time that we included a section on investments in our budget and that , in association with the European Investment Bank - of which I propose that , henceforth , since we have legal personality , the European Union becomes a partner , alongside the Member States - we had an investment plan , notably on trans-European networks ?
This covers energy , motorways , high-speed rail links , waterways , universities , education , broadband , health , space , and so on .
Mr President , this is my first budget in this Parliament , and I have been very impressed by the consensus on what Parliament 's priorities are and by the consensus that we should protect those priorities .
I wish to thank everybody involved in this process .
We have achieved a lot .
We have not achieved everything , but I am pleased we have achieved so much .
In particular , I am pleased with the declarations on the structural funds and cohesion policy .
I hope those declarations are remembered when we decide on policy post-2013 .
However , difficult decisions remain for Parliament , such as that on funding for the Microfinance Facility - I hope Members will still regard that as a priority - on ensuring that we find the funding for Kozloduy in the next three years , and on finding funding for new priorities : priorities coming out of Copenhagen , priorities coming out of the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty and priorities coming out of the new 2020 strategy we will be discussing next year .
We have to solve all these problems in the knowledge that margins are tight and that the Council will be reluctant to provide extra funding .
That is why a fundamental review of the budget in the future is absolutely essential .
We should make sure that the budget in the future meets our priorities .
We also need to look at a new budget line for the Globalisation Fund , rather than to keep taking money from other lines .
We also need to make sure there is enough money under the flexibility instrument so that we can respond and change our priorities .
At the moment , that amount is not enough .
If we can do all these things , then we will meet our priorities and , more importantly , we can show the citizens of Europe that this Parliament is relevant .
Our budget should follow our priorities , but it should also follow the priorities of our citizens .
That is the key message for us as a parliament , but also a key message for the Commission and for the Council .
( HU ) It is perhaps no coincidence that the preparation of the 2010 budget is attracting this much attention .
All this attention is fully justified in view of the worsening unemployment and the difficulties caused by the economic crisis .
As the rapporteur for the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I wish to express my thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Surján , for the professional way in which he has handled the relevant dossiers .
We specified earlier the following priorities in the opinion recorded by me in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
We obviously gave number one priority to instruments aimed at alleviating the effects of the financial and economic crisis on Europe 's citizens .
We supported every proposal , including the 8.4 % increase intended to boost competitiveness , that we hope will retain jobs or create new ones and contribute to the economic recovery plan , the renewed Lisbon strategy , as well as the lifelong learning programme .
We also highlighted the tasks associated with the Social Fund , vocational training , obtaining technical qualifications and lifelong learning .
I feel that it is particularly important that we managed to earmark EUR 25 million in funding for the future microfinance facility in 2010 .
Yesterday , we debated this new facility .
Hopefully , we will be able to agree quickly on the other funding details as well .
I believe that it is important for the budget to emphasise the significance of the funding for the activities and policies under budget line 1a .
They will contribute to sustainable development and job creation .
I would especially welcome the items intended to improve the situation of small and medium-sized enterprises , as well as the support given to the Progress programme , the EURES consultancy and information network and pilot projects such as the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Taking all these together , I feel that the objectives defined by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs can play a major role in the budget , for which we owe a debt of gratitude to the rapporteurs .
Mr President , in the last Parliament , much attention was paid to the Members ' and assistants ' statutes , and I think that was quite appropriate .
Now , at the beginning of this Parliament and new Commission , it is time we turned our attention to other members of staff of the three institutions and examined the role of those staff .
We are very privileged to have very professional and committed people working for Parliament , the Council and the Commission , but the reality of it is that within this Parliament , we do not have a grasp of exactly what a lot of these staff do .
They have done what they have done for years .
When there are 27 Member States represented in this Parliament , 27 Commissioners coming together from those Member States into the Commission , and Council Ministers going back to their Parliaments and coming here , it is very easy for the staff elected to serve us to actually take over the agenda .
What I am asking from the very beginning of this Parliament is that the incoming Commission - I do not know , incidentally , what proportion of the budget is on staffing , but I know it is substantial - require a study on what it is that the staff of the three institutions do , to ensure that they are being efficient and effective and , above all , that they are transparent and accountable in what they do .
I think that this would be an important public service .
There is a sort of growing belief that there is a faceless bureaucracy .
I do not share that view , and I do not mean that as a backhanded compliment as we have some very good staff , but that is not the measure of efficiency and effectiveness .
We have to know what the staff are doing and , if we are serious about having a Lisbon agenda with an efficient and effective economy , then we have to be sure that the staff who work for our three institutions are being applied effectively , efficiently and accountably .
I believe that in each of the institutions , there should be a deputy secretary-general who reports to those institutions on the efficiency and effectiveness of staff from time to time .
I would ask the Commission to have this examined independently and fairly in the early stages of the new Commission .
( PL ) Mr President , it appears worth pointing out during the budget debate , too , that the law is a fundamental element in the life of society , and its cohesion unites our continent .
The Court of Justice of the European Union plays an essential role in this area , and this is why the Committee on Legal Affairs has proposed a series of amendments intended to restore means provided in the initial draft budget , which will barely allow the Court to meet just its most fundamental needs .
One of the most pressing problems is the matter of increasing budgetary means for 2010 for the translation of questions referred for preliminary rulings , which are a basic instrument used by national courts to allow them to adapt national jurisdiction to European jurisdiction .
The ECJ has insufficient means to increase its resources of personnel working in its translation service , and this is causing delays to court proceedings .
Granting additional means to the Court will contribute to an increase in efficiency of operation in this area , and also to a reduction of delays to court proceedings in Member States .
The reduction of means by the Council affects what are already highly curtailed strategic IT projects proposed by the Court for 2010 to improve its quality of service with a simultaneous reduction in the number of staff employed .
It is imperative that the means provided in the joint draft budget be restored .
Information technology is a fundamental area which enables the new challenges of our times to be met , brings long-term savings , and offers the citizens better service .
I would also like to stress the need to support the draft Reference Frameworks .
In February 2009 , a group of academics presented the final version of a summary of the draft Reference Frameworks which European institutions will be able to use as a basis for the creation of European contract law .
At this stage , it is extremely important to make the Frameworks available in as many of the official languages as possible , to enable political and legal groups and other interested parties to have a thorough discussion on the subject of the future of European contract law .
I am glad that the European Parliament will make good these mistakes of the Council and allow the Court to function in a better way .
Mr President , like everybody else , I find this an extremely good budget .
A great deal of work has gone into it , and congratulations to all those who were involved in it .
What I would like to do at this stage of the debate is to try and look at the big picture .
Extremely important contributions have been made about particular issues , but we have to look at the broad European context in order to understand the significance of what we are talking about .
It seems to me that , in a democracy , every institution has to have a budget , and the institution must account for what it is spending to those who are actually making the contributions and who are providing the resources .
This particular budget is , in consequence , loaded with responsibility .
In fact , it is loaded with the responsibility of being the budget of an institution which is particularly committed to transparency and accountability .
Not least , given our commitment to transparency and accountability , this will enhance good governance and , in an ideal world , it will increase trust between those who spend and those who provide .
Perhaps I should stress that is in an ideal world - reality is often different .
The particular significance of this transparency is that it can help to overcome the remoteness that exists between individuals and those who exercise power .
This remoteness - I think we can all agree on this - is an unavoidable feature of modern life , so every institution should do what it can to bridge the gap .
On top of that , there are difficult times ahead for Europe , and I think that enhances insecurity among citizens .
What we can do in this context is to illuminate the issues by promoting debate and discussion which should , incidentally , include disagreement .
From this perspective , I think the budget is an excellent step in the right direction , and I would like to give my strong support to it .
Mr President , the 2010 budget is far from being generous - just like any other budget .
Under the circumstances , we need to work with what we have , and what we have is the impact of a major global crisis as a priority .
Everything else becomes secondary .
As the rapporteur for the Committee on International Trade ( INTA ) , I would hope the increased amounts under Heading 4 ( The EU as a global player ) will be well invested and well monitored so that they stimulate increased flows in trade and , together with the elimination of barriers , we should achieve stronger GDP and employment growth .
The WTO Doha Development Agenda is the best multilateral platform to accomplish this task , particularly in developing countries .
Therefore , there is a strong incentive to bring this long-lasting saga to a successful resolution as we will then be in a position to fight the nasty impact of globalisation with a truly powerful tool .
( PL ) Ladies and gentlemen , the budget for 2010 is a difficult compromise .
On the one hand , it is supposed to act to limit the economic crisis and , at the same time , we are financing efforts to combat climate change , mainly by limiting CO2 emissions .
This is good , but surely in the short term , this hinders development , which is an area where we continue to spend too little .
The increase in spending on research and innovation is justified .
This will improve our competitiveness .
It seems we still spend too little on education , including the Erasmus exchange programme .
It is good that money - although not enough - has been found for the milk fund , because the past year has been a difficult one for European farmers .
If we want to stimulate economic conditions and reduce unemployment and social exclusion , we should increase funding for the Microfinance Facility .
Financing broadband Internet in rural areas is important for development , but of course , as I said , this budget is a compromise .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to take the floor under the catch-the-eye procedure since , earlier , I had only one minute of speaking time when the agenda said I had two .
I would just like to add something : although I will join the rest of my group in voting in favour , on Thursday , of the budget we are debating , I nevertheless wish to stress that we are experiencing not only an economic , financial and environmental crisis - as was pointed out earlier - but also a very profound social crisis linked to the rise in unemployment .
Although the budget strikes a delicate balance , I , for my part , regret the Member States ' failure to take account of strong political signals sent out precisely to those people experiencing difficulties .
The wish was expressed that additional funding be provided as part of the plan to help the poorest citizens , but unfortunately , it has not been acted upon .
I regret that , because it would have sent out a strong signal that we are moving in the direction of a more social Europe .
( LT ) Thank you , Mr President , Council , Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the 2010 budget really is an example of a good compromise .
I definitely do not agree with those colleagues who have said that the 2010 budget is a crisis budget .
We , the representatives of some states , know very well what a crisis budget is , when budget revenues have decreased by 30 % and more in two years .
We must congratulate the Commission for certain priorities ; together with the Council and Parliament , it mobilised additional funds , in particular , to finance the Economic Recovery Plan , for example , to increase broadband Internet access , and also to fund the SET-Plan .
I would also like to mention that there are some problematic areas .
Nevertheless I would like to draw attention to the speech made by my fellow Member , Mr Godmanis , in which he mentioned that for more than a year , individual states have failed to manage financial support .
Therefore , I really think that this is a good budget , it should be supported and I congratulate the Commission .
Mr President , briefly , I want to stress one thing as the Commissioner is here .
We have a problem : in the Committee on Regional Development , we are still working on the proposals for changes whereby , for 2009-2010 , the European Commission ( EC ) will not ask the Member States for cofinancing .
The entire funds amount to more than EUR 6.6 billion .
We have adopted the 2010 budget , but there is no money in this budget to provide for those needs ; the 2009 budget is finished .
The Committee on Regional Development is still waiting for the new EC proposal because the previous proposal was rejected by the Council .
We have to be very clear on what we have to do next .
My understanding is that there is no room for this proposal , but the situation has to be qualified .
Otherwise , the Committee on Regional Development will be working in one direction , and we in the Committee on Budgets will have no idea what we can do because we have no more money for these proposals in the upcoming 2010 budget .
( PT ) Mr President , in the midst of the economic and social crisis , which is having terrible effects on employment and people 's living conditions , I am sorry to say that this draft Community budget for 2010 does not go nearly far enough .
It does not even take account of either the financial perspectives , which suggested 1.1 % of the Community 's Gross National Income , or the draft submitted and approved at first reading in this budget , which was for 1.08 % of Community GNI .
The draft which is now here for approval perpetuates a budget that prioritises and finances the European Union 's neoliberal and militaristic tendencies .
It should be noted that this first budget under the Treaty of Lisbon is to the detriment of the much-vaunted policy of economic and social cohesion , which now receives a much smaller share .
In total payments , the cuts in cohesion spending amount to roughly EUR 2.5 billion compared with what was approved at first reading .
For all these reasons , we cannot agree with this draft budget , which is over EUR 11 billion smaller than was planned in the multiannual financial framework for 2010 .
Mr President , I think this has been an exciting debate .
We have had differing views and that is how it should be .
Some people want to slim down the budget .
However , it seems that many people will not be completely satisfied until all of the national budgets are transferred to the EU .
Fortunately , transferring all power to the European Parliament is probably not what our voters want .
I received a direct question from Mr Färm .
To listen to Mr Färm , it would seem as though we would have no employment policy in Europe if we did not have micro-credits .
That is not the case , of course .
The various Member States are investing enormous amounts of money in supporting the economy and employment .
In addition , Europe is making substantial general increases in the budget , including the provision of EUR 5 billion through the recovery plan .
Finally , we also have the European Central Bank 's very expansive policy .
Thus , we no doubt have a very powerful policy for employment and growth .
If Mr Färm believes that micro-credits are something that should be prioritised , something else will , of course , need to be given a lower priority .
It is all about choices .
However , simply wanting to have more and to send the bill to the various Member States is not , of course , an acceptable solution .
Ladies and gentlemen , thank you for your inspiring speeches .
I would like to thank the representatives of the European institutions , the Presidency of the European Parliament , the shadow rapporteurs , coordinators and all of you .
Everything has taken place this year under the leadership of two Budget Committee chairs .

In the first half of the year , it was Mr Böge , and in the second , Mr Lamassoure .
Mr Böge , Mr Lamassoure , I am sure I am not the first to tell you that you have both made a great contribution to the work of the committee and the entire budget process .
I appreciate the cooperation of the Swedish Presidency and the Commissioner .
The women and men who do not appear officially are our advisors , assistants and administrative staff .
However , they are key people .
Without them we would not have achieved today 's result .
I would like to thank them all .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Lisbon Treaty will have an impact on the entire range of services of the European Parliament and the other institutions .
For the European Parliament , codecision making will increase dramatically , covering up to 95 % of the legislation in areas such as freedom , security and justice , agriculture , fisheries , research and structural funds .
There will be greater use of qualified majority voting in the Council and the creation of a number of new legal foundations in areas such as tourism , sport , energy , civil defence and administrative cooperation .
This will increase the legislative activities of the EU generally with a significant overall impact on the powers of the European Parliament and its activities and therefore also on the need to boost the administration .
In the coming months , we will examine and quantify the financial resources necessary for implementing the new policies of the EU connected with the Lisbon Treaty .
I believe that together , we will succeed in setting out the next budget process .
Mr President , I would like to thank all my fellow Members .
We have managed to find a common position with regard to the Council .
However , I would also like to thank the Council and the Presidency of the Council very warmly at this point .
Anyone who knows me will be aware that I am normally very sparing with praise and thanks .
Nevertheless , I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the Swedish Presidency and , in particular , Mr Lindblad , for its work and its constant presence during the discussions on budget issues .
This made a pleasant contrast to the other Council presidencies that I have experienced during the course of my long career as a Member of Parliament .
Thank you very much .
This morning , many Members took part in the discussion and I believe that on this occasion , there were many more Members involved than usual .
The majority of them referred to the limitations of the budget and its structure .
Ladies and gentlemen , we can confidently assume that the 2010 budget will be the last of its kind , the last with this structure , which leads us to believe that we can finance the necessary policies of the European Union and its new challenges and tasks in this way .
We expect the new Commission to carry out the mid-term review quickly , as , under the terms of the agreements made in 2006 , this should have been submitted by 2009 at the latest , in other words , by the end of this year .
To spell it out , we also expect a revision proposal for the current financial perspective .
We cannot wait until 2014 for reform .
We need sustainable instruments now , so that the European Union can meet the challenges of the immediate future with democratic legitimacy , as the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Lamassoure , has just called for on behalf of all of us .
Mr President , now that we have all agreed on the 2010 budget , in line with political realities , today we must , of course , focus our attention on what lies before us in the next few months .
As the European Council has granted itself EUR 23.5 million using a very one-sided process , we will also have to put in place the necessary supplements to the parliamentary budget very rapidly , in order to maintain the balance between the institutions and to ensure the ability of Parliament to respond to the challenges posed by the Treaty of Lisbon .
We will also have to pay sufficient attention to the ability of the groups , the committees and , in particular , the individual Members , to act with regard to the tasks that face us .
In addition , we will have to hold general discussions over the next few months on adjustments , reviews and revisions .
This concerns adjusting , renewing and enhancing the interinstitutional agreement .
It is about linking up parts of the interinstitutional agreement into a multiannual financial framework , which has a different decision-making process on the basis of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is about the codecision procedure in the Financial Regulation .
In addition , it relates , for example , to the large package to develop the European External Action Service , with regard both to guaranteeing Parliament 's budgetary rights and to the possible adjustments to the legal bases that may be necessary for the multiannual programmes of the External Action Service .
For this reason , I would like at this point to say once again that without adjustments , reviews and revisions , nothing can be done .
We cannot put off indefinitely the necessary process of phasing in the budgetary challenges of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I expect the new Commission to begin work very quickly and to make proposals which guarantee the rights of Parliament in every area and which do not attempt to modify individual rights through the back door , as this could be to the disadvantage of Parliament .
We know how to stop this happening .
If we want to increase Europeans ' sense of security in 2010 , we need to implement this budget in an effective and practical manner .
This is exactly why we have increased energy security , are supporting the creation of jobs and introducing a microfinance facility .
We also support research and development , as well as lifelong learning .
We want to help the dairy sector and alleviate , as far as possible , the harmful effects of climate change .
We have all achieved this by spending every last penny of the resources received through the multiannual financial framework .
However , this means that the budget has become completely inflexible , failing to provide sufficient margin .
This is another reason for the great urgency of the mid-term review , which I am also reiterating .
The Commission and Member States share particular responsibility for future success .
We can only look taxpayers straight in the eye if we use the framework available to us not only lawfully , but purposefully as well .
If there are resources available for creating new jobs , the number of jobs will actually increase .
If there are other resources available allowing underdeveloped regions to catch up , the volume of the GDP produced locally in these regions will actually grow .
Only when we are in control of these conditions can we say that we have received value for our money and that it was worthwhile Europe 's citizens making the sacrifice , because the current contribution to the EU budget of EUR 123 billion is certainly a sacrifice .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I hope that this Parliament will give its firm support to the current report which has been tabled , and that on Thursday , we will give Europe 's citizens a good budget which is not only legally sound , but morally sound as well .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote on Jutta Haug 's report will take place tomorrow .
The vote on the Surján , Maňka and Böge reports will take place on Thursday .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
My colleague from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , Mr Surján , and Mr Maňka have completed an important task .
Just as with a budget debate in any national parliament , we also need to make it quite clear in this House what a draft budget specifically contains and the message which this conveys to society .
In spite of the fact that there was no mention of accessibility in the report , I would like to draw your attention to the following : based on the decision made by the General Affairs Council on 26 November , the EU has joined the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities as a regional organisation .
In light of this and in accordance with paragraph 43 and the provisions contained in Appendix 2 of the report , we should welcome the joint declaration made on the policy on buildings .
However , it is very important that accessibility is included in the case of construction and other infrastructure investments as well , in addition to complying with the other important requirements ( e.g. energy savings ) .
The additional costs for accessibility are always much higher .
As part of this , it is of paramount importance that the European Parliament also considers the visually impaired with regard to safety requirements .
For instance , when designing buildings and getting them ready for use , clearly visible signs should be used , along with tactile floor markings to help the visually impaired find their way .
In addition , in connection with language rights , I would consider it important that along with making buildings accessible , documents ( including electronic versions ) should also contain appropriate information about how the visually impaired can gain access ( what the recommended software packages are ) .
During an economic crisis , when the citizens of Europe are being subjected to waves of redundancies and cuts in social services , the European Union must also make savings .
Next year , the EU plans to spend about EUR 123 billion , which is seven billion more than this year .
In difficult economic times , measures are , of course , needed to stimulate the economy , but it is doubtful whether instruments such as the European Economic Recovery Programme can achieve this .
In the past , much-vaunted EU programmes have turned out to be paper tigers .
In addition , various EU subsidies have proved to be an invitation to commit abuses of many different kinds .
For years , the European Court of Auditors has been identifying in its annual reports blatant faults in the agricultural and structural funds .
This means that hard-earned taxpayers ' money has , for years , been trickling away into mysterious channels .
The complicated regulations which even Brussels eurocrats often find confusing are a major contributor to the defective nature of the system .
The EU does not even have control over the recovery of funds which have been paid out mistakenly .
Therefore , continuing to inflate the EU budget is the wrong route to take .
Instead , the errors should be eliminated from the system by means of far-reaching renationalisation measures , for example , in the agricultural sector .
This would allow the Member States to decide for themselves which areas they want to subsidise .
As far as the measures to stimulate the economy are concerned , these should form part of a coordinated approach by the Member States .
In March 2009 , with the economic recovery plan that has been approved by the European Council , it is intended that in 2009 and 2010 , EUR 5 billion of unused EU budgetary funds will be allocated for investment in projects concerning the connection of energy networks and the development of broadband networks .
I am very pleased to note that , in relation to the second year ( 2010 ) of funding of the recovery plan for the European economy , a result was achieved in the Conciliation Committee , through the investigation of the 2007-2013 financial framework and a transfer of funds , which guarantees funding amounting to EUR 2.4 billion for next year , and also makes it possible to implement the objectives specified in the economic recovery plan .
If the changes made to the financial framework in connection with the recovery plan for the European economy leave very little funding in 2010 to cover the expected financial needs , then I agree with the rapporteur 's position that the multiannual financial framework currently in effect does not meet the European Union 's financial needs , and also that the European Commission should immediately put forward a proposal concerning an interim summary of the multiannual financial framework currently in effect .
I would like to begin by stating my admiration for everyone who worked on the budget .
Preparing an EU budget in conditions of economic crisis and the transitional period from Nice to Lisbon was a very difficult task .
The budget for 2010 is the last one in this structure .
The Lisbon Treaty is nevertheless in force and it will be difficult to work within the framework of a budget whose structure does not reflect the new conditions .
However complicated the Lisbon Treaty ratification might have been in the end , it cannot be an excuse for the Commission , which failed to submit the draft of the new budget structure on time .
The Commission must complete this task without delay .
The 2010 budget is very carefully balanced as it makes full use of all the opportunities for allocating expenditure .
As a result of this and as a result of economic fluctuations caused by the turbulent period of economic crisis , the budget may become very fragile .
This budget must be supported in the knowledge that it is perhaps too finely crafted for the current period of insecurity and working with it in 2010 will require a certain measure of flexibility .
in writing . - ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to express my satisfaction at the agreement reached on the budget for 2010 .
At the same time , however , note should be made of the fact that the margins available are extremely limited for coming years .
That leaves little room for response in the event that the EU has to respond to unforeseen requirements or wants to react to new political challenges , such as the EU strategy for 2020 , or to new measures to combat climate change .
I am especially pleased that we managed , thanks to the persistence of the European Parliament , to safeguard financing for energy networks and infrastructures within the framework of the Economic Recovery Plan , placing emphasis on ' green technologies ' , innovation , research and the creation of broadband networks in the countryside .
It is also extremely important that we succeed in safeguarding the viability of existing Community infrastructures and tools in the civil protection sector , especially by further strengthening the rapid response capacity of the European Union in the event of natural disasters , thereby paving the way for the future creation of a European civil protection force .
Finally , I think that we all agree that we cannot talk of a better Europe , of a Europe which is closer to the citizens , without commensurate financing .
The 2010 EU budget is the last budget to be approved in accordance with the Treaty of Nice .
The new treaty grants the European Parliament greater power and the last word when it comes to the adoption of the budget .
Parliament and the Council will have equal powers as legislators in areas such as agriculture , energy , immigration , justice and internal affairs , health and the Structural Funds , which obviously includes their relevant budgets as well .
The 2010 budget allocates significant proportions of its funds for the conservation and management of natural resources , social and economic cohesion , growth and employment , competitiveness and innovation , regional development , agriculture and rural development .
The European Economic Recovery Plan features in the 2010 EU budget with EUR 2.4 billion available for funding strategic projects relating to energy , transport , the development of broadband networks in rural areas and for supporting rural communities .
I welcome that the European Parliament has managed to allocate a sum of EUR 300 million in support of dairy producers .
The economic crisis has affected the GDP of Member States and will influence Member States ' contributions to the EU budget .
I hope that the mid-term review in 2010 for the 2007-2013 financial framework will enable Member States to absorb the Structural Funds better , particularly in the area of transport and energy efficiency in residential buildings .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 and resumed at 12.00 )

1 .
European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion ( Progress ) (
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the excellent work carried out by the rapporteur and by all the Members who have worked towards the creation of this new instrument which will allow micro-credits to be granted to small and medium-sized enterprises and to people who have lost their jobs in recent years .
In view of the loss of 3 million jobs in the EU alone and the banks ' difficulties in extending credit , this instrument will provide easier access to the necessary resources for those who wish to start up a new business .
I am certain that this new initiative will help create new jobs , especially if we introduce new accompanying measures such as funding for training , which will help young people set up investment projects .
This instrument , Mr President , must be adopted as quickly as possible in order to revitalise small and medium-sized enterprises which represent the life-blood of Europe 's economy .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President , I voted in favour of the financial measures report .
I think that this facility is very appropriate at this precise moment in time and that it will have a very positive impact if it is applied properly , as it was in my country , Bulgaria .
At the moment , the climate is extremely unfavourable for small entrepreneurs who , with few opportunities available , have no chance of obtaining credit from banks .
All the banks are pursuing a policy which is basically incompatible with the concept behind banking institutions .
I get the feeling that the banks are deliberately inventing an ever-increasing number of additional terms for no other reason than to prevent them from issuing credit .
However , without credit , a business cannot operate .
Nevertheless , when credit is issued , these companies are obliged to provide guarantees of 100-150 % , making them liable to go bankrupt .
This is why I believe that the European Union and Parliament have , in this case , taken very appropriate action with this report , which will really contribute to the development of the European and Bulgarian economies .
Mr President , I want to make it clear that while I feel that helping small business is a very good idea and one that should be pursued , it should be pursued at national government level .
I have huge concerns over this proposal , about the accountability of the money that will be lent , and the payback in relation it .
I would encourage national governments to do all they can to help small business , which is the backbone of our economy .
The EU can help by decreasing regulation and making funds available at a national level .
Mr President , we were in favour of this proposal .
I think it is very important that we help entrepreneurs right across the EU and in Member States to create wealth and jobs and take people out of poverty .
I am also grateful that we were looking at taking the money from the existing budget , rather than new spending , and using that to leverage even more spending from the private sector .
However , I must point out that we have to be very careful here when using state financing and taxpayers ' money .
In my own constituency , I am aware of some microfinance facilities , such as the excellent Croydon Caribbean Credit Union , which helps underprivileged communities come out of poverty .
These facilities have been squeezed out by local government and other state microfinanced facilities .
It is important , in pursuing increased accessibility to microfinance , that we do not squeeze out the many excellent private providers that are already there .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think that we all agree on the issue of micro-credit , but we should also discuss financial resources .
I believe that it should be our duty to increase this financial resource .
We must also be careful not to extend micro-credit to further stakeholders in small and medium-sized enterprises , since micro-credit came into being to help less fortunate social partners .
Along with this , we also need to discuss a cultural question : in many countries , and I believe especially in countries where there is the greatest need , the right cultural approach required to obtain these sums is lacking .
I strongly believe that these instruments should be adopted first by the governments concerned .

There are two speeds in Europe : the speed of countries which have already applied this approach , such as France and Germany , and there are other countries which instead need to take a cultural approach to this question .
In short , I strongly feel that the true problem , what is really at stake in Europe , is that it is not just a question of procuring funding as an end in itself ; we must seek to bring about the conditions whereby the least fortunate workers can create employment for themselves .
Written explanations of vote
I voted in favour of the creation of this microfinance facility for employment , since it aims at providing opportunities for the unemployed and encouraging entrepreneurship .
This facility , which is aimed at people who want to start or develop a micro-enterprise ( less than 10 employees and a turnover of less than EUR 2 million ) , will open up new horizons for many unemployed people .
Given the current state of the economy , it would have been useful if this important programme had been launched sooner , because people have been finding it difficult to access credit for a long time now .
As this facility is aimed at public and private organisations that provide private individuals and micro-enterprises with micro-credit at national , regional and local levels in EU Member States , it needs to be carefully monitored by the relevant bodies to ensure that the credit is actually reaching the places where it is most needed and that we do not see a repeat of the situations that occurred during the last financial crisis .
in writing . - I am in favour of the state providing microfinance to individuals to help them to establish small businesses .
However , I am opposed to the European Union carrying out this function .
Nevertheless , I did vote in favour of some amendments because it was always likely that the resolution would be carried and I wished to improve the resolution as much as possible .
The ' blocking ' of the votes on several amendments prevented me from voting separately on some amendments .
in writing . - One of the most detrimental consequences of the global economic crisis is the lack of credit being supplied by banks , which is preventing individuals as well as large companies from conducting their economic activities .
The proposal being made by the European Commission provides for the establishment of a microfinance facility that seeks to aid in alleviating the current hesitation in funding by banks and other financial institutions .
It is for this reason that I have decided to support the rapporteur on this issue and vote in favour of the report .
I voted against the report because unemployment , which is constantly increasing in the European Union , cannot be combated with a microfinance programme .
Integrated programmes with adequate funding under a separate budget line are needed , programmes which focus on combating youth unemployment , which is extremely high in Greece in particular , with one in four young people under the age of 25 out of work .
Generally speaking , what we need are policies which call for an increase in the Community budget and which overturn the neoliberal framework of the Stability Pact and low deficits .
I also believe that funding within the framework of this mechanism should be purely voluntary and should not in any way force anyone to use the mechanism under the threat that their social security benefits will be cut or reduced .
Unfortunately , amendments to this effect tabled by me and my fellow members in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left were rejected .
As Europe is going through a deep economic and financial crisis , which has led to serious social problems with unemployment growing in all the Member States , it is essential for the European Union to create effective mechanisms for tackling the crisis and also supporting those worst affected , including the unemployed and businesses in difficulty .
That is why I welcome the creation of a microfinance facility for employment , focusing on entrepreneurship and giving everyone the opportunity to start their own business .
European microfinance will be available for cases where access to banking credit is denied or made difficult , through support for the growth of micro-enterprises , together with mentoring , coaching and interest-rate support from the European Social Fund .
It is also important to point out that this facility should serve the sole purpose of supporting entrepreneurship as a means of creating new jobs , by helping to realise solid business ideas , and it should not be used for social support or to boost consumption .
In the current context of economic crisis and rising unemployment it is important to foster the growth of self-employment , as well as the creation and development of micro-enterprises .
Micro-credit will help achieve this objective .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal and Parliament 's work on this subject .
This is a way to encourage entrepreneurship and raise the levels of employment and social inclusion .
This microfinance facility is complementary to other programmes that support employment and inclusion .
I therefore think it is important that this facility should not be financed at the expense of existing programmes or jeopardise them .
I had already voted in favour of this facility in the Committee on Budgets in the context of the budgetary procedure for 2010 , through which two new budget lines were created , one for operational expenses in the sum of EUR 37.5 million and the other for administrative expenses in the sum of EUR 0.25 million .
I hope this programme will soon become operational and the process of approving applications will be swift and not tied up in red tape .
We regret that a majority in this Parliament has yet again gone back on its word and approved a proposal that takes money out of the Progress programme , which was already clearly underfunded for its areas of action in the social field .
Irrespective of any considerations regarding the objectives of the new European microfinance facility , it is unacceptable that it should be financed by reducing the funds available to existing programmes , in this case Progress , a Community programme in the area of employment , social inclusion and equal rights .
The text approved by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs clearly rejected the idea of financing this facility from Progress and proposed creating a new budget line with its own resources : in other words , ' new ' money .
The amendments tabled by our political group were along the same lines , but were rejected today .
Since social conditions in the various Member States are deteriorating , it is unacceptable for funds to be channelled away from the employment and social inclusion area towards other priorities that have been defined in the meantime , even if it is to the area of microfinance .
Thanks to the Göncz report on micro-credit and the controversy that surrounded the financing of this project , I went to see what this famous Progress programme - which the left is so adamant should not be deprived of a single cent for the financing of micro-enterprises and individual initiatives - is all about .
Because , for the moment , what purpose does Progress , defined as the ' Community programme for employment and social solidarity ' , really serve ?
That of creating paperwork , and of financing studies and reports .
Because , for the moment , Progress 's ' target ' audience is neither the unemployed nor the excluded , but political decision makers and opinion formers .
Some people are refusing to deduct EUR 100 million for micro-credit from the paltry sum of EUR 700 million allocated over seven years .
A little less money for those who profit from the system , a little more money for Europeans , with a constant budget : one cannot argue with that !
The time has come to stop observing the poverty and the difficulties of our fellow citizens and to take concrete action instead .
I have one reservation , however : micro-credit is necessary only because the ' banksters ' , who are so quick to pocket State aid , are not doing what they are supposed to be doing : pumping money into the economy .
I voted in favour of the Göncz report on the European Microfinance Facility .
Micro-financing concerns micro-credits ( loans of less than EUR 25 000 ) and micro-enterprises ( enterprises that employ fewer than 10 people ) .
In this period of economic crisis and due to the considerable fall in the number of loans granted , it is vitally important for the European Union to create a facility aimed at the most vulnerable , such as the unemployed , young people and small businesses .
When an economy or jobs are at stake , it is crucial to stimulate growth with substantial investment .
The facility will see its funding increased to EUR 100 million , the money being taken from the budget for the Progress programme ( Community Programme for Employment and Social Solidarity ) , and will come into force on 1 January 2010 ( for a four-year period ) .
The Council must hear this message so that an agreement can be reached in the next few days .
I voted in favour of the report by my colleague , Mrs Göncz , because I feel it is crucial , especially in the context of an employment crisis and of a social crisis , to support micro-finance by providing it with a specific budget line .
This is a special instrument in the fight against banking exclusion and poverty .
Contrary to what the European Commission is asking , we oppose the idea of reallocating appropriations from the Progress programme to the European Microfinance Facility , because that would send out a negative message to economic operators .
We must maintain the Progress programme , which targets the most vulnerable groups , and it is the joint responsibility of the Member States and the European Union to implement it effectively in the current circumstances .
I am absolutely delighted that the vast majority of the European Parliament has today approved the report on the European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion .
The planned micro-credit system can contribute significantly to the creation of social cohesion and new jobs , not to mention greatly help alleviate the harmful effects of the financial and economic crisis .
During the global recession , it is particularly important to provide new opportunities for citizens who have been squeezed out of the labour market and the traditional credit market , and pave the way for stable , long-term self-employment .
Furthermore , it is vital that a simple financial facility exists for those in disadvantaged regions intending to start up their own business and for the most vulnerable groups , which , in spite of the high risk , low margins and risk of default , helps businesses to start up and thrive .
The overwhelming majority of employees in Europe are employed by micro- , small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is the reason why , in order to ensure that these companies do not lose , but actually increase their employment potential , suitable support must be provided to them which , in certain cases , is of such a small amount that the traditional banking sector is unable to provide such funds .
During today 's vote , the European Parliament gave the clear message that the codecision procedure should be completed as soon as possible so that the microfinance facility may already be accessible from 2010 .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on microfinance facilities .
There is still a lot we could do to encourage young people in Europe to go into entrepreneurship .
The financial and economic crisis has brought with it an employment and a social crisis , and it is indeed predicted that there will be another 10 million unemployed people in Europe next year .
If there was ever a time to take prompt action , it is now .
With the current credit squeeze aggravating the situation at present , I am very much in favour of the initiative in the report to provide micro-credits for the unemployed or those threatened with unemployment who have difficulties having access to commercial loans for their business ideas .
Nevertheless , we must also invest , for example , in young people 's workshops and business incubators , as well as entrepreneurship education .
A comprehensive approach to investing in improving the employment figures and entrepreneurship is a prerequisite for a prosperous Europe .
I am in favour of financing social provisions in order to assist workers who have lost their jobs .
However , this should not mean that businesses are exempted from their social and territorial obligations .
It is not up to the public authorities to compensate for this unacceptable failure to fulfil one 's obligations .
That is why I shall abstain .
I am voting in favour of the report on establishing a new microfinance facility which will help people whose jobs are at risk to set up or develop micro-enterprises .
These are defined as companies with fewer than ten employees and a turnover of less than EUR 2 million .
This finance opportunity will be available initially for a period of four years , starting from 1 January 2010 .
This will give people who have lost their jobs as a result of the crisis or who are finding it difficult to gain access to credit for their company the opportunity to undergo training , to retain existing jobs and , in some cases , even to create new ones .
This will help to stimulate the economy and contribute to bringing the crisis to an end .
We shall vote against the proposal for a decision establishing a European Microfinance Facility for Employment and Social Inclusion .
At a time when so many European citizens are being made redundant because of the crisis of capitalism and the complete lack of solidarity shown by those who continue to make profits at their expense , it is time for the European Union to change its liberal approach to solving the problems encountered .
Faced with the insatiable commercial appetites that the European Union 's liberal dogmatism has created , we need a policy that protects European workers , the creators of the wealth of which they are being deprived in the name of profit .
Again , this is a case of the Europe of big profits and of small , arbitrary handouts .
The paltry sums pledged , the lack of clarity concerning their allocation and the individualistic logic behind the vehicle promoted testify to this .
This bears no relation to the Europe of the general interest and of social equality that our peoples need .
At a time of crisis , when credit is scarce and access to it difficult , this kind of facility is essential to help provide micro-credit for small enterprises and people who have lost their jobs and want to start up new businesses on their own .
It is difficult to achieve such goals without this kind of support facility .
Furthermore , in the current crisis situation , banks are not sensitive to the credit needs of start-up enterprises which , in most cases , makes it impossible for them to get off the ground .
With the prospect of several million more jobs being lost in the EU , it is important to have incentives that people who are made redundant can access in an attempt to make a new life for themselves , thereby avoiding social crises and reducing Member States ' spending on social support measures .
The financial and economic crisis caused primarily by British and American speculators is now leading to growing unemployment in Europe as a result of the economic downturn .
It is mainly young people , who were already at serious risk of unemployment , who have been particularly hard hit by the changing situation .
Therefore , it is especially important to give them an opportunity to start or restart their careers and to pave the way for some of them to start their own companies .
I hope that the new European microfinance facility for employment and social inclusion - Progress - will give them significant support in this respect .
This new instrument also allows us to respond to the continuing credit crunch .
As well as interest rate support , people who set up micro-enterprises will also receive support in the form of mentoring , training , coaching and capacity building .
I support the committee 's initiative to increase the funding for the microfinance facility by 50 % , compared with the Commission 's proposal , to EUR 150 million .
Looking at the huge sums that have been spent on rescuing the banks , it is important to be generous to those people who have been hardest hit by the situation .
For all of these reasons , I have voted in favour of this report .
On 10 November 2009 , the European Commission published a Proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Microfinance Facility .
It is related to the Commission document entitled ' Realisation of the European Recovery Plan ' and the priorities of the Council , which are : maintaining employment , creating jobs and promoting mobility , improving skills and adapting to the needs of the labour market , and increasing access to employment .
The microfinance facility is supposed to give easier access to financial services to the unemployed and groups of businesspeople who have found themselves in a difficult situation .
It is concerned with people from certain social groups who do not have the creditworthiness required by commercial banks but would like to start up in business .
Introduction of this type of support facility , which comes from EU funds , has particularly significant meaning in a situation in which lending levels are currently reduced and the value of loans which have been made has fallen .
The situation in the lending sector shows that the financial and economic crisis is changing into an employment and social crisis .
The report of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs contains significant amendments to the Commission Proposal , including opposition to transfer of the necessary funds from the Progress programme to the European Microfinance Facility .
The rapporteur proposes putting the facility under a separate budget line , and also proposes increasing the facility 's budget for the next four years by EUR 50 million .
In view of these aspects , I endorse the report .
I have voted in favour of the resolution to introduce the microfinance facility , because for me , the top priority is to adopt this resolution quickly .
This will give disadvantaged sections of the population the opportunity to take out loans and to help themselves .
However , I am calling on the Council not to take the funding from Progress .
It is important that this programme retains its funding in full .
In particular in this crisis , EU money must not be redeployed at the expense of the weakest members of society .
in writing . - I am delighted that the European Parliament has today approved a scheme for ensuring that additional loans will be made available to small businesses .
This decision will allow EUR 100 million to be made available at regional and national level over the next four years .
This is a valuable and timely development which will provide many of those people suffering the effects of the global recession with new opportunities .
The measures announced today will support those wanting to start new businesses , as well as providing professional training - thereby increasing the range of skills upon which citizens can draw to set up the enterprises which are vital to Europe 's economy .
More and more , we are seeing greater consideration of small and medium-sized enterprises in European Union policy and legislation .
I welcome this new development and , in particular , the European Parliament 's contribution to stimulating the development of small businesses in difficult economic times .
The Progress programme was started to assist in realisation of European Union objectives in the fields of employment , social affairs and equal opportunities , which are laid out in the Social Agenda .
The budgetary means available under this programme are supposed to be a stimulus for the process of transformation and modernisation in the five areas of employment , social integration and social protection , conditions of work , combating discrimination and equal opportunities for women and men .
Currently , the financial and economic crisis is changing into a social crisis and an employment crisis .
The unemployed and people from social groups which are in an unfavourable situation need active support and advice if they want to become independent .
The Progress programme is aimed at the most exposed groups , and in relation to this , I think Member States and the European Union are responsible for effective implementation of the programme .
The Union should also make every effort to increase the range of directed financial support for new sole traders and the founders of micro-enterprises in the form of monitoring , training - including practical training - and skills development .
Progress is supposed to serve the development of micro-enterprises and the social economy .
In the present economic and financial situation , which is characterised by a reduced supply of loans , the Progress programme extends the range of directed financial aid for new businesspeople .
The main responsibility for employment and social policy rests with the Member States , but the European Union should be the initiator of these changes .
It is necessary to create real possibilities of employment for all , and to raise the quality and productivity of work .
Microfinance is an interesting instrument to provide people who are unemployed or in danger of losing their jobs , and also enterprises in the social economy , with financial support in times of crisis .
I voted against this report , as it is not certain that this instrument is to be financed with fresh money .
It is possible that resources from the existing Progress programme will be used , a programme that was launched in 2007 and comprises actions concerning poverty reduction , anti-discrimination , social inclusion , gender and employment .
Taking money from programmes that fight poverty in order to fight poverty is not a good strategy .
The Council , in particular , rejects a separate budget .
The Member States clearly lack political courage .
To enable this to start at the beginning of 2010 , EUR 25 million is being released from the 2010 EU budget .
There is no agreement between Parliament and the Council at present on the financing for the following three years ( 2011-2013 ) .
What Europe needs is a sustainable strategy and not a one-off injection such as this initiative .
The microfinance instrument has no coherence and no long-term vision .
In addition , micro-credits can already be granted under the European Social Fund , and also under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
I say an emphatic ' no ' , then , to this report .
in writing . - This is a great initiative that will make it easier for people who have lost , or risk losing , their jobs to get credit to start up their own businesses .
The European Progress Microfinance Facility will make available up to EUR 25,000 to people who want loans to start or grow very small firms , and who have been unable to obtain credit through conventional markets .
I am pleased that the European Parliament was able to ensure this money did not come from the ' Progress ' programme , which is designed to help vulnerable people , but was created using money from the 2010 budget for the first year .
The EUR 100 million fund , available from early 2010 , is exactly the kind of help that small businesses need at this time of financial crisis when banks are still unwilling to release credit .
This will help businesses across Wales , and I am disappointed that colleagues from UKIP were unable to support this progressive initiative .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Question Hour with the President of the Commission
The next item is the Question Hour with the President of the Commission .
Open questions
Mr President , expectations of EU 2020 are running high , not only in our group but also among European citizens .
They expect prosperity , jobs and a sustainable , innovative social market economy by 2020 , as well as specific proposals for strong SMEs and an open European single market , including in the field of capital and knowledge development .
They expect a 2020 strategy with a solid , transparent European governance structure , with no free-for-all for Member States .
Mr President , what Parliament wants is not merely to be informed after the event about proposals by the Commission and the Council ; it wants to actually participate in developing and implementing the 2020 strategy .
How are you going to ensure this , and what timetable are you working to ?
The Council President has announced that the intention is to reach conclusions as early as March .
Will you take the initiative ?
Can we expect a specific framework in the near future containing starting points and objectives as a basis for participation by Parliament in this discussion ?
Can you let us know what timetable you are working to and who is responsible ?
Are you Mr 2020 ?
President of the Commission . - As President of the Commission , I will be responsible for that , in coordination with my colleagues in the Commission , because this will be the central task for the next Commission , as was presented in my political guidelines .
Regarding the timing , we hope to have a formal communication ready in time for the Spring Council , but I feel it would be better only to have the formal conclusions at the June Council .
That will be my proposal to the European Council , so that we can have - and I very much wish for this - full participation and ownership for Parliament of the strategy .
At European Council level , there has also been a very interesting pre-discussion about the economy and , in fact , I have encouraged the European Council to take full ownership on the Council side as well , and to reinforce the mechanisms of governance .
As you know , five years ago , when we re-launched the Lisbon strategy , there was resistance from some Member States to follow certain recommendations of the Kok report .
This time , the conditions exist for having a reinforced system of governance in this strategy .
Mr President , Mr Barroso , 2009 is drawing to an end in a difficult situation , with major unemployment and economic and budgetary problems .
At the same time , the five-year period of the Barroso Commission is coming to a close .
What conclusions do you draw from the first five years about the second five years , providing that the Commission is confirmed in office , in particular , with regard to these economic and social issues ?
What will you be saying to our citizens and also to your commissioners about the things that should be different in this new period ?
We should work together to set new priorities with respect to our economic and socio-political objectives and to avoid recreating the situation that we currently find ourselves in .
Therefore , I would like to ask you again what conclusions you draw from the first five years and what you want to do differently , better and more clearly in the next five years in order to fulfil the wishes of the citizens of Europe .
President of the Commission . - First of all , I think that the fact that this Parliament voted again for a mandate for myself is a signal that there is support for the action we have been taking .
Having said that , there are issues that we have to change and to improve .
The situation today is different .
There is a much greater sense of social urgency than before .
As I have said very often , the most important problem we face in Europe today - which most likely we are going to face for some time yet - is unemployment .
We have to find not only new sources of growth , but also to look at what was wrong with the previous model of growth .
It was obvious that the previous model of growth was dilapidated .
Although it created some artificial bubbles - not only in the financial sector but also in other sectors - it was not sustainable , including from an energy and climate point of view .
That is the focus of my strategy - the strategy I have put forward to this Parliament and which I hope to develop with the next Commission in , of course , very close association with this Parliament .
I would like to ask a brief additional question , Mr Barroso .
If , during the hearings in Parliament , we are of the opinion that the allocation of the portfolios does not fully meet these objectives and we make proposals for changing the portfolios , are you prepared in principle to address our objections and to make changes ?
Would you , in principle , reject any objections or are you prepared to accept them ?
President of the Commission . - It is clearly stated in the Lisbon Treaty that the internal organisation of the College and the Commission services is a responsibility of the Commission .
I am always ready to listen to your suggestions and to your comments .
In fact , some of the innovations were as a result of some debates with your group and other groups .
I count on your support for the full respect of the competences of the Commission , as I will always respect the competences of Parliament .
I am always open to listening to your suggestions but I think we should concentrate more on matters of policy , of substance .
Regarding the organisation of the Commission , I believe that after five years of everyday work in the Commission , I am pretty well informed about the best ways of allocating resources inside the Commission .
Mr President , my question concerns the situation in Greece .
This situation is very alarming , of course , with a government deficit of 12.7 % and government debt poised to exceed 130 % .
This is exactly the situation I found in Belgium when , at a young age , I became Minister for the Budget in 1985 .
The figures were exactly the same - I shall never forget them - 12.7 % government deficit .
Clearly , then , Greece will have to work hard and implement reforms it has not implemented to date .
Yet we , too , can do something , President Barroso .
We can enable the costs associated with the government debt of the various Member States to fall by installing , at long last , a European bond market that would cover a large proportion of this government debt .
We are currently paying several hundred billion euro too much in interest on our government debt owing to the fact that there is no European bond market and all the bond markets are still segmented , with an enormous shortage of liquidity .
My question is whether you will take the initiative in this matter and launch such a European bond market at long last .
This would not obviate the need for Greece to make an effort itself , but it could help .
President of the Commission . - I was very reassured by yesterday 's commitment by Prime Minister Papandreou to cut public deficits and reduce the Government 's debt through permanent expenditure cuts and revenue increases .
We believe the current budget for 2010 that is now being discussed in the Greek Parliament and Prime Minister Papandreou 's statements are steps in the right direction .
I have been following the situation very closely with this government and with the previous government , namely the question of public finances .
We were also very impressed by the candid presentation made by the Prime Minister of Greece in the last European Council .
He is fully aware of the problem and he has shown us his determination to address it .
Greece will submit to the Commission in the course of January an updated stability programme , as foreseen in the Stability and Growth Pact .
I trust that this programme will include concrete measures to strengthen fiscal adjustment in 2010 and to ensure lasting consolidation of public finances .
Naturally , the Commission will continue to monitor very closely the macroeconomic and fiscal situation and the implementation of the measures in Greece .
Having said this , I do not consider it appropriate at this stage to elaborate on possible scenarios .
We believe that Greece is now taking appropriate measures and that we should support Greece in the enforcement of those measures .
Mr President , to come back to what I was saying , a European bond market could help Greece .
It would by no means obviate the need for that country to carry out reforms , but it would help all the other EU Member States too , as it would mean a much lower interest rate being payable on the debt .
Let us compare the interest rates payable in Germany and the United States .
The Americans pay 0.4 % less interest on their treasury bonds than the Germans , even though German public finances are in much better shape .
This is proof that we urgently need to take that course .
I expect the Commission to do so .
President of the Commission . - We are not at this stage contemplating the kind of measures suggested .
I personally believe it is not very appropriate to link this kind of proposal to the specific situation in Greece today ; in fact , it could send the wrong signal .
Let us be honest about it .
Greece and the countries of the euro area have a specific obligation when it comes to implementing the conditions of the Stability and Growth Pact .
It is very important for them and , above all , for their own economy , but it is also important for others .
I believe that raising this issue at this moment and suggesting that there could be a solution outside Greece 's own efforts is not the best way to help our Greek friends to implement , with determination , the measures announced by Prime Minister Papandreou .
I would like to ask you today about the structure of the next Commission .
The portfolio responsibilities that you have presented seem to us to have very presidential overtones .
In our opinion , you are organising this structure in such a way as to give you personally , as Commission President , a great deal of power .
We are surprised that you want to abolish the working groups of the members of the Commission .
In our opinion , these groups have produced good results during the last parliamentary term .
We are also surprised that the responsibilities in some areas have been fragmented in a way which seems to us incomprehensible .
It is a mystery to us how you will handle the division of responsibilities between Mrs Reding and Mrs Malmström .
It seems to us that Mrs Malmström will be creating a sort of homeland security office .
I definitely have nothing against making the climate into a separate responsibility .
However , if you appoint a climate commissioner , you must also show that she has real power and will have access to areas such as energy , industry , transport , the environment and agriculture .
We do not believe that this is the case .
President of the Commission . - Two different questions : one regarding the portfolios on justice and security , the other on climate .
Regarding justice and security , I have forwarded the suggestion made by many of you in this Parliament to have a specific portfolio more centred on fundamental rights .
So , Commissioner Reding , if she meets with your approval , will be Commissioner for justice , fundamental rights and citizenship .
There will also be a Commissioner for home affairs , which is basically what happens in most , if not all , Member States in Europe - there is a minister for the interior and a minister for justice .
I believe that it is much more efficient so that they can work with their colleagues in the respective Councils .
It will also be much better in terms of the amount of work because , as you know , we have just approved the Stockholm Programme .
This is a very ambitious programme in which this Parliament has a lot of important competences now , so it is fully justified to have two different Commissioners .
It is not because of the role of the President in this case .
It has nothing to do with the role of the President of the Commission .
It has to do with the need to have some kind of division of labour in such an important area .
I would like the Commissioner for fundamental rights to have security concerns in her hands , and I would like the Commissioner for security to do the job whilst respecting fundamental rights and the spirit of liberties in the European Union .
I would like to repeat my previous question .
How can the climate commissioner be a powerful force and how can she assert herself , if this , on the basis of the second option , is not reflected in the structures ?
Secondly , there is another issue in the detail which seems totally unreasonable to us and that is that green genetic engineering , which you , Mr Barroso , are in favour of , now forms part of the health portfolio and is no longer included in the environment or agriculture portfolio .
We need you to explain this .
President of the Commission . - I am happy to see that you are happy with the creation of the Commissioner for climate change .
She will , in fact , have a lot to do because , as we are now seeing , Copenhagen will not be the end of the road .
There will be a lot to do after Copenhagen .
Her main tasks will be to mainstream climate change in all sectors of the Commission - not only the ones you have mentioned , but many others .
There is almost no policy in the European Union that does not have some impact on climate action : from agriculture to research , from enterprise and industry to maritime affairs .
That is the task .
She will have a dedicated DG for climate change .
I want the Commissioner for climate change to have some instruments to pursue her policy but , of course , she has to do this in cooperation with other Commissioners - namely the Commissioner for the Environment , the Commissioner for Energy and others - because this is such an important policy that also has a very important external dimension .
Mr President , I would like to ask for your assessment of the EU-Ukraine Summit which took place almost a fortnight ago .
At the same time , I would like to raise two matters .
When I was in Kiev , I learned that the European side refused to accept a reference in the final declaration to Ukraine 's European identity .
I will not hide the fact that this surprises me greatly , because it seems to me that the question of Ukraine 's European identity should not be a matter of dispute .
Secondly , I learned in Kiev that our European delegation refused to lay wreaths at the monument to the victims of the Ukrainian famine , something which is customary for all diplomats visiting Ukraine , and I must say that these two facts surprise me greatly .
President of the Commission . - I think the meeting we had with Ukraine was successful .
To be frank with you , our Ukrainian friends have to do more if they want us to help them more .
I have been spending more time working on Ukrainian issues than on most of the Member States of the European Union , which shows the attention we give to Ukrainian concerns .
This is a country that is very close to us and a country we want to be closer to .
That is why we have offered them a comprehensive and innovative European Union-Ukraine association agreement .
This is the most advanced status we can give to a country , barring accession , which is not possible under the current situation .
There were some discussions , but if you look at the final conclusions , it is clearly reaffirmed that Ukraine is a European country , Ukraine is bound by the same European values and we want to be closer to Ukraine .
We want to help them to be closer to us .
I believe that it was a productive meeting , but we cannot honestly expect to create a new status for Ukraine every time there is a summit .
The last summit before this was in Paris .
We granted Ukraine this association possibility , but we cannot move to a new status every time there is a summit , and we had a very honest , open and friendly discussion about this with President Yushchenko and the other interlocutors .
Mr President , I have a question for you about the Tobin tax .
This tax is a worthwhile proposal , but as yet , no one has introduced it .
Everyone says that it will never be introduced unless all the Member States do so at the same time .
I am now afraid , after the decision at the European summit , which I welcome , that this will once again be postponed , because we are not all starting at the same time .
I would like to know what your opinion on this is and what you think are the chances of the Tobin tax being introduced .
President of the Commission . - If there is an overall global tax for financial transactions , we should support it .
In fact , I have personally supported this in discussions in the European Council .
The European Council has asked the Commission to put forward some ideas on that , and we are preparing it .
Also linked to the issue of innovative financing , I personally believe that , if we want to meet our obligations regarding the fight against climate change , it cannot be only with the money from our budgets .
It is obvious that our budgets are under such pressure that our national budgets alone over the next few years cannot provide the resources for fighting climate change .
We have to think of innovative ways of financing .
A global financial transaction tax seems to me a very good idea , and we are working on that area in order to put forward proposals at an appropriate time .
I hope the new Commission will put forward some proposals in this area .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr Barroso , we have recently heard that there is to be a closure of the Corus steel works on Teesside in northern England .
This is due to an EU target reduction of 20 % of carbon emissions .
Thanks to the carbon credit , Corus can no longer afford to employ over 5 000 steel workers , including suppliers .
We also have the spectacle of the British Government admitting that its hands are tied on this issue because of punitive EU competition law .
The real gain to Corus from stopping production on Teesside is the saving it will make in its carbon allowances allocated by the EU under its emissions trading system scheme , which will be worth up to GBP 600 million over the next three years .
But surprise , surprise - guess what : the head of the IPCC , Rajendra Pachauri , is also the head of the Tata Foundation , so , one must ask , cui bono ?
Because Tata owns Corus .
( Protests from the floor )
The question I would like to ask is : is it now official EU policy to offer incentives to companies to close plants such as Teesside so that they can outsource their business to countries such as India , or is there a more personal interest at stake here ?
President of the Commission . - Regarding the insinuation you are making , I really cannot comment .
If I were the person involved , I would take the matter to the courts .
Concerning the issue at stake , you said that the British Government said this was the position of the European Union .
I do not know anything about that statement , but let me tell you that , if there is one government that has been pushing the European Union for ambitious targets in the fight against climate change , it is precisely the government of your country , whether you like it or not .
In fact , the common agenda today in the European Union is to reduce global emissions of greenhouse gases .
This does have some consequences in terms of the adaptation of our industry .
We want industry to be kept in Europe , but we want another kind of industry , which is less energy consuming and friendlier to the environment .
You did not answer my question , because the question was : is it official EU policy to offer incentives to companies to close plants such as Teesside and outsource the business to countries such as India ?
You did not answer the question .
Would you please answer it ?
President of the Commission . - I will answer by saying ' no ' .
Colleagues , the blue card procedure is not applicable now because these are discussions between two people .
It is very difficult for the blue card to be used for an additional question now as I do not know which of the two people it is intended for .
I am sorry about that .
It will , of course , be applicable during other debates .
( FR ) Mr President , the European Commission , in response to the referendum in Switzerland on minarets , has gone to the lengths of making a statement that is disturbing and ambiguous , to say the least .
It felt it necessary to reaffirm , for the benefit of those Member States that might be tempted to take similar decisions , the need to ' respect fundamental rights such as freedom of religion ' .
This thinly veiled threat requires some explaining on your part , when opinion polls show that the vast majority of Europeans would have voted in such a referendum had it been an option in their respective countries .
Mr Barroso , do the EU Member States have the right or not to hold a referendum for their people that is identical in every way to the one held on 29 November in Switzerland ?
Would the Commission oppose or not the sovereign decision of these peoples if they were to vote as the people of Switzerland did ?
If , as we believe , the European Union is today more totalitarian than democratic , it is high time it was acknowledged .
It is the sovereign right of Member States to decide , in accordance with their constitutional rules , how they wish to consult their people directly .
I am not going to make hypothetical statements about hypothetical referendums .
What I can tell you is that the Member States take their own decisions on this matter .
Therefore , I will not prejudge a referendum in a country or the reaction to a referendum organised by the Commission .
The Commission has powers to verify the measures and the decisions taken by the Member States in relation to the application of European law .
In this case , the Commission has not only the right , but also the duty , to voice its opinion .
( FR ) Mr Barroso , all the same , the question was clear .
I was not asking you a question about a hypothetical referendum , but about a referendum that is identical in every way to the one that was held for the people of Switzerland .
If one of the EU Member States , in a completely identical referendum , asked the question that was asked of the Swiss people , how would the Commission react ?
Do they have the right to do so ?
And would the Commission oppose the decision of the sovereign people if it decided to vote as the Swiss did ?
The question is clear .
Mrs Le Pen , you are asking a hypothetical question .
My French is not as good as yours , but , when you say ' if ' , that is a hypothetical question .
' If there were a referendum ' , that is a hypothetical question .
( Applause )
I am not in the habit of answering hypothetical questions .
The reality is already complex enough .
Therefore , what I can tell you is that the Commission is against all forms of discrimination , including all forms of religious discrimination .
That is our position and it is clear .
It is not only the Commission 's position ; it is the position of all the democratic Member States of the European Union .
That being said , I am not going to express an opinion on a hypothetical referendum .
( MT ) I had intended to address a question to the President of the Commission concerning the Commission .
However , an intervention was made today by the Socialist Party concerning the hearing we have with the Commissioners .
I hope that the Socialist Party will not start playing around with the portfolios assigned to the nominated Commissioners .
We do not have the competence to change the Commissioners ' portfolios , since this falls under the exclusive competence of the President of the Commission .
The selected individuals , from our Party , the Liberals and the Socialist Party , are all very valid persons , and we should not have the competence to start debating as from now , prior to the hearing , whether we can change the portfolios of the Commissioners .
I am aware that this was not the subject , but following the Socialist Party 's intervention , I felt that I had to make this intervention .
President of the Commission . - It was not a question so I do not have to answer but , since I have the opportunity , I will just say the following .
The principle of loyalty between the different institutions is very important .
Also , now that we have a new treaty , we need to respect the competences of each institution .
I told you how important it is to have a special relationship between the Commission and Parliament , and I will work for that .
This , of course , means respecting the competences of each institution in its own field according to the treaties .
( FI ) Mr President , at the start of his speech , the Commission President referred to what had been wrong in earlier models .
What is wrong , surely , is that the Commission has had some good programmes , but the Member States just do what they like .
In other words , the stick and carrot approach is not enough to guide the Member States .
I also noticed that the 2020 document contained no innovative ideas regarding how the Member States might be guided .
I would like to ask whether the Commission intends to use the warnings under Article 121 of the Treaty of Lisbon if a Member State does not comply or even want to comply with the ideas of the 2020 Strategy .
President of the Commission . - Thank you for your question and for the intention behind your question .
My intention is to propose to the Member States to reinforce economic governance in Europe .
I think now we have an opportunity to do it .
Frankly , it has been refused several times before .
You have probably read a recent interview given by one of my predecessors , Mr Delors , who said that his proposal of reinforced coordination on social matters failed in 1993 .
It was refused by the Member States .
It was interesting and I looked up what I said then as Foreign Minister of my country .
I was one of those supporting a reinforced cooperation of the Member States in that area .
Unfortunately , it was not possible .
When the Lisbon Strategy was being revised , we put forward a proposal based on the Wim Kok report , and it was refused by Member States .
After this crisis , I think there is now much more awareness of the need to have real coordination in the response to the crisis .
I am going to fight for that but , of course , we need the support of the Member States to achieve this .
We need them , because some of those policies are made at national level and some are at Community level .
I am encouraged by the first exchange of views with the European Council .
In fact , the new President of the Council , President Van Rompuy , has already announced that he wants an informal exchange of views at the beginning of February .
I hope that will be a way of having more commitment from the European Council for a strengthened mechanism of governance of the European Union 2020 Strategy .
( FR ) Mr Barroso , the Lisbon Strategy has had its day .
The European Union will therefore not be the most competitive economy from 1 January .
Please excuse my harsh words , but one can almost talk in terms of a mirage .
What we need to do now is ensure that , for the years ahead , for 2010 , the EU is more like an oasis of calm for Europe 's entrepreneurs and citizens .
In this connection , I read in the memo with which you have presented us that you are talking about internationalising SMEs , the main creators of jobs in the EU .
Do you not think , Mr Barroso , that the urgent requirement today is to stabilise the situation , to reassure people ?
Moreover , can you guarantee today that the Commission will oppose any regulatory hysteria and will apply , on a daily basis and in all its policies , the principle , the strategy , ' Think small first ' ?
Thank you , Mrs Ries .
This was one of the priorities of my Commission , but it is also a priority for the current Commission and will certainly be a priority for the next Commission too .
Small and medium-sized enterprises are the ones that create jobs .
We created the Small Business Act on the basis of the very principle - ' Think small first ' - that you are talking about , and we are embarking on a programme to reduce administrative burdens , particularly for small and medium-sized enterprises .
That is why we have placed the completion of the internal market at the heart of our priorities , as there is potential and also an international dimension to exploit , because the truth is that our small and medium-sized enterprises are still coming up against a number of obstacles when trying to work with other markets .
I therefore believe that this is one of the priorities of the new strategy , of the 2020 strategy .
It is precisely a strategy that is linked more closely to the international dimension , because , today , the effects of globalisation are being felt , and it is only by adopting an aggressive , proactive stance that we can win this battle of competitiveness .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to provide an explanation in response to a very important question by Mrs Ries .
We started to prepare the list of speakers at 15.00 , when we started this item .
I have about 30 people on the list , in the order you took your blue cards .
Of course , we can add other speakers to the list , but it will be impossible for them to speak during this item .
If you wish , you can keep your cards for now , and Ms Durant will be the next speaker for one minute .
We can try to add to the list the remaining Members wishing to speak , but I can tell you very honestly that it is impossible to have so many speakers ; I have about 30 .
We started to deal with the list at 15.00 .
If any other Members would like to add their names , please keep to one minute .
( FR ) Mr President , President of the Commission , I would like to ask you , in the context of this 2020 strategy and , in particular , of the system of enhanced governance , how you wish to deal with the issue of lobbies .
You know , as I do , that if a 2020 strategy is drafted , there will inevitably be lobbying across the board .
Lobbying takes place just about everywhere ; there is lobbying of the Commission , of Parliament , of the Council .
As you are also aware , an interinstitutional debate is being held today on the issue of lobbies .
Mr Kallas was in charge of this issue in the previous Commission .
I should like you to tell me who in the Commission will be in charge of this issue of lobbies , and what his or her mandate will be .
Do you wish to make progress - as I and other members of this interinstitutional group hope - towards a mandatory registration system for lobbies ?
That is the condition governing transparency and it is also , in my view , the condition governing the citizens ' support .
They must be able to understand how decisions are taken at European level by the Commission , the Council and Parliament .
Mr President , this is a well-known problem , a very important problem , and I am in fact proud that we have made progress during this Commission 's term of office .
As you mentioned , Commissioner and Vice-President Kallas has done a great deal of work in this area , and we have made progress with the lobby registration system .
In my view , however , it should be acknowledged that the best way to deal with this problem is to be transparent , not to hide information .
It is only natural !
It is only natural in an open society and in an open economy for different , sometimes conflicting , interests to be expressed .
It is along these lines that the Commission will carry out its work : its relations with representatives of the various interests - the interests of businesses , of trade unions , of specific causes sometimes - will become more transparent .
The person responsible for this matter within the Commission , if you will kindly offer him your support , will be Commissioner and Vice-President Maroš Šefčovič .
It is he who the administration will appoint to carry out this task within the new Commission .
President Barroso , I welcome your vision for 2020 .
You show that even in the dark days of recession , one can dream of Utopia .
I welcome your comments on European research areas .
I represent Cambridge , which is home to the leading research cluster that has already seen great successes in high-tech , green-tech and bio-tech .
If we are to turn your dreams into anything like reality , then we could do with listening to , and learning from , the Cambridge experience .
Research needs funding ; innovative businesses need funding ; world class-innovation needs world-class funding .
Last week , I met representatives of the Wellcome Trust , which is the UK 's largest charity and last year gave EUR 750 million to medical research .
They came to Brussels to tell this Parliament that , if we pass the legislation , as drafted , on alternative investments , then we would cut their organisation 's funding by two thirds .
Please do not say one thing and do another .
President of the Commission . - Congratulations to Cambridge .
I think Cambridge is one of the greatest universities in Europe and in the world .
It is precisely because we do not have so many Cambridges in Europe that we have been working to have a real European research area , because Cambridge and other very important universities in Europe are quite international .
They are able to attract very important funding , but in other countries , especially small countries and some of the poorest countries , they do not have those kinds of resources .
That is why we not only need private funding like the ones you mentioned , and I certainly welcome all the work of foundations such as the ones you mentioned , but we also need public funding from the states and from the European Union budget .
That will be one of the points I intend to put into the next European Union budget .
Regarding the link with alternative investment managers , I really do not see this link .
I think we should not use one thing or the other .
We believe it is important to have sensible regulations for products on the financial markets considering what happened , including in your country .
It was in your country that we had the highest ever case of State aid in the history of the European Union , precisely because of problems in the financial markets .


( EL ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , may I say that , while the ambitious objectives of the strategy for 2020 are being debated , there are certain countries , such as Greece , which will join this strategy on unfavourable terms , with huge economic problems and high unemployment .
Yesterday , the Prime Minister announced measures which he hopes will reduce the deficit .
Athens is waiting with bated breath for reaction from the markets and an evaluation by various firms .
I listened to your reply to an earlier question and I have read today 's statements by Mr Almunia and I should like to ask you Mr Barroso : apart from the Commission monitoring the public deficit in Greece , how else can it help to address this problem ?
And secondly , within the framework of the strategy for 2020 , how are such national peculiarities addressed , so that such problems do not arise ?
President of the Commission . - First of all , in the 2020 Strategy , our idea is precisely to have national programmes , but also horizontal European Community-wide programmes .
We are going to ask every Member State to put forward specific , simplified objectives for each country , taking into consideration their different circumstances .
As you have mentioned , Greece is in a specific situation today , and we are being very attentive to it .
Greece will , of course , go on benefiting from cohesion funds as it is one of the countries benefiting from those cohesion funds , and this is separate from the European Union 2020 Strategy .
However , it is important to understand why countries like Greece have to correct their deficits and their excessive debts .
The interest countries pay for debt is money they cannot put into their hospitals or schools for the future .
It is not because that we are attached to an idea of rigid macro-economic discipline that we recommend Member States not to maintain very high debt and deficit levels , but because we are thinking about social expenditure and addressing people 's concerns .
( NL ) Mr President .
President Barroso , I should like to ask you a question regarding the future of the automobile sector which , indeed , will remain one of the most important industrial sectors even after 2020 .
Some of our crown jewels are about to be sold off to China , which is an unwelcome development .
In my opinion , it is by no means too late to avert this , but to do so we - you , Mr President , and the new European Commission - must move up a gear as a matter of urgency .
We must mobilise more resources for research and development , with greater focus on the automobile sector , and we must also , of course , mobilise more financial resources from the European Investment Bank .
As I see it , this is the only way to ensure that our current dependence on oil is not replaced with a future dependence on Chinese electric batteries , for example .
Hence my question : are you and the European Commission prepared to assume a coordinating role in the short term , including with regard to the Opel dossier , so that we can join together resolutely to focus on the new , environmentally friendly technologies in the automobile sector ?
President of the Commission . - In the case of Opel , as you know , the Commission has maintained an important position , promoting the necessary meetings between the different countries involved and the companies concerned .
Regarding the issue of the automobile industry , there is a problem of over-capacity in Europe and in the world .
So the future is precisely as your question suggests , finding new ways and new technologies , namely the development of cleaner cars .
We have been supporting this idea , not only in terms of ideas but in terms of funding .
In fact the European Investment Bank , with our full support , has , as you know , created a special facility for this .
This is one of the priorities for the next mandate : to develop a greener automobile industry in Europe which is technologically more advanced .
This is the way in which we can maintain a leading position in the automobile industry in the world .

President Barroso , the European Anti-Poverty Network has described your consultation document on the 2020 Strategy as a step backwards from commitments by successive European Councils to strengthen the social dimension .
Your document only mentions flexicurity and training .
You should know that on this side of the House , we cannot accept a strategy that is devoid of social content .
2010 will be the European Year against Poverty and Social Exclusion .
Should you not make the fight against the scourge of poverty and exclusion the centrepiece of the 2020 Strategy ?
Finally , recognising that a third of all jobs created since the year 2000 in the European Union are in the health , social and employment services , making a double contribution to reducing poverty , providing services and creating employment , should the 2020 Strategy not set targets for the provision of high-quality social services ?
Thank you , colleague , but please do not put two questions during your one minute , because it is very difficult for President Barroso to answer two questions in one minute .
Which question do you prefer - the first or the second ?
Colleagues , this is very important .
Mr President , in fact I put three points , and three ' yeses ' would do !
( Laughter )
President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you very much for your understanding .
I will try to choose the best question !
The honest answer is the following : this is a consultation document ; it is not yet a strategy , and I very much welcome your input .
Let me tell you my personal opinion .
Yes , we have to do more to fight poverty and social exclusion but for that , we need the support of our Member States .
I can tell you that I have proposed concrete measures several times and have received a very loud ' no ' , with the argument that some Member States view social matters as something for them , and not for Europe .
That is an interesting debate .
Let us see if we agree on this matter .
I very much expect to have your support on this because , as you know , to fight social exclusion and poverty , we also need some instruments at European level that complement the instruments at national level .
I am telling you the position that I will be defending .
I hope all the Member States will be ready to support this view .
( PL ) Commissioner , implementation of the Lisbon Strategy is not going very well .
How do you intend to change the document on the Europe 2020 Strategy in order to achieve its objectives ?
Do you foresee preparation of something in the way of a programme for realisation of the strategy , a separate document for the Commission 's five-year term of office , which would set out the actions to be implemented ?
I think it would be a good idea .
We could monitor realisation of the strategy and , at the same time , appraise the Commission on what has been implemented .
Finally , I will permit myself to make a comment : I think the time allowed for social consultations , and I mean the deadline set for 15 January , is too short .
We should treat our social partners a little more seriously .
It is they who are going to realise the strategy , and they should have more time to take part in these consultations .
President of the Commission . - The deadline is the deadline for the consultation based on this document , but there will also be other opportunities to consult .
In fact , there have been consultations on the future of the Lisbon strategy at least since 2008 .
The Committee of the Regions has prepared a very interesting report , as has the Economic and Social Committee , and I would like to take this opportunity to say that I am prepared , if the European Parliament so wishes , to hold a debate on this matter - not just this question hour with one-minute replies , but a special debate on this matter alone - whenever you want , because I really believe it is extremely important .
( Applause )
It is extremely important for this Parliament to have ownership , and also to associate national parliaments in this process , because this is to be the centrepiece of the strategy for the future .
I would like to underline that point .
Regarding the issue of the mechanisms of governance , that is exactly what we are now preparing .
There are several ideas .
One current idea is precisely to have ways of measuring progress and to monitor progress in certain areas on the basis of indicators .
This is what we are preparing , and for this we need the support of Parliament and , hopefully , also the agreement of our Member States .
( DE ) Following up on the question which has already been asked , I would like to return to the 2020 climate strategy .
Mr President , is it right that the provisional emissions trading system gives the largest steel company in Europe 90 million tonnes of CO2 , despite the fact that it had 68 million last year and will have 43 million this year ?
Can it be that the largest steel company in Europe will have earned GBP 1 billion by 2012 from emissions , having been allocated too large an amount as a result of its lobbying activities with , among others , the Commission ?


President of the Commission . - Mr Langen , I do not know exactly to what you are referring , but , if you are talking about emissions in Europe , let us be honest about it : our emissions are roughly speaking 14 % of global emissions and that trend is a downwards one , because there are big economies on the rise in terms of emissions .
However , on an emissions per capita basis , we are still far above those economies and let us be fair about it : we also have some historical responsibility .
The Americans produce more greenhouse gas emissions per capita than we do , but we produce much more than China and much more than India , for instance , if you are referring to the Indian case .
This is indeed a problem that we have to address in a spirit of global fairness .
If we want to solve the problem and if we believe there is a threat to our planet - that of climate change - we need cooperative efforts on all sides .
So , yes , we do have more stringent conditions than in some other parts of the world , but we are also viewing this as an opportunity to develop new technologies so that we can meet our targets without putting at risk our companies , because we do not want to export our companies and our jobs .
Colleagues , during Question Hour with President Barroso , please do not ask additional questions , because a lot of people are waiting for their first question .
I am very sorry , but I would prefer to move on to a fresh question .
President Barroso , as you mentioned , interest rates are indeed affected by the state of the economy .
They reflect the confidence in a particular economy and the international economic community is affected by them .
Interest rates are affected by the confidence the Community has in a particular economy and that confidence is , in turn , affected many times by statements on the confidence that the European Commission shows in measures taken by Member States .
In that sense , speculators also try to speculate on a bad economic situation and sometimes make it worse .
President Barroso , are you prepared today , in this Chamber , to state your support for the measures announced yesterday by the Greek Government to reverse the economic situation in Greece ?
Does the Commission believe that they are moving in the right direction and , if applied , that they could change the financial situation , which you have indicated has been problematic in the past ?
President of the Commission . - I have already said that I was happy to hear yesterday Prime Minister Papandreou 's commitment to cut the public deficit and reduce government debt through permanent expenditure cuts and revenue increases .
I even added that the 2010 budget currently being discussed in the Greek Parliament and the Prime Minister 's statement are steps in the right direction .
Naturally , the Commission will continue to monitor closely the macroeconomic and fiscal situation and the implementation of the measures in Greece .
This is very clear in my statement of support for the measures announced .
I believe that this is the best way we can help Greece in the very difficult situation they are now facing in terms of budget and debt .
I trust those measures will have some important results .
Mr President , I warmly welcome the chance to put a question to President Barroso because the Conference of Committee Chairs has , for the first time , been moved backward by an hour so we committee chairmen are able to be here for the first time .
I want to ask him about a policy to help framework conditions for research and innovation - which I was rather disappointed to see did not make it into this first draft of 2020 , but I hope will be there in future - and that is to harness the huge potential of public procurement , throughout the European Union , to stimulate innovative products and services .
I want to ask him today if he would take up the recommendations endorsed almost unanimously by this Parliament in my report last November , which showed how this could be done .
Just to give him an idea and to share it with colleagues , if 1 % of European public procurement was secured for innovative products and services , it would raise the investment in innovation across the European Union by no less than EUR 15 billion .
President of the Commission . - Thank you all for your comments , but let me tell you that there is no first draft of the new strategy .
There is a Commission working document for consultation but we are not yet at the point of presenting a draft .
Therefore , all your comments are very welcome .
Do not expect from me in a reply of one minute to give a decisive answer to such an important issue as the one you have put forward .
I am aware of your report . I am aware of some of the interesting proposals you have made in terms of public procurement and , yes , it is also my intention , it is in the broad guidelines .
I presented this to Parliament , as you will remember , in a reference to the need to deepen those commitments in terms of more market friendly , more innovative public procurement rules in Europe .
This is certainly going to be part of our future strategy but I cannot , at this stage , commit to exactly how it will be incorporated .
( SV ) Mr President , one of the biggest failings of the Lisbon strategy which , in other respects , is a good document , is that we have , to a certain extent , failed to get the Member States to actually achieve the goals set out in the strategy .
My fellow Member from Finland asked Mr Barroso earlier how he thought we could get the Member States to follow the strategy better .
One of the targets that was included was how much the Member States should invest in research and development in terms of a percentage of GDP .
I would like to know whether the Commission intends to set similar targets for the Member States , in other words , how much of its gross national product each Member State should invest in research and development .
President of the Commission . - We are now assessing the reasons why all the goals and targets were not attained .
With the new proposal , we will make an assessment - I believe a very honest and objective assessment - of what went right and what went wrong with the Lisbon strategy .
I cannot commit at this stage to what we are going to propose ; we are precisely at this moment thinking about the way forward .
That is why , when I mention the discussions I would like to have with you , I talk about real discussions , because your input is very important .
I personally think that to have an overall target for all Member States is probably not very realistic .
I think the next phase of the European Union 2020 Strategy will have to be more refined and more sophisticated , having specific targets - agreed , of course , with the Member States - but for different situations .
This is my personal thinking .
We have not yet come to the stage of presenting a proposal to you .
I would also like the new Commission to have full ownership of the proposal , and we will present a bilan of the last Lisbon strategy .
Mr President , by next year , Britain 's net contribution will have doubled from what it was in 2008 .
In 2020 there will be four to seven new Member States at least .
On their current economic performance , each one of the new Member States will be receiving cohesion funds - which are subsidies by another name - from the date they become members right the way through until 2020 .
Can , therefore , the British taxpayer anticipate a further doubling in Britain 's net contribution to the European Union by 2020 , and , if not , why not ?
President of the Commission . - I am not yet at the stage of discussing the financial perspectives and I cannot anticipate what Britain 's contribution will be .
I understand the concern that you are expressing , because at the present time , British taxpayers are paying the biggest contributions because of what happened in the financial sector in Britain .
There has been no other case of such large State aid as that which we have seen in your country .
The point we are at today is the following : we believe it is important to set priorities for the future , to see what we have to spend at national level and what we have to spend at European level , and then to have a discussion about the fair way of sharing that investment .
However , we believe that in some cases , it makes more sense to spend a euro at European level than at national level because of the potential benefits of exploring the European dimension and the European internal market .
We will come to that discussion and , I hope , at the end , we will come to an agreement .
This was our third Question Hour with the President of the European Commission .
Thank you very much , colleagues , for putting forward questions for discussion .
As regards presence , there were slightly more people in the Chamber at the end of Question Hour than there were at the start , at 15.00 .
I am very sorry about that : we would have preferred to have had a lot of you here .
Thank you once again , President Barroso .
Mr President , the point I would like to make is that there are many people here today who have not had a chance to ask Mr Barroso questions .

Given the huge salary that Mr Barroso is on , can he not spend another 30 minutes with us on a regular basis , to make this an hour and a half ?
The first 30 minutes were with the other group leaders .
There are 750 Members in this place .
I think 30 minutes is ridiculous .
Can we not have an hour and a half ?
Mr Barroso , you are on a good enough salary , sir .
Come here for 90 minutes , not 60 .
President Barroso is smiling very politely , but we will see .
We must decide about that .
Thank you for your proposal .
Conclusions of the Foreign Affairs Council on the Middle East peace process , including the situation in eastern Jerusalem ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the Conclusions of the Foreign Affairs Council on the Middle East peace process , including the situation in eastern Jerusalem .
Mr President , the conflict in the Middle East was one of the issues we discussed here in Parliament right at the beginning of the Swedish Presidency .
It feels good to be able to come back and report to you like this at the end of our term of office .
Sweden 's Minister for Foreign Affairs , Carl Bildt , was also in the Committee on Foreign Affairs last week , where he presented a report and held long discussions , including on the Middle East .
Last week , the Foreign Affairs Council discussed the situation in the Middle East and adopted conclusions .
We are pleased that all 27 Member States support these conclusions , which clearly indicate the EU 's views on the peace process in the Middle East .
With these conclusions , the Council and the Presidency want to send a very clear and strong message from Europe that we hope may result in the negotiations between the parties being resumed soon .
We are concerned about the lack of progress in the peace process in the Middle East .
We have therefore made clear our support for the efforts by the United States to achieve peace .
The EU is calling on the parties to accept responsibility and begin negotiations on all final status issues , including Jerusalem , borders , refugees and security .
Our conclusions also reflect the EU 's position on the Middle East , based on international law , that we have held for a long time and that we have expressed on many occasions .
The EU 's position is , among other things , that an agreed two-state solution must be based on the 1967 borders and that the settlements are illegal .
Jerusalem is a final status issue and we have made it clear that , if genuine peace is to be achieved , Jerusalem 's status as the future capital of two states must be settled through negotiations .
Resumption of the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations was linked to the settlement issue for a large part of the year .
Recently , the Israeli Government announced a partial and temporary settlement freeze .
The Foreign Affairs Council welcomes this decision and we hope that it will contribute to a resumption of meaningful negotiations .
However , we note with concern the surprising decision by the Israeli Government on 13 December to make the settlements part of the National Priority Areas programme for the first time .
This goes against the spirit of the settlement freeze and damages the efforts to create an atmosphere that can help to bring about a long-term resolution of the conflict .
My colleague , the Swedish Minister for International Development Cooperation , Gunilla Carlsson , visited the Committee on Development in the European Parliament at the beginning of September .
She promised to follow developments locally , to provide assistance and to intervene in the areas that we are all aware of - the situation in and around East Jerusalem , the settlements and issues such as access and movement , particularly with regard to Gaza .
We have fulfilled this promise .
Over recent months , under the leadership of the Presidency , the EU has adopted a clear position with regard to the settlements and the continued closure of Gaza .
The policy of closure is unacceptable and counterproductive .
The EU is continuing to demand that the border crossings be opened immediately and unconditionally for the flow of humanitarian aid , commercial goods and persons .
The Council has also called for the full implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 1860 and for international humanitarian law to be respected .
Those holding the abducted Israeli soldier , Gilad Shalit , must release him immediately .
I would like to say a few more words about Gaza .
Of course , we hope that the mediation efforts by Egypt and the Arab League can continue .
It is important to prevent a permanent division between the West Bank and East Jerusalem , on the one hand , and Gaza , on the other .
We look forward to free and fair elections when conditions permit .
One thing is clear - peace between Israel and the Palestinians can only be achieved if the Palestinians are united .
Our diplomats in the region have followed the situation in East Jerusalem closely .
In their view , Israel is weakening the Palestinian community in the city .
This causes us concern .
The EU will increase its assistance to East Jerusalem to ease the living conditions of the Palestinians .
The strong message concerning East Jerusalem in the Council 's conclusions is clear evidence of our concern for the situation .
It is important to remember that settlements between Israel and Syria and between Israel and Lebanon are prerequisites for there to be peace in the Middle East .
The EU welcomes the recent statements by Israel and Syria confirming their willingness to advance the peace process .
It goes without saying that this would have extremely positive repercussions in the whole region .
Vice-President designate of the Commission . - Mr President , the Council adopted very substantive conclusions on the Middle East peace process last week .
These set out a principled position on a number of crucial issues in a clear and determined manner .
I will not dwell on the conclusions or repeat what the Presidency has said .
Suffice to say that in reaffirming our principles , I hope we may have helped restore some Palestinian confidence and willingness to enter into the peace process .
The conclusions , of course , will also be of great help to me , in providing me with a clear steer for the months to come .
You have invited me here today to talk about our political work , but also about the situation in East Jerusalem .
This is an area of deep concern .
East Jerusalem is occupied territory , together with the rest of the West Bank .
The EU is opposed to the demolition of Palestinian homes , the eviction of Palestinian families , the construction of Israeli settlements and the route of the ' separation barrier ' .
The EU is addressing these issues at political level , through diplomatic channels and in our public statements .
We are also addressing the situation through practical assistance , aimed at supporting the Palestinian population in East Jerusalem .
For example , there is a lack of 1 200 classrooms for Palestinian children in the city , so we are helping to reinforce education facilities .
In addition , we enable Palestinian hospitals in East Jerusalem to remain viable and we do a lot of work with Palestinian young people in the city who suffer from high rates of unemployment and psychological problems .
To date , in East Jerusalem , the EU is implementing activities costing EUR 4.6 million .
Another aspect of concern , of course , is the situation in Gaza .
We have consistently called for the flow of aid , trade and persons .
We are deeply concerned about the daily living conditions of the Gazan people : since the January conflict , donors have not been able to do reconstruction work and serious issues persist like the lack of clean drinking water .
Israel should reopen the crossings without delay , which would allow a revival of the private sector and a reduction of Gaza 's aid dependency .
It is now time to move to action and put the Council conclusions into practice .
We now need to think about how we can re-engage a political process .
The two sides appear to have strayed further apart , in terms of engaging on an end game .
I will be travelling to the region shortly and my main objective will be to meet the main actors and see first hand how the EU can be a force for change .
I believe we all agree with the overall and overriding priority of a resumption of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations - not negotiations for negotiations ' sake , but negotiations to achieve a peace deal and turn the page .
We cannot - nor , I doubt , can the region - tolerate another round of fruitless negotiations .
Negotiations have taken place on and off for several years starting with the Oslo Declaration of Principles signed in September 1993 .
That was 16 years ago .
Negotiations should be based on international law and respect previous agreements .
All issues should be on the table including the status of Jerusalem as the future shared capital .
They should also take place within an agreed timeframe with effective mediation .
We need to see a serious commitment and the political will from both Israel and Palestine to engage in serious and genuine negotiations .
The European Union is there to help both parties take that engagement and offer them support on the difficult road of negotiations .
I am here to make sure Europe works effectively and harmoniously .
The EU has consistently supported both Israel and the Palestinians by giving them the time and space to negotiate bilaterally .
Our assistance has enabled the Palestinian Authority to build the institutions of the future state of Palestine , so that it can deliver services to its people and be a reliable neighbour in the region .
Today , however , the Palestinians are divided both politically and physically .
Credible negotiations require a strong and united Palestinian partner .
Israel stands to gain , not lose , from a strong Palestinian partner .
Israel has taken a first step with its temporary and partial settlement freeze .
We hope this will contribute towards a resumption of meaningful negotiations .
The US remains an indispensable and crucial actor in the Middle East .
Conditions for an effective EU-US partnership on the Middle East have rarely been as good .
It is time to turn this into a reality by closely coordinating our positions and strategy .
The EU will continue to support and work closely with the US via the Quartet .
The Quartet needs reinvigoration - the current stalemate in the peace process demands it .
The Quartet can provide the careful , yet dynamic , mediation that is required .
Peace in the Middle East requires a comprehensive solution .
Both Syria and Lebanon have an important role to play .
We look forward to the implementation of the Arab Peace Initiative .
They should be part of the solution .
Our approach should be regional and inclusive .
A multilateral framework should complement the Israeli-Palestinian bilateral framework .
In the coming months , I intend to remain in close contact with Parliament on all these issues .
I am aware of the active role Parliament plays , not least in its capacity as budgetary authority .
At political level , the EP delegations work directly with the Israeli Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council ( PLC ) .
Last week , the Delegation to the PLC visited the occupied Palestinian territories and reported with great concern on the situation on the ground .
Finally , I welcome the continuation of Parliament 's working group on the peace process , which will meet again this week .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , during a visit of young Israeli and Palestinian leaders to the European Parliament , a thorough discussion was held which outlined a peace settlement for their future - a secure and recognised two-state solution , on the basis of the 1967 borders , with Jerusalem as the capital for both ; demilitarisation of the Palestinian state ; the reiteration of the 2007 Arab peace initiative ; NATO guarantees ; and the refugee issue to be arranged in a way that does not alter the demographic character of the Hebrew state .
While the young have a vision of a common future , their seniors still argue about whether they should begin negotiations .
The Egyptian initiative for inter-Palestinian reconciliation - so that there is one interlocutor - is still pondering and the security arrangement in Gaza , with the liberation of prisoners , such as Gilad Shalit , is still awaited .
In the meantime , the faits accomplis on the ground , according to the report by the EU Head of Mission in East Jerusalem , renders the Palestinian state less and less viable .
I regret the fact that Israel , a democratic country , pays little attention to the damage some of its actions create through the eyes of international public opinion and limits itself to damage limitation only afterwards .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Vice-President of the Commission and High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , firstly I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Swedish Presidency for this initiative .
It was a good initiative and I would like to congratulate you on it .
I would also like to thank Baroness Ashton for sitting on the Commission 's side on her first appearance here , even though she has spoken primarily in her role as High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
This is all about a common foreign and security policy .
In some ways , it may not be important where you sit .
What is important is that you are here and that you are representing a common foreign policy .
My second point is that the statement adopted by the Council is a good one and it is by no means anti-Israeli .
On the contrary , it is in the interests of Israel and its security and stability .
It is very important to emphasise this .
If we , as Europeans , are to play an active role in this respect , it is essential that we continue to do so .
I would ask you , Baroness Ashton , to take this to heart .
A few days ago , we were in the US having discussions with our colleagues from Congress .
When faced with one-sided approach of Congress and its lack of understanding of the situation of the Palestinians , President Obama has very few options open to him .
We have great sympathy for the situation in Israel .
We are also opposed to any form of terrorism and we want the captured soldier to be returned to his family at last .
However , we are equally concerned about and sympathetic towards the unfortunate position which the Palestinians find themselves in with regard to everything referred to in this statement and , in particular , the 1967 borders , the difficult situation in Jerusalem and the settlement activities .
It is completely incomprehensible , although it is a continuation of the policy of the last few years , that a highly conflicting approach is being taken to settlement growth .
First it was stopped and then it was included in the national priority programme .
After this , only natural development continued and then roads were built which cut through Palestinian settlements .
The way in which land is being taken away from the Palestinians on a day-to-day basis is totally unacceptable .
What happened to a delegation from Parliament is also completely unacceptable .
Mr de Rossa will also give his view on this .
The Members of this Parliament must join together with the Council and the Commission to state clearly that Members of Parliament have the right to travel to Gaza and to see the situation there for themselves .
What does Israel have to hide ?
Why is it preventing Members of Parliament from going to Gaza ?
We must not accept this and I hope that we will oppose it jointly .
Transparency and openness , among other things , are the prerequisites for a reasonable Middle East policy .
We must give this our clear support .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , firstly , Mrs Malmström , I should like to congratulate the entire Swedish Presidency on the Council 's conclusions on the Middle East conflict in general and East Jerusalem in particular .
I believe everyone will see it as an important omen that a joint report by the EU Heads of Delegation on East Jerusalem has been approved and adopted unanimously for the very first time , and at this time in particular , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Another omen is that the conclusions proposed by the Swedish Presidency have also been adopted unanimously , including those on East Jerusalem .
I hope that the Israeli authorities realise the importance of this development .
Ladies and gentlemen , we debate the Middle East every few months , and sometimes it seems like the Echternach procession : one small step forward , then signs of a backwards step , then more cause for hope .
Unfortunately , there is also cause for despondency , but we continue to hope , of course .
It is of the utmost importance , of course - including to my group - that both Israelis and Palestinians be able to live side by side in peace in two separate states , to benefit from all the available development opportunities and to guarantee each other 's security .
I believe we all agree on this .
We also agree on what steps would ideally lead to this and , of course , we are prepared to make our contribution .
Jerusalem is one of the most beautiful cities in the world - it is really an extraordinary place - and so it is terribly tragic that the peoples living there side by side cannot manage to do so peacefully .
For the sake of the wellbeing and preservation of Jerusalem , I hope that , in the few days remaining before Christmas , this can still be achieved .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would like to welcome the statements from both the Council and the Commission , but my question to them both is when are we are going to go beyond the fine words - which I very much agree with - when are we going to have real action ?
We have heard the same words over and again that we need to ensure that Israel does this or does that , but we need the real leverage to make that happen , otherwise Israel will simply ignore us , as it continues to do .
My question is what practically can you do to make sure that we see real movement and progress here ?
To my mind that has to involve issues like the suspension of the EU-Israel Association Agreement .
Focusing on the situation in East Jerusalem , I welcome very much the Swedish Presidency 's initiative and its clarity over the role of Jerusalem as a capital of two states and your firmness about the importance of Israel freezing its settlement activity in East Jerusalem .
I also pay tribute to the authors of the EU Heads of Mission report on East Jerusalem itself .
That report speaks with a clarity and vision which is all too often absent in these debates .
It sets out how Israel 's policy of illegal annexation of East Jerusalem is deliberately designed to weaken the Palestinian community in the city and prevent Palestinian development .
But the Heads of Mission called on the Council to adopt a whole range of recommendations as a result of that report , and I believe that we need to see urgent action from the Council to do exactly that .
If the EU is serious about its commitment to a two-state solution , it needs to be doing everything possible to preserve and strengthen the Palestinian character and identity of East Jerusalem .
The Heads of Mission statement and report show practical ways of doing so .
Mr President , particularly at this time of Advent , many are praying for peace in the Middle East , but sometimes one loses heart and thinks this peace will never come .
It is , nevertheless , important that all parties continue to work for peace , yet therein may lie the main problem .
Are all parties able and willing to work for peace ?
Israel has already taken action to exchange land for peace in the past - I am thinking of its withdrawal from parts of the Gaza Strip - but , unfortunately , this did not lead to peace .
Indeed , the rocket fire increased and , in 2009 , Israel invaded the Gaza Strip .
Now , Israel has announced a temporary halt to construction on the West Bank . A series of roadblocks has also been removed .
This was a gesture to help bring about peace talks .
This action by the Netanyahu Government is already fairly far-reaching by Israeli standards , yet I still see little movement on the Palestinian side .
People keep saying that what Israel does is of no account , but I fail to see a Palestinian gesture to enable talks .
Is the Palestinian side willing and able to bring about further talks ?
Hamas seems to be embroiled in its struggle with Fatah and to be kept on a tight leash by Iran .
Mahmoud Abbas seems to be a paper tiger , no longer wielding much influence to speak of .
I think it is time the Palestinian side , too , made clear that it wants peace .
Mr President , Lady Ashton , we welcome the decision taken on 8 December by the Council of the European Union .
This confirms the European Union 's support for the creation of two states on the basis of the 1967 borders .
Nonetheless , based on experience from our recent visit to the area , the situation which prevails in the territories in question makes the creation of a Palestinian State almost impossible .
I refer specifically to the erection of the wall , to the demolition of Palestinian houses and , most importantly , to the creation of settlements in the area of the West Bank as a whole , especially around East Jerusalem .
Around 500 000 settlers are living in these settlements today .
More importantly , in East Jerusalem , efforts are being made to create a palisade by erecting settlements around the city , so as to force the Palestinians to abandon their homes .
It is now obvious that the Israeli Government is using talks to gain time .
Slowly but surely , it is trying to impose its sovereignty on all the Palestinian territories .
In addition to advocating the solution of two states , the European Union should take specific measures against Israel .
The continuing violation of human rights is sufficient cause for the European Union to impose sanctions on the basis of Article 2 of the treaty , because if , on the one hand , it chooses to support the peace process but , on the other hand , continues to upgrade economic relations with Israel without limitation , the only thing it will achieve is to serve Israel 's policy , which consists of forcing the Palestinians to abandon their land and expanding Israeli sovereignty to the whole of Palestine .
Mr President , has Europe taken leave of its senses ?
This rhetorical question was put by the United States at the start of December .
The subject of this fierce criticism from Congress was the unilateral designation of East Jerusalem as the capital of the envisaged Palestinian State in a draft Council Resolution in circulation .
As Chair of the EP Delegation for relations with Israel , I had imagined and hoped for a more constructive start to our transatlantic dialogue .
Also , I hasten to add , careful examination of both the draft and the final Council statement left me , like our counterparts in Congress , extremely dismayed .
I distance myself emphatically from the proposal to divide Jerusalem , in particular .
I consider the Council statement on the Middle East to be a serious diplomatic and political setback for the peace process , and hence am very disappointed in the Foreign Ministers for being led by the Swedish Presidency , of all presidencies , with its strained relations with the Jewish State .
I have several fundamental objections to the said Council statement .
This is hardly the way to encourage the Palestinian Authority to resume talks with Israel .
In addition , the statement goes against the Quartet 's principle , laid down on 9 November 2008 , that ' third parties should not intervene in the bilateral negotiations ' .
The official reaction of the United States to the Council statement of 8 December underlined this principle once more .
Is there nothing for it , then , but to resign ourselves to the impasse in the peace process ?
Absolutely not !
Following recent delegation visits to Israel , I firmly believe that a gradual , solid process of rapprochement between the State of Israel and the Palestinian Authority is both necessary and possible .
Gradually transferring administration on the West Bank , for example in Area C , and strengthening economic cooperation , whilst strengthening and establishing reliable Palestinian institutions , will really move the peace process forward .
I call on the Council and the Commission , therefore , to stop making counterproductive declarations on the peace process and instead to invest in specific projects involving cooperation between the Israelis and Palestinians .
This is an established European formula , is it not ?
Mr President , as a member of the parliamentary delegation to Israel , I listened with interest to the Foreign Affairs Council 's comments on the Middle East peace process and the Commission 's statement .
However , I , like my previous colleague , are left with an overriding sense of concern in relation to these .
Israel is the only functioning democracy in the region .
The favourite tactics of its opponents have been terrorism against the state .
I believe that the Council and the Commission statements fail to give proper weight to Israel 's security concerns .
In fact , I did not hear the High Representative mention those concerns in her statement to this House .
Furthermore , I believe that the statement places too strong a burden upon Israel , both in terms of the failure of the process to progress and on the resolution of the outstanding issues - in particular , Jerusalem .
( ES ) Mr President , the truth is that this is a very unusual debate , because we have Mrs Malmström sitting on the Council benches - soon we hope to see her sitting on the Commission benches .
We will see where she sits !
In any case , Mr President , the Council 's conclusions do not exactly incite optimism .
The Council has expressed its deep concern regarding the lack of progress in the Middle East peace process , and is asking for it to be resumed on the basis of the United Nations Security Council resolutions , the conclusions of the Madrid Conference and the road map .
Nothing is new under the sun .
It also says that the European Union is prepared to make its essential contribution to resolving the problems that the two speakers have presented here : the problem of eastern Jerusalem , the water problem , the security problem and the border problem .
There are , however , a series of new elements that I would like our guests to give their opinion about .
Firstly I would like to know whether , in their opinion , the eight-month moratorium and the settlements decided upon by the Israeli Government are linked to the new United States Government .
I would also like to know what they think about the statements made yesterday in Gaza by the representative of Hamas , on the twenty-second anniversary , saying that they are not intending to make any concessions to Israel and that they are not intending to recognise it .
What do they think of the continuity law that is going to give a voice to the Israeli people through a referendum on the occupation of the occupied territories ?
Finally , what do they think of the Goldstone report and its adoption by the United Nations Human Rights Council ?
Do they think that this is something that will help the peace process or , on the contrary , as Israel maintains , do you think that it is something that will obstruct or hinder it ?
Mr President , there are two commitments which I specifically want to welcome in the Council statement and which have the potential to create a new dynamic : support for the Palestinian Authority 's two-year programme for ending the Israeli occupation and establishing the Palestinian state , and the Union 's readiness , when appropriate , to recognise a Palestinian state .
Last week , I led an official European Parliament delegation to the occupied Palestinian territories where , once again , I saw with my own eyes the apartheid system being implemented by Israel against Palestinians , along with the dispossession and destruction of their homes , their lands , their water and their places of worship .
Within hours of the publication of the Council statement , the permission my delegation had for going to Gaza was rescinded .
That is not the act of a friendly state .
It is certainly an interference in the democratic right of this Parliament to have decent and democratic relations with our opposite numbers , elected by the Palestinian people .
We found widespread despondency and hopelessness amongst the people we met and in the areas we visited in Hebron , East Jerusalem and Ramallah .
Where there is hopelessness , there will be violence .
We can make progress now or we can let the situation slide into more bitter violence , which will drive moderate Palestinian politicians out of leadership .
That is the choice we have to make .
I would appeal to both the Council and to Baroness Ashton , whom I wish well , to reinvigorate the Union 's engagement with this process - not just looking towards the Quartet to reinvigorate its engagement with the process - and to put in place a timetable coinciding with the Palestinian authority 's two-year timetable for the implementation of the principles we outlined , so bravely in my view , last week .
We must vigorously defend human rights .
We must act .
We must use access to our markets to incentivise Israel .
I am not talking about sanctions .
I am talking about ensuring that access to our market is used as an incentive to ensure that Israel acts in relation to its international responsibilities .
We must also , finally , persuade the United States to urgently re-engage on the same basis we outlined last week .
Mr President , the EU Heads of Mission report on East Jerusalem makes pretty devastating reading .
Let us not beat about the bush .
This report makes clear that what is going on in East Jerusalem amounts to a form of ethnic cleansing .
Palestinian homes are being stolen , people are being forced out and hopes of peace are being destroyed .
So the question is : what are we going to do about it ?
The Council 's conclusions are very welcome .
We know they are strong , because the Israeli Government immediately dismissed them .
Nothing new , they said .
They are used to dismissing our words because we never back them up with deeds .
They treat us with contempt .
Why shouldn 't they - we are so gullible we actually pay the bills for the occupying power !
We keep the Palestinians going when it should be Israel footing the bill , not our taxpayers .
If our words are to have meaning , then we should suspend or threaten to suspend the association agreement , but not one of our foreign ministers has ever even raised that possibility , we are told .
So the question remains : where is the policy ?
Well , we have the policy .
It is in the conclusions .
Now what about the action ?
Israel will not move unless it is pushed .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to welcome Baroness Ashton to her new position .
I would also like to thank the Swedish Presidency for the resolution and for acknowledging that it will not be possible to implement the two-state solution in the long term unless we can solve the settlement problem .
The Heads of Mission report has been mentioned several times and we also believe that it is very good .
On this basis , I have two questions .
What is the current status of this report and where will it be published ?
Secondly , what will you , the Commission and the Council , do to implement the recommendations in the report ?
I would now like to quote three of the recommendations from the report .
The first is :
' prevent , discourage financial transactions from EU Member States ' actors supporting settlement activity in East Jerusalem by adopting appropriate EU legislation ' ; second , ' ensure that products manufactured in settlements in East Jerusalem are not exported to the EU under the EU-Israel Association Agreement ' ; and , third , ' provide guidance on origin labelling for settlement products to major EU retailers . '
( DE ) The proposals made in this report are very specific and precise .
What steps do you plan to take now to implement them ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , I thank you and I welcome your comments .
Europe now has two essential documents with which to push for new peace initiatives .
Firstly , the courageous report by the Swedish Presidency , which you just mentioned , Mrs Malmström .
This report calls for progress along the lines of having two States , one of which would be Palestine , within the 1967 borders , with East Jerusalem as the capital .
Secondly , the text by the ambassadors , the Heads of Mission , which shows that the Israeli authorities are pursuing a strategy whereby they demolish houses and colonise land in violation of human rights .
This strategy is aimed at cutting Jerusalem off from the West Bank so that the very idea of creating a Palestinian state is shelved .
However , our words in this House will clearly have no effect if we do not follow them up with concrete acts .
We must act and , to do so , we can suspend the European Union-Israel association agreement until such time as the Israeli Government complies with international law .
We therefore need to act to ensure an end to the colonisation , the lifting of the blockade of Gaza , the destruction of the wall of shame , the return of the refugees , and the release of all the political prisoners .
May I say one more thing .
The release of the soldier , Gilad Shalit , has been discussed in this House .
I agree with what has been said .
However , at the same time , our Parliament must gives its support to the release of another European citizen , the young Franco-Palestinian , Salah Hamouri .
Yes , freedom for Gilad Shalit , but also for Salah Hamouri !
( MT ) Please allow me to start by congratulating the Council for the courageous conclusions it reached last week .
In my opinion , we have never had such clear , concrete and courageous conclusions on such a sensitive issue from the Council as the one we had last week .
Therefore , I congratulate the Council .
I would , however , like to add that we must now proceed to take action , since the situation in Jerusalem is deteriorating on a daily basis and cannot be tolerated any further .
There are problems of blatant violations of international law , there are difficulties which are causing great suffering to many persons , including expulsion from their homes , destruction of their residences , and the construction of illegal residences .
We cannot remain silent in the face of such injustices , because by doing so , we would be conveying the message that law , diplomacy , and the much cherished principle of peaceful solution of conflicts are worthless .
I do not think that we would have allowed this to happen in our country .
We must therefore act by creating the right environment conducive to confidence building between the two parties , and to have two distinct and viable states which can cohabit peacefully .
Kindly allow me to give credit to the instrumental role Jordan is playing in this regard .
A final word to Baroness Ashton - you have been assigned a new role by the Lisbon Treaty , an important role which provides us with an opportunity .
Let us please not miss this opportunity .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we were in Ramallah when we heard the news that Europe had adopted a new decision on the Middle East peace process .
We saw the hopeful smiles on the faces of the Palestinian representatives .
They were days filled with emotion and suffering , etched on the faces of the children gripping the window bars of their homes on the Hebron road , the deserted road that no Palestinian is allowed to cross .
We saw the suffering of an 85-year-old woman , driven out of her occupied home , forced to sleep in the cold in a tent set up in the garden of what used to be her own house , and the suffering on the faces of the Palestinians who had built a farm using European funds , subsequently destroyed by Israeli soldiers .
Israel has the right to be an independent state , but the Palestinians also have the right to a homeland , a state and a passport .
The decision of the Council of Europe represents a considerable step forward , but we need to act immediately .
The Israeli-Palestinian conflict is just the tip of the iceberg in a larger conflict .
On the final day of our visit , the Israeli authorities prevented us , the European Parliament delegation , from visiting the Gaza Strip .
I believe that in this regard , the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , should step in to protest on behalf of democratic Europe .
I should like to thank Mr De Rossa who led the delegation and all the other members of the delegation , because during the days we spent in Palestine , the vulnerable were able to see and hear the face and the words of a Europe which upholds rights and wishes to , and must , do more .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Ashton , I believe that the new High Representative must be amazed at how the European Parliament has done its homework .
What sort of history books must it have read if it did not know how the state of Israel came about in 1947 ?
This interpretation that the Council adopted under the Swedish leadership therefore seems a bit odd .
We have to remember that the European Union must stand by its values .
We have democracy , human rights and freedom of opinion , which is important .
Furthermore , Israel is the only democratic country in the Middle East .
We should not be creating anti-democracies there , non-democracies , because they do not respect our values .
It is also very important to remember that the idea that Jerusalem should be divided , making it a city in two countries , is quite inconceivable .
The European Union would not propose such a thing for any other democratic country .
Of course , we need to ensure that Israel can preserve its democratic system and its rights in its own capital , and the European Union can be involved in the peace process , and it should be , but in a diplomatic role and not as a doctor or judge .
It is regrettable that Gilad Shalit , who is a French national - a citizen of the European Union - and an Israeli soldier , has not been released .
This shows what the Palestinian administration and Hamas think about the European Union .
They have no respect whatsoever for our principles or our values .
We need to move on , and these sorts of daydreams , which the Council resolution largely consists of , should be abandoned .
Israel is a democracy ; its values are the same as our own .
We must defend democracy and people 's right there to a complete and secure existence , and to peace , and that peace can be achieved when the terrorist organisations , Hamas and their cohorts , stop the attacks against Israel and Israeli citizens .
Here we have the scope to fight terrorism together and make it possible for Israel to exist as a nation .
( NL ) Mr President , in their report of 23 November , the EU Heads of Delegation in Jerusalem and Ramallah made very clear that Israel is actively engaged in illegally annexing East Jerusalem and completely isolating it from the rest of the West Bank .
I ask myself , therefore , why the Foreign Affairs Council is not drawing the right conclusions from this .
Why is it simply disregarding the specific recommendations , in particular , of such an important factual report - its own report , at that - knowing that the current developments are irreversible and , in so doing , even casting serious doubt on the chances of establishing an independent , viable Palestinian State alongside the State of Israel ?
The Middle East peace process has no need for woolly pronouncements .
It is high time and the right moment for the European Union to assume an active , visible role in the region , and this is only possible , of course , if we also show the courage to take a clear and unequivocal position , particularly on East Jerusalem .
( EL ) Mr President , the EU policy is to support the Israeli Government , together with the United States and NATO , in its criminal policy of genocide of the Palestinian people .
This is the conclusion reached by members of the European Parliament delegation which the Israeli authorities prohibited from entering the occupied Gaza Strip .
EU policy and the recent decision essentially give extra time to Israeli governments , which burden themselves with war crimes , as we know from the UN report on the war in Gaza , so that they can continue with their occupation plans .
The mealy-mouthed talk by the European Union is out of keeping with the righteous global call for a viable and independent Palestinian state on the 1967 territories with its capital in East Jerusalem .
The European Union is not taking any practical steps in this direction .
On the contrary , it is upgrading relations with Israel , which continues with the settlements , especially in East Jerusalem , with the construction of the dividing wall and with the shameful and criminal isolation of the Gaza Strip .
We reject imperialist plans for the Middle East and stand side by side with the Palestinian people and all the peoples in their struggle .
( SK ) I have to say that the results of last week 's meeting of the Council of Ministers were not entirely balanced and , moreover , I have the feeling , as I have been dealing with this issue for a long time , that they have not really advanced matters in terms of our efforts for the peaceful coexistence of these two nations .
I would therefore like to say that I know that we have more to do .
We have to be not only mediators but also active mediators in this peace process , and we must insist that the solution to this catastrophic situation appears equal and is equal and acceptable to both states , so that both states , both Palestine and the State of Israel , have an equal stake in it .
The Council has tried to bring the Palestinians back to the negotiating table , despite their opposition to some Israeli measures , and we , too , are insisting that needless obstacles to the peace process are removed as soon as possible .
The demolition of Palestinians ' homes in East Jerusalem and the building of settlements and separation barriers on occupied territory are not acceptable .
It is also unacceptable , however , for us to expose Israel and not to manage to defend it actively against all attacks and terrorist activities aimed against citizens of the State of Israel .
I would like to emphasise , of course , that it is also necessary to respect the international legal framework , without which there can be no hope of stable development for the region .
In my opinion , we Europeans , the EU and the citizens of our states , are prepared to hold out a helping hand and I hope that Baroness Ashton achieves success with her mission to the region and returns from the region with good reports .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I am a member of the delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council , in other words , the Palestinian parliament .
Last week , our delegation was refused entry to Gaza by Israel .
The situation in Gaza is very disturbing , particularly now that winter has come .
Only 10 % of the population can obtain the supplies they need by smuggling goods through the tunnels and this is exactly why the tunnels are tolerated by everyone .
Before operation ' Cast Lead ' the situation was exactly the reverse and 90 % of the population of Gaza could take care of themselves .
As an occupying power , Israel should be responsible for providing for the population in all the occupied areas .
Israel is shirking its responsibility under international law , which means that the international community and , above all , the EU have to step in .
If we are supplying food to 90 % of the population of Gaza , we have a right to see where European taxpayers ' money is being spent , whether it is being used appropriately and whether it is reaching the people who need it .
( FR ) Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mrs Malmström and the Swedish Presidency on their excellent conclusions .
They revive the expectation that we all had , namely that it would be confirmed that the EU is indeed responsible for peace in the region under international law , and that , I believe , is crucial .
Nevertheless , I am surprised that , one year after the military invasion of Gaza , no reference has been made , in these conclusions , to the follow-up to the Goldstone report sought by the Council .
What stage are we at in the follow-up to this Goldstone report , to which the Council committed itself , notably with regard to the internal investigations involving the various parties concerned ?
Next , I am delighted that East Jerusalem is being considered as the capital of the future Palestinian State , or the Jerusalem of the two States .
Nevertheless , these conclusions lack specific operational options .
On the other hand , there are very many such options in the mission report by the Heads of State or Government who visited East Jerusalem .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to kindly clarify for us the specific methods by which , in fact , the European Union will neither recognise nor legitimise the annexation of East Jerusalem that Israel is currently seeking to achieve by , among other things , introducing economic measures , but also by orchestrating the mass displacement of Palestinian communities .
Mr President , may I welcome the presence of the new High Representative in the Chamber and also the strong Council conclusions on the Middle East steered by the Swedish Presidency .
On the Goldstone report , I would like to congratulate Mr Bildt , on behalf of the Presidency , for praising the - and I quote - ' credibility and high integrity ' of the Goldstone report .
I do think it would be useful if Mrs Malmström could repeat today in the European Parliament what her Ambassador said in the United Nations - that the EU urges Israel and the Palestinians to launch appropriate , credible and independent domestic investigations of human rights violations in relation to the Gaza conflict .
Finally , can I ask the Presidency and the High Representative if they are aware of the British Government guidance adopted last week for food labelling to distinguish between imports originating from the Palestinian territories and those from illegal Israeli settlements , and tell us what plans they have for extending this advice to the European level .
As electors , we can choose to pay the costs of peace .
As consumers , we do not want to subsidise the price of conflict .
Mr President , I think that the recent European Union position led by the Swedish Presidency on the Middle East that would recognise East Jerusalem as the capital of a future independent Palestinian state may harm European efforts to play a significant part in mediating between Israel and the Palestinians .
It might be counterproductive with our common objective to bring peace to this already turbulent region .
I personally believe that rather than unilaterally and unexpectedly announcing an independent capital for the Palestinian territories , it would be preferable and more useful if the European Union would concentrate all its efforts on encouraging and pushing for the creation of a real democracy in the Palestinian territories , for example , supporting non-violent opposition .
This would help the Israeli state and democracy , as well as the international community , to find a credible and legitimate interlocutor .
As Cecilia Malmström has said today , the status of Jerusalem should be negotiated bilaterally by Israelis and Palestinians .
I therefore believe that rather than a ' two states for two peoples ' solution , a ' two democracies for two peoples ' vision would be more desirable .
Democracy , dear colleagues , is a precondition for peace .
( DE ) Mr President , firstly I would like to say how pleased I am that Baroness Ashton is sitting on the Commission side .
I hope that she will continue to do so .
I have two questions for the Presidency .
In the conclusions from the Council of Foreign Ministers there is no reference to the Middle East Quartet .
Is the Council not in agreement about the role of the Middle East Quartet in the peace process or what is the reason for this ?
Secondly , the same thing applies to Hamas .
No reference is made in the conclusions to this group which , unfortunately , is politically important .
What lies behind this ?

( FR ) Mr President , since Mr Le Hyaric practically doubled his speaking time , I feel entitled to go at my own pace , but I shall nevertheless get straight to the point .
Under the Swedish Presidency , we had become used to better , much better .
Mrs Malmström , please forgive my frankness .
Designating , decreeing , as she has done , East Jerusalem as the capital of the future Palestinian State - just to begin with , I know - is , in my view , a rare diplomatic error - I am speaking euphemistically here .
The error is not one of substance - let no one be mistaken about what I am saying here - but the way in which this declaration , which prejudges the final outcome of the negotiations , patronises , indeed scorns , the parties concerned .
Moreover , there are many Member States that have taken a stand and kept their distance from this first draft of the text .
So yes , of course , a thousand times yes to an open capital , a shared capital , this form of sharing that , since the 2000s now , has been part of the Clinton Parameters for a negotiated peace , a principle that has been accepted by Ehud Barak in Taba , and by others too .
Furthermore , we also remember , in this very Chamber , the powerful way in which it was defended by Avraham Burg and Ahmed Qurei .
Jerusalem : a sacred city for three religions , the capital city of books , an open capital .
The only thing is , our role is not to impose sharing , a timetable or methods , but - as was said earlier - to encourage dialogue so as to enable the parties concerned , Palestinians and Israelis , to come to a conclusion .
Mr President , the Council conclusion is indeed a welcome vigorous statement of the EU position and its intention to play a much stronger role in a reinvigorated Quartet engagement .
Do the Council and Commission therefore agree that the approach urged on it by some , which is to boycott Israel , is completely the wrong route to that engagement ?
You cannot boycott and engage at the same time .
Indeed , the right approach is the one also stressed by the Council conclusions , which is to reaffirm the further development of bilateral relations with Israel .
However tempting it is , the Council can only be an influential player politically , as well as with economic support , if it resists the temptations - motivated sometimes by frustration at one or other of the parties - to have some sort of sanctions or punish one or the other .
It is too complex a situation and it simply undermines a consistent , coherent EU pressure on both parties to get back to the table and have a peace agreement .
( SL ) I , too , am against the language of sanctions and threats and I , too , am in favour of a constructive policy and dialogue .
However , I regret that we have heard far too often today the message that Israel is a democratic state .
Israel is a state which is not behaving democratically when it comes to the Palestinians and when it comes to our common objective , which is the establishment of two independent , self-confident and secure states which will co-exist alongside each other .
This is why , Baroness Ashton , I think that today you have been given many incentives for the development of a more constructive and a more effective European Union policy .
I regret to say that Israel continues to see us as a paper tiger , not as a real entity with which it ought to establish a dialogue and which could be useful in resolving the problem .
Mr President , as a member of the delegation that went to Palestine last week , it became clear to me that there are a number of sensible people who believe that the two-state option is dead in the water , largely because of Israeli actions , not least the proposals to extend the wall even further into and beyond East Jerusalem , thereby dividing the West Bank into the north and the south .
What interests and what actions are we likely to take if the single-state option becomes a reality ?
Secondly , are the Presidency and Lady Ashton aware of how much the views of , again , sensible people about the charade that passes off as the Quartet is prevalent amongst a number of people ?
What actions are we going to take to ensure that the cost of this operation is matched by its effectiveness , which presently is nil ?

Mr President , I agree with the Israeli Foreign Minister , Mr Lieberman , that the final Council statement is a lot better perhaps than the earlier Swedish draft which I saw a couple of weeks ago , but it makes no mention of the accepted Quartet principles which Hamas repudiates as it carries on terrorising Palestinian Authority officials and civilians alike in Gaza .
Also , why did Foreign Minister Bildt not visit the region to show solidarity with democratic Israel and moderate Palestinians ?
Also , why was the annexation of East Jerusalem singled out for mention at this critical time ?
The EU needs to be more balanced and formally recognise our common democratic values with the state of Israel and actually enhance Israel 's participation in EU programmes - unusually , I agree with Baroness Ludford on this - under the Association Agreement , in order to build confidence by Israel in the EU 's goodwill towards the Jewish state .
Mr President , thank you for a very constructive debate .
I would like to start by answering some specific questions and then I will say a few words to conclude .
The Goldstone report is a very important one .
It is a serious report .
It is important to study the conclusions carefully and the EU has called on both parties , Israel and the Palestinians , to launch appropriate investigations in the spirit recommended in the report .
As regards the Quartet , there is also a reference to the Quartet itself and to the need for the Quartet to step up its efforts in the conclusions adopted by the Council .
With regard to the talks with Hamas , the Council is maintaining contact with the Palestinian leadership under President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad .
The conditions for talks with Hamas are well-known and they have not been met .
Finally , I would like to say that it is extremely gratifying to see the high level of support in this House for the conclusions .
Everyone , with some slightly differing opinions of course , appreciates how important it is to try in every way possible to support the peace process in the Middle East and we all feel an enormous amount of frustration about the fact that it is progressing so desperately slowly .
The peace of Christmas that will soon settle over this Chamber and many places in the world will once again not be experienced in the way we would like it to be in the region this year .
At the beginning of the Swedish Presidency , we had hoped that the efforts of US President Obama would bear fruit in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations .
It is important for the EU and the US to work closely together .
This has not happened yet , but - as always with regard to this issue - we must be patient and persistent .
The EU must be consistent and stand firm in its message with regard to East Jerusalem , borders , settlements and security .
I am very pleased at the high level of consensus here in Parliament , including with regard to our conclusions , which are clear and consistent .
They will form the basis for the EU 's work for a long time to come .
In this regard , it will be important for all institutions to work closely together .
The EU is continuing its European security and defence policy mission in the region , and the European Union Police Co-ordinating Office for Palestinian Police Support ( Eupol Copps ) , in particular , has made a significant contribution over the last year to improving the social and economic conditions for Palestinians in the West Bank .
The EU also supports the preparations for the formation of an independent Palestinian state .
A lot of work is needed here , and we , of course , support the programme drawn up by the Palestinian authorities : Palestine : Ending the Occupation , Establishing a State .
In order to put an end to this conflict , a negotiated settlement must be reached between the parties .
This must include all of the issues .
We cannot accept a solution that is determined through unilateral measures , which then becomes a fait accompli .
The solution must be comprehensive .
It must include the Lebanese and Syrian track and it must be part of a regional strategy that settles the Arab-Israeli conflict .
We are not there yet , but the EU has nevertheless taken a huge step forward .
All of the institutions are very much in agreement about the need for this and I look forward to continued cooperation on this matter .
Vice-President designate of the Commission . - Mr President , can I just say that the issue of where I sit , I suspect , will keep coming back .
I am sitting here because the Council is over there .
I may have to go and sit over there or you may have to build me a seat equidistant , because I assure you I will be in trouble somewhere for wherever I sit .
It is a great delight , though , to be here with Cecilia and I look forward very much to working with her .
What strikes me about the debate that we have just had is that pretty much - and I think , Mr Atkins , you may be the exception in what you said , though I listened with great care - there is a shared conviction that what we are looking for is a two-state solution .
There is an enormous amount of passion from all parliamentarians , especially , if I may say , Mr De Rossa and those Members who have recently come back , and who have clearly seen for themselves the dreadful situation that exists on the ground .
I believe what is significant about the Council conclusions is that they are very clear .
They give me a real sense of the direction that we need to move in .
What is also very clear - and I pay tribute to the Presidency for the work that they have done on this - is the frustration in this House that things are not moving , frustration borne of views that are sometimes quite different , but nonetheless converge on a desire to see a solution .
The nuances are important .
The views that you hold on the differences , as well as the similarities , matter to me as I navigate our future in these discussions and negotiations .
There is no doubt to me that we have got to do two things .
One is the rather political issues that you quite rightly raise .
What is our relationship to be ?
I am at the beginning of that journey , and this debate is extremely important to me in listening to the views that have been put forward .
What I take away from it is , first of all , that the Quartet must demonstrate that it is worth the money , that it is actually able to be reinvigorated .
I have already talked with the staff by video link in Jerusalem , I have already talked to Mr Blair about his work and I have already talked to Secretary of State Clinton about the same things .
It is very important , if it is going to work , that the word ' reinvigorate ' is absolutely right .
Secondly , there are the issues in the region which the Presidency has raised about the broader questions of those other countries that we need to engage with .
I think most significant from today is : what is the EU itself going to be able to do ?
That brings me , in a sense , to what I call the practical .
A number of colleagues have raised particular issues , whether it is a question of what the UK is doing on labelling , whether it is issues about the association agreement , whether this report - the Heads of Mission report - and the recommendations that I have not yet considered within it are there .
We need to consider all of these issues carefully , but what we have got to do is demonstrate the practical support that we put on the ground .
I described 1 200 classrooms that were needed and I described our work in health .
We are very committed to Prime Minister Fayyad 's state-building plan and to enhancing the institutions , particularly in terms of the rule of law .
We must be seen to be practically engaged on the ground and practically working to find ways in which we can make the situation better for the people who have to live there every day and who look to us for the help that they need .
That is the most significant and practical thing I need to do first of all .
I would describe the work that I want to do as this : we have the potential to do the political and the economic .
What I want to do is draw those two things together , to find a way in which we can enhance what we do , to support the work that is going on , to make the Quartet more effective , to bring together what has been , in a sense , the Council and Commission operating side by side , and to meld it into one so that what we do on the ground really makes a difference .
In the end , it is the two sides who come together to make the decision and to find the peace .
But , on the way to the end , we have a significant role to play , and I am determined , on your behalf as well as on behalf of the Commission and the Council , that we play our full part in that .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
During the last Foreign Affairs Council , the Council of the European Union made it known that it wanted a Palestinian state to be created in the near future , within the 1967 borders and with East Jerusalem as its capital .
Europe is thus outlining the conditions of a viable solution to the Middle East conflict that is acceptable to both parties .
The solution proposed by the Council is fair .
Israel and Palestine can use it as a basis on which to exchange land for peace .
The European Union has a major role to play .
It can support inter-Palestinian reconciliation , without which there will be no Palestinian interlocutor in the negotiations with Israel .
It can encourage the resumption of an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue within the context of the Union for the Mediterranean .
in writing . - I welcome the recent Council conclusions on this matter , particularly regarding the issue of East Jerusalem .
The Council has set out a clear position on several key issues , including the 1967 borders , Israeli settlements , access to Gaza , and support for a two-state solution in which Jerusalem would be a shared capital .
These remain some of the crucial sticking points and the Council has succeeded in addressing them in its conclusions .
The Council has provided the EU 's High Representative with a list of concrete objectives and a clear direction in which the EU wants to see the negotiations moving .
I am hopeful that this clarity and unity from the Member States will lead to more effective EU involvement in the negotiations , and an increased capacity to engage with other key actors in the peace process .
Restrictive measures affecting the rights of individuals following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty ( debate )
The next item is :
the oral question to the Council ( B7-0233 / 2009 ) by Emine Bozkurt , Louis Michel and Michèle Striffler , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on restrictive measures affecting the rights of individuals following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty ;
the oral question to the Commission ( B7-0234 / 2009 ) by Emine Bozkurt , Louis Michel and Michèle Striffler , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on restrictive measures affecting the rights of individuals following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
Mr President , democracy , the rule of law , human rights and fundamental freedoms are what the EU stands for .
In the fight against terrorism , however , the EU is less principled .
Take the UN blacklist , for example .
People or entities suspected of having links with Osama bin Laden , the al-Qaeda network or the Taliban can be placed on this list , which results in a travel ban and the freezing of their financial assets .
This measure is all well and good as far as terrorism is concerned , as this terrorism must be fought - that is beyond dispute - but the lawlessness with which terrorists operate must not be allowed to creep into the way we fight terrorism .
Unfortunately , the current system is characterised by abuses of fundamental rights .
People are placed on the list , often without being fully informed of the fact , without intervention by any judicial power .
The information that leads to them being placed on the blacklist regularly originates from secret services .
This information is not transparent to suspects and , as a result , they do not know why they have been placed on the list .
This deprives them of not only their right to information but also their right of defence .
Once a person 's name is on the list , it is very difficult to have it removed .
There have already been enough cases of people listed wrongfully for many years who had to fight for due legal process .
They are condemned to poverty , cannot key in their PIN to pay for shopping and are not allowed to leave their countries .
I am arguing today not for more rights for terror suspects but only for them to be able to rely on their rights like anyone else .
I advocate transparent procedures and due legal process for everyone .
The list also has far-reaching side effects .
Since authorities can decide to place people or organisations on the list , this can also be used as a political tool .
Non-governmental organisations ( NGOs ) fighting for human rights , for example , who are a thorn in the government 's side , can be designated as terrorist organisations to paralyse their activities .
The Commission was forced to revise the current procedures by a judgment of the European Court .
The Commission gave this a decent impetus , but it failed at Council level .
A new situation has now arisen as a result of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Is it to be Article 215 or Article 75 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ?
In other words , is the European Parliament to take no part in examining the proposals , or is it to be involved via the normal procedure , namely codecision ?
The Committee on Legal Affairs has indicated that Article 75 is the correct legal basis , as has Parliament 's Legal Service .
I should like both the Council and the Commission to tell us today how they see the way ahead for these proposals for restrictive measures .
What role is envisaged here for Parliament ?
It is time we had transparent , democratic procedures .
The question is whether we can count on your cooperation .
Mr President , I am afraid the Portuguese interpretation is not working .
I have not heard one single word from the previous speaker .
Something must be done ; otherwise , I cannot follow the debate .
We will have to ask what is happening , and we will let you know , Mr Coelho .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , first of all , I would like to thank and congratulate my fellow rapporteurs , Mrs Bozkurt and Mrs Striffler .
I fully endorse the conclusions of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs , as well as those of Parliament 's legal service .
Since respect for human rights is one of the fundamental values of the Union , it is crucial that these rights are fully respected .
The measures taken as part of the fight against terrorism must be proportionate , appropriate and effective .
Still in the context of respect for fundamental rights and the rights of defence , access to personal data by the persons concerned , as well as communication of the grounds on which the measure is based , are essential stages in the process of combating terrorism .
Since sanctions and blacklists are only temporary , I believe that close and serious monitoring must be carried out and that a regular evaluation is required , with mandatory consultation of Parliament .
While we can welcome the measures taken , particularly those relating to Zimbabwe and Somalia , we must bear in mind that these sanctions cannot , under any circumstances , serve as an obstacle to the development , democracy-building and human rights missions carried out by humanitarian organisations , or have harmful consequences for the local populations .
Lastly , with regard to the protection of personal data , I fully endorse the conclusions of the European Data Protection Supervisor concerning the collection , processing and transfer of this data .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the vast majority of European citizens believe that the fight against terrorism must be conducted as a matter of priority at EU level .
They are fully aware of the impact that Europe , through its global vision and the implementation of consistent policies , can have in this area .
Thus , I welcome the fact that , thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament can do a thorough job of colegislating in this area and can provide the necessary democratic control where European counterterrorism policies are concerned .
The first decade of the 21st century is coming to an end .
We all remember that it began with one of the worst tragedies in the history of mankind .
We cannot allow terrorism to develop and we must find a firm and appropriate solution to it .
The Taliban , the al-Qaeda network and Osama bin Laden represent the greatest , most urgent risk for the European Union .
Islamic extremism - a shameful abuse of the Muslim religion - and hatred of the West and its values sustain this deadly terrorist network .
We must combat this phenomenon and , I repeat , the European Union must show that it is extremely firm and extremely vigilant in the face of this threat .
Moreover , in view of the serious and constant violations of human rights and of the freedom of expression , association and peaceful assembly committed in Zimbabwe , the European Union must not dare turn a blind eye .
Natural and legal persons - belonging or not to the government - whose activities undermine democracy , respect for the most fundamental human rights , and the rule of law in Zimbabwe must be severely punished .
By the same token , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union has a duty to take targeted measures against those who threaten peace , security and stability in Somalia .
We must enforce the general and complete embargo on the supply of weapons to Somalia and ensure that the delivery of humanitarian aid and access to that aid and its distribution in Somalia are guaranteed .
I say this because it is , above all , the poorest , most vulnerable populations that are suffering , and we cannot continue to stand by and watch .
I regret , however , that Parliament 's role in this area has been diminished by the Treaty of Lisbon , contrary to the spirit of the treaty and the importance that it confers on Parliament .
However , the European Union must punish those responsible .
Does that mean that it has to forget its most fundamental principles ?
No . The European Union 's action on the international stage must centre on the principles that have governed its creation , development and enlargement , and it must promote these values in the rest of the world .
Mr President , what we refer to as restrictive measures are very important and something that I know many Members have opinions on .
They are perhaps a little difficult for anyone listening to this debate to understand .
Let me start by explaining how the Council uses these measures .
Then I will talk about the Treaty of Lisbon .
Restrictive measures against third countries , individuals , natural or legal persons or other entities are an important tool for the EU in its foreign and security policy .
In general , you could say that they are used to bring about a change in a particular policy or activity .
They should , of course , be used as part of an integrated , comprehensive policy that may include political dialogue , various forms of incentive and conditions that need to be met .
Restrictive measures alone are not always sufficient to bring about a change , but they can be a way of exerting pressure on repressive regimes or stopping the flow of money and other resources that support such regimes or terrorist networks .
In some cases , restrictive measures are introduced by the Council when we implement resolutions that have been adopted by the UN Security Council in accordance with Chapter VII of the UN Charter .
In such cases , the EU 's various legal instruments must adhere strictly to these resolutions .
They relate to situations and acts , including terrorism , that constitute a threat to peace and security .
They can only form part of the EU 's external action and , in that way , they differ from measures to create our own area of freedom , security and justice , which is , of course , our goal within the Union .
The Council interprets the Treaty of Lisbon in such a way as to apply Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in respect of these and other restrictive measures within the framework of the common foreign and security policy , including with regard to terrorism .
The EU can also decide to apply further measures alongside those decided by the UN and we can also introduce measures on our own .
Sanctions that the EU decides on by itself can be introduced to support other foreign and security policy objectives - respect for human rights , democracy , the principles of the rule of law and good governance - all in accordance with the EU 's obligations under international law .
The measures are currently most often levelled directly against those who have been identified as being responsible for the policy or the measures that we are opposed to , or against their interests or their sources of income .
This is more effective than broader sanctions in the form of general trade embargoes or other more arbitrary measures .
Targeted sanctions are intended to minimise the negative impact that these measures can have on the population of the country in question .
This is a very important consideration when the Council is preparing a decision regarding the introduction of new sanctions .
All sanctions are reviewed regularly to assess their effectiveness .
They may be adjusted or lifted completely , depending on the developments .
According to the Treaty of Lisbon , restrictive measures will also continue to be used as a tool within the common foreign and security policy by means of Council Decisions in accordance with Article 29 of the treaty .
One important change in the new treaty is that decisions on restrictive measures relating to natural or legal persons are now subject to legal review .
This means that the court can examine whether a decision regarding sanctions is lawful .
This was not the case previously .
Now that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , regulations are adopted following a joint proposal from the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and the Commission in accordance with Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union .
The European Parliament shall be informed of any such decisions .
I understand that this change is not appreciated by Parliament , as the Council is no longer obliged to consult Parliament on sanctions that relate to individuals .
However , that is how we interpret the treaty .
It is important to point out that any decision on restrictive measures , and implementation of these measures , must always comply with international law .
Restrictive measures entail the restriction of certain rights for those individuals that they are directed against .
Therefore , the sanctions clearly must respect human rights and the fundamental freedoms . This relates to procedural rights and the right to legal protection .
The measures must also always be proportionate to the objective .
With the experience that we have gained in applying sanctions , we have carried out thorough assessments and have looked at how sanctions can be imposed in a constructive way .
A number of tangible improvements have been introduced .
These include a requirement for the criteria for using certain sanctions to be specified , as well as the grounds for including an individual , a natural or legal person or other entities on a sanctions list .
This must be continually reviewed and adjusted if necessary .
In this work , the Council has taken account of the European Parliament resolution from last year on the evaluation of EU sanctions as part of the EU 's actions and policies in the area of human rights .
Vice-President designate of the Commission . - Mr President , as the Presidency said , the questions you have put forward raise important issues in relation to the future management of restrictive measures or sanctions in the EU .
Following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty we now have to make a choice as regards the legal base for the proposed Regulation which amends the al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Regulation . Our view is as follows :
Firstly , the new treaty has added a specific provision to the article in the former EC Treaty on foreign policy-related restrictive measures or sanctions .
Article 215 ( 2 ) provides a new legal base for restrictive measures against natural or legal persons and groups or non-state entities .
It expands the scope of the former Article 301 and should be applied as the legal base for amendment of the al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Regulation .
Secondly , Article 215 applies when there is a Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) decision .
The al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Regulation implements a CFSP decision which requires that regulations be made to implement certain UN Security Council resolutions .
These resolutions are binding for EU Member States under international law .
Thirdly , we consider that a double legal base - Article 215 ( 2 ) and Article 75 - is not workable .
That is because the objectives , scope and procedures of the two articles are different .
I note that Parliament 's Legal Affairs Committee and legal advisers have made the same assessment .
In conclusion , it is our view that the new treaty has provided specificity and clarity on the legal base for restrictive measures against natural or legal persons and groups or non-state entities .
Article 215 addresses the role of Parliament and Council and the legislator should not deviate from the treaty .
We were also asked to provide information on fundamental rights-related improvements in the work of UN Sanctions Committees .
The proposed amendment of the al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Regulation implements the findings of the European Court of Justice in the Kadi case .
In that judgment , the Court made a number of comments on ways to improve the listing procedures applied by the UN al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee .
The points made by the Court are the motivation to amend the listing procedures of the regulation .
A number of UN Security Council resolutions have set out the procedures for handling the sanctions list at UN level .
Most recently , UN Security Council Resolution 1822 provided that a summary of reasons should be made available on the UN al-Qaeda and Taliban Sanctions Committee 's website in connection with each listed person , and provided for a review of all names on the list by 30 June 2010 , with provision for regular review thereafter .
The resolution demanded that the relevant state take measures to inform the listed person of their listing , the reasons for it and information about exemptions and delisting requests .


The approach in Resolution 1822 has since been replicated in Resolution 1844 on sanctions in relation to Somalia and in Resolution 1857 in relation to Democratic Republic of Congo .
Resolution 1822 provides for a review of the measures contained in it after 18 months .
That period expires at the end of this year .
Work is ongoing in connection with the review but the Commission is not in a position to indicate what changes to the procedures the UN Security Council will decide .
The strengthening of Parliament 's powers has been a keynote in a number of politicians ' speeches on the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
The President of the Commission , Dr Barroso , for example , said the following here in Strasbourg on 25 November , on the preparation of the European Council : ' Now the Lisbon Treaty gives us a new opportunity to move ahead .
We all know that freedom , security and justice will see some of the most significant changes from the treaty . [ ... ] And , in particular , it extends the democratic framework for these policies by the full involvement of your Parliament . '
I would emphasise ' the full involvement of your Parliament . '
In his first official speech , the President of the Council , Mr Van Rompuy , also said that the treaty was a powerful tool with which we can face the challenges of our times .
If that is the case , then , it would make no sense to highlight the strengthening of our powers and competences in official discourse and then to adopt a restrictive interpretation of the Treaty of Lisbon , so as to deprive Parliament of prerogatives that it used to have and which it would make no sense to lose .
The questions that have been asked are , therefore , based on common sense , but this common sense goes beyond a mere evaluation of doctrine and the consistency between declared intentions and their interpretation .
There is also a practical consequence , which arises from the old saying that he who can do the greater can certainly do the lesser , and it concerns the following : what sense is there for a body that has competence in criminal matters and in preventing and combating terrorist attacks , through being involved in a codecision process , to be subsequently excluded a priori when other measures are at stake which , by affecting citizens ' rights , may even also be important in this context ?
Therefore - I am finishing , Mr President - it is fundamentally important that the way the Treaty of Lisbon is interpreted in legislation corresponds in reality to the stated strengthening of Parliament 's powers and competences .
At the very least , in some cases , as was raised in the question , it should be possible to have a dual legal basis when the rights of citizens are at stake and anti-terrorism policies are threatened .
In other cases , such as Zimbabwe and Somalia , for example , optional consultation should be envisaged , as in fact is enshrined in the Stuttgart Declaration on the European Union , which was also mentioned in the question .
That is the position that I wanted to set out here , Mr President .
I would like to say that in my opinion , the efforts made by Members of the European Parliament in the ratification process for the Lisbon Treaty were not , from the perspective of the theme currently under discussion , adequately appreciated through involving us more in these processes .
I consider restrictive measures and sanctions as an important instrument of EU policy in the areas of foreign and security policy as well as , of course , in questions of justice and the defence of fundamental human rights .
Naturally , we were expecting an opportunity ( as the European Parliament ) to be much more involved in decision making in this area .
We also accept that target measures and sanctions have the aim of minimising the impact on the civilian population and I am delighted that you have mentioned precisely this clause , Mrs Malmström .
However , as the only directly elected representatives of European institutions , we nevertheless feel with some justification that we will simply be a kind of adjunct in the creation process and later excluded from the decision-making and control process .
I do not consider this to be entirely correct , especially in a case such as this , involving a highly sensitive area relating to the field of justice and protection of fundamental rights , because the fight against terrorism is a highly sensitive theme for the citizens of our countries and for the entire EU .
I will therefore wait patiently until the whole process is up and running to see what our cooperation will look like .
Mr President , I am talking here about so-called targeted sanctions , about intelligent sanctions , those that have a direct impact on fundamental rights too - the fundamental rights of individuals , organisations or legal bodies of any kind .
These fundamental rights are important .
They can include , for example , freedom of movement , but also protection of property .
It is for these reasons that these targeted sanctions must comply with a number of minimum rules in terms of procedure and legal certainty .
I would add , moreover , that respect for these legal and procedural rules is crucial if these targeted sanctions are to be credible and , therefore , effective .
It was the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe - we in this House remember - that , through one of its then Members , Dick Marty , demanded transparency and the right of defence and which showed the absurdity of this lack of transparency where the effectiveness of listing and delisting was concerned .
Listing and delisting were liable to affect innocent people too , people who were unaware of what was going on around them and unable to do anything about a situation that they generally stumbled upon by accident .
That is why access to data , as mentioned by Mr Michel , communication of the grounds for listing , and protection in the transfer of personal data , are crucial elements of this procedure .
Moving on , it nevertheless took a great deal of perseverance on the part of the victims of the United Nations ' and the European Union 's system of sanctions and the mobilisation of civil society , human rights organisations and also the European Parliament to have these victims ' rights recognised by the European Court of Justice .
I would add that the Council 's amendments concerning blacklists depend on the proposals that have been made , including by the European Parliament .
That is why the European Parliament absolutely must be involved in taking , implementing and monitoring these decisions , since history shows that it was the European Parliament that made the reform of the Council regulation possible .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , like charity , rights begin at home .
I ask about the rights of Europeans Sikhs .
Because they wear the kirpan , a small ceremonial dagger , beneath their clothing , they have been prevented from entering the European Parliament .
The kirpan is an act of faith which they may not remove , so their exclusion is a matter of religious and racial intolerance .
In successive years , I have written to each of the two previous Presidents and the Commission who all replied that the exclusion is on security grounds .
In celebrating her diamond jubilee , Queen Elizabeth came to my region , the East Midlands , where in their place of worship in Leicester , she talked to Sikhs , all wearing the kirpan , standing as close to them as you are to your colleagues .
I am minded to speak on this today because a month ago , I was at the Palace of Westminster .
There , in our democratic parliament , very close to both the House of Lords and to the House of Commons , I met several Sikhs , all wearing the kirpan .
With them was a leading Sikh I have come to know .
His forebears stood shoulder to shoulder with my forebears , fighting for democracy in those conflicts which have so disfigured this Europe of ours .
As a result , you and 700 others have the freedom to come from the four corners of Europe to meet in this place .
So what of the Lisbon Treaty which speaks of a Union founded on respect for freedom , equality , the rights of minorities , values of non-discrimination ? Will you live up to your treaty , or is it just empty words ?
Mr Clark , it is hard to see how exactly this connects with the present debate on the oral question , but thank you .
Mr President , in the original list , what is the justification for placing the Taliban in the same category as Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda ?
Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda are terrorists who have already committed terrorist acts worldwide and intend to commit more in the future .
We must pursue those people to the ends of the earth and restrict them as much as possible .
Whilst the Taliban are an appalling , repressive and anti-democratic organisation , the world is full of unpleasant regimes and the Taliban are not even in government .
They are also killing and maiming our troops in Afghanistan , for which they are quite rightly hated .
However , they would not be killing and maiming our troops if our troops were not deployed there .
The Taliban , as far as I know , have no ambitions beyond their borders .
Is there not a danger that placing the Taliban in the same category as al-Qaeda provides ammunition for the warmongers in the US and British Governments to pursue a pointless , murderous and unwinnable war in Afghanistan for years ahead ?
Furthermore , wars against Muslim countries only provoke terrorist outrages .
Returning to al-Qaeda for a moment , there is considerable doubt about its existence as an organisational entity , as distinct from an ideological one .
There is no possibility of drawing up a definitive and inclusive list of its operatives .
The only strategy is to be watchful of those communities from which it recruits , regrettably , including innocent people as well as the guilty .
( EL ) Mr President , the Lisbon Treaty has a specific spirit and lays down new frameworks for cooperation between the institutions of the European Union .
I agree with this new regime ; the role of the European Parliament has become more substantial in terms of the rights of individuals , as decisions will now be taken under the codecision procedure .
I therefore consider it slightly contradictory today , in the first plenary following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , that we are obliged to discuss and go into legal provisions on the limits on our new role before we have barely started to function and adjust to it .
All of us , without exception , agree that we need to act decisively against terrorism .
In this endeavour , it is often necessary to take strict measures , such as , in the present case , freezing bank accounts and movements of funds .
On the other hand , respect for and protection of the rights of the individual are a fundamental and core value of the European Union and we are not entitled to overlook it when we take measures for citizens ' security , without - of course - this meaning that we are not determined to give priority to combating terrorism and other criminal acts .
Of course , both the opinion of Parliament 's Legal Service and the case law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities move in this direction .
We are directly elected by the citizens of the European Union and that is precisely why we have a particular responsibility to explain to the citizens how , on the one hand , we are safeguarding their security and how , on the other , we are , at the same time , fighting to protect their rights .
We are the most competent people for the job .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is committed to combating all forms of terrorism .
When we speak of tackling terrorist offences , we need to ensure that fundamental rights are fully upheld and that the measures adopted to fight terrorism are suitable and effective .
The rights of defence and fundamental procedural safeguards must therefore be fully complied with by the EU institutions , including when they draw up lists of individuals and bodies , in this case linked to al-Qaeda , that are subject to restrictive measures .
It is equally essential that these measures are subject to proper democratic and parliamentary scrutiny , as rightly required by the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is therefore clear , as also affirmed by Parliament 's legal service , that each measure of this kind must follow the ordinary legislative procedure , enabling the representatives of Europe 's citizens to fully perform their roles as legislators and guarantors .
( DE ) Mr President , Article 75 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union governs the implementation of restrictive measures to combat terrorism and , therefore , any intrusions into citizens ' property rights , such as freezing bank accounts .
While these provisions concern police cooperation in criminal matters , Article 215 refers to the common foreign and security policy .
However , the Council has sole authority in this area .
As a result , on one page , in Article 75 , Parliament is a colegislator and , on another page , in Article 215 , Parliament only has to be informed about events .
However , both articles concern possible intrusions into the individual rights of citizens or legal persons , which is why the Council and the Commission must explain what the relationship between these two provisions is and why Parliament is not involved in the case of Article 215 in particular .
Mr President , before the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the three proposals in question were based on Articles 60 , 301 and 308 of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
This is now only of historical interest , since the legal basis has changed and we have to refer to Articles 215 and 75 of the new treaty .
Incredible as it might seem , the Lisbon Treaty limited the role of the European Parliament in this particular case .
Article 215 clearly states that the Council only has to inform the European Parliament on the measures adopted , as opposed to the former procedure that implied the consultation of Parliament on such matters .
I cannot accept that , and I strongly support my colleagues ' initiative to clarify Parliament 's involvement in this area .
Leaving aside the legal aspect that I hope will be solved through good cooperation between the European institutions , I would like to draw your attention to the important problem that we are debating here , which is fighting terrorism and terrorism-related activities , such as the ones carried out by Osama bin Laden and the al-Qaeda network .
I think that when it comes to such sensitive topics , we cannot afford to classify them into strict categories such as EU-internal and EU-external issues , because terrorist actions might be planned outside the EU but can seriously affect the people living inside the EU .
We have the responsibility to protect these European citizens against terrorist action , so we have to be given the tools to do that .
I trust your good judgment in solving this procedural problem , and I am looking forward to hearing the opinion of the representatives of the Council and the Commission .
( PT ) Mrs Malmström , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to return to a subject addressed by a number of my fellow Members , particularly in the last speeches by Mr Papanikolaou and Mr Luhan .
Let us look at one aspect at a time , starting with the proposals relating to Zimbabwe and Somalia .
I accept that here we are dealing with the application of sanctions imposed by the United Nations , and as such , they clearly come under the Union 's external actions .
In principle , Article 215 seems to be the most appropriate .
According to this article , however , any acts adopted in accordance with it should include the necessary provisions on legal safeguards , but this requirement is not met in either of the proposals .
These initiatives originate exclusively from the Commission and not from a joint proposal of the Commission and the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
There is no doubt , therefore , that these proposals do not fulfil the necessary requirements for adoption on the basis of Article 215 .
With regard to the third proposal on persons and groups associated with Osama bin Laden , the al-Qaeda network or the Taliban , the idea that this comes under the Union 's external actions is untenable , as Mr Luhan has just stated .
Since preventing and fighting terrorism are one of the top priorities among the European Union 's internal actions , this objective is explicitly included under Article 75 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
That , then , should be the most appropriate legal basis , in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure .
Mrs Malmström , we are just beginning to implement the Treaty of Lisbon .
With the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , will the Council show its goodwill by starting off our international relations on the right foot , or does it intend to carry out a restrictive analysis ?
I think we would all like to begin in the best way possible .
( ES ) Mr President , regarding specific restrictive measures , freezing funds belonging to individuals and entities linked to al-Qaeda and measures against members of the Zimbabwean and Somalian Governments , on 5 November , the Commission and the Council said that once the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force , the proposals would be based on Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union rather than Article 75 .
Article 215 states that the Council shall inform Parliament of any decisions that provide for the interruption or reduction of economic relations , etc .
Article 75 , however , makes it clear that when it is necessary in order to achieve the objectives set out in Article 67 , Parliament and the Council shall define , in other words , shall jointly decide on regulatory measures for the freezing of funds , financial assets or economic gains belonging to , owned or held by natural or legal persons , groups or entities associated with terrorist activities .
Article 67 also sets out the objectives of the foundations of the area of freedom , security and justice .
It therefore appears to be clear that , with regard to people or entities associated with terrorist activities , the legal basis for the Council 's proposals for regulations should be Article 75 .
With regard to Zimbabwe and Somalia , the Council and the Commission could also consider the Solemn Declaration of Stuttgart , which provides for optional consultation of Parliament on international affairs , including when the treaties do not establish anything in that respect .
I am simply clarifying my position , Mr President .
I want to claim Parliament 's role as colegislator , here and now , and ask the Council and the Commission for a more reasonable explanation .
That is all for now .
Mr President , first I want to say that this is a topic that is very difficult to get a definitive answer on what is right and what is wrong .
We all know , ever since 9 / 11 , that we are living in a very dangerous world where there are terrorists at large who have all day , every day , to spend planning their deadly missions , and they have the economic resources , some of it state-sponsored , to carry out their missions .
For that reason , it is difficult for those who are trying to combat terrorism to prove how effective they are , but I think we could safely say that , if the terrorists had their way , this place would have been blown up long ago .
While it is important that Parliament would have oversight on restrictions on individuals ' rights etc . , at the same time , we have to put our faith in those who are in charge of security .
I think the evidence is there that they have done a good job .
Sometimes , we may not be able to know all the details of individuals involved , but at the same time , the overall principle is a good one .
( PL ) I would like to thank you very much for allowing me to speak on this subject .
I think no one in this House is in any doubt that terrorism is the curse of the 21st century and that we have to put a stop to it .
Therefore , I understand , on the one hand , our concern to uphold fundamental rights , while , on the other , we know we are working here in an area where not everything can be open .
Therefore , the question I would like to put to Mrs Ashton is as follows : should we , as Parliament , be given information about what I think is a very important matter - about various restrictions on the application of certain laws ?
So my question is this : what range of information will be communicated to Parliament ?
In my opinion , this discussion is not about whether Parliament can count on receiving this information , but about what the scope of that information will be .
( SK ) In view of the fact that the functioning of the Union is based on representative democracy and the citizens of the Union are represented at a European level in the European Parliament , I believe that the assessment of restrictive measures affecting the fundamental rights of individuals should , in this case , clearly have involved the participation of the European Parliament .
It is not , in my opinion , coherent for the European Parliament , on the one hand , to be responsible for criminal matters and especially for prevention and the fight against terrorism and , on the other , to be excluded from the passing of a number of binding anti-terrorism measures that will be applied in the EU .
Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , functioning as an exception to the provisions of Article 75 , according to which the European Parliament is a joint lawmaking body , should therefore not have been applied or interpreted in such a way as to weaken the protection of fundamental rights and the democratic process of decision making in the EU .
Before I give the floor to Ms Malmström and Ms Ashton , let me just say that this Parliament has great faith in both of you , and knows you very well , especially because of your personal involvement in these issues in the past .
We very much look forward to working closely with you , and to your support , as you have given in the past , to the important role Parliament can play in this extremely sensitive field .
Mr President , the Swedish Presidency has spent a considerable amount of time getting the Treaty of Lisbon in place .
We are extremely proud of the fact that it has now entered into force .
It contains significant improvements , which will be good for the European Union and for European citizens .
One of the most important changes that the Treaty of Lisbon brings is precisely the introduction of the power of codecision for the European Parliament in the area of justice , security and freedom .
This will give the European Parliament the power of codecision in a lot of areas .
That is a good thing and it will increase the quality of the legislation that we produce together .
It will also increase legal certainty and that is very important , as these are sensitive and difficult areas .
I would also like to thank you for your support with regard to the introduction of sanctions against terrorists , individuals or regimes that oppress people and deny them their human rights .
Sanctions and respect for human rights and legal certainty are not mutually exclusive - quite the contrary .
Sanctions can be very effective and legitimate if , at the same time , they have legal certainty .
I can assure you that the European Parliament will be involved in the formulation of new rules , including those relating to terrorism , with the power of codecision under Article 75 when it comes to sanctions within the European Union .
However , as regards external action , in other words sanctions against third countries adopted by the UN , the European Parliament will have no power of codecision .
This is what both we and the Commission clearly understand the treaty to state .
However , we will give a lot of attention to your resolution on this matter and will always bear in mind the human rights aspect when we resort to the instrument of sanctions , within the EU and in the UN .
We are continually trying to improve the procedure .
We note your request for consultation and the exchange of information regarding proposals for sanction systems .
I believe we can work together effectively and I have no doubt that we will find suitable ways to cooperate within the current institutional framework .
Vice-President designate of the Commission . - Mr President , I will be brief .
I think there are three particular points that I would like to refer to .
Firstly , honourable Members have quite rightly talked about the importance of fundamental rights , and I think we would all agree that there of course is a significant role in this for the European Court of Justice who , amongst other things , will make sure that rights are respected in terms of what the Council or the Commission does .
But I take the point very well .
The second point I wanted to make was this issue of good cooperation .
The previous president called upon both me and Mrs Wallström to be very clear about the importance that they attach to our role and approach in dealing with Parliament .
I was asked specifically what information .
At this stage , I do not know .
I think one of the things that I have to do as I set out in this new role is work with Parliament , which I will do , to look at what it is .
How we cooperate effectively and what information is included , bearing in mind indeed what was said about what can we put in the public domain or not .
I will be extremely mindful of that for all the reasons that Members of Parliament would expect me to be .
The third and final thing I would say is about legal certainty .
I spent many hours taking the Lisbon Treaty through a parliament so at one time , I knew the treaty extremely well .
The interpretation of Article 75 of course is how you refer back to Article 67 and the relevance of that within the context , and so the legal advice we have got is to try and seek to clarify where indeed this now fits .
The advice we have is clear .
Members of Parliament of course are at liberty to contest that , but I think it is very important that wherever we arrive in this , there is legal certainty .
It is extremely important as the Lisbon Treaty comes into effect .
It is extremely important to me as I work out how to do the role that I have been honoured to be given .
It is extremely important that we reach a conclusion on this .
For my part , I think we have the answer in terms of certainty .
I do understand Parliament 's concern ; I do understand the need to nevertheless cooperate fully .
I have received one motion for a resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote shall take place tomorrow .
Improvement needed in the legal framework for access to documents following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty ( debate )
The next item is the joint debate on
- the oral question to the Council by Michael Cashman , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on improving the legal framework for access to documents after the Lisbon Treaty enters into effect - B7-0230 / 2009 ) ;
the oral question to the Commission by Michael Cashman , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on improving the legal framework for access to documents after the Lisbon Treaty enters into effect - B7-0231 / 2009 )
author . - Mr President , can I start by saying that it is very good to see Commissioner Wallström in the room , as well as Cecilia Malmström , from the Presidency-in-Office , because we were both engaged in this dossier from the outset , in 1999 .
It is interesting to reflect that what we achieved in our agreement in May 2001 was somehow historic , amongst 15 Member States moving from different traditions and cultures , and different approaches , to openness and transparency .
We managed to reach an agreement and , interestingly , in no small way was that due to the determination of the Swedish Presidency at the time .
It was also due to the determination of the Commission to recognise that all three institutions needed a cultural change .
We needed to see that openness and transparency did not prevent democracy from flourishing , but actually improved it .
It allowed accountability .
It allowed citizens to see what was being done in their name and , arguably , it helped us to lift the curtain and to prove once and for all that there were no terrible secrets hidden in the safes of the Commission or the Council - I am not so sure about Parliament , but hopefully not in Parliament 's safes either !
I want to thank in particular the Commissioner and , if I may , my dear former colleague , Cecilia Malmström , for that commitment .
Now we need another commitment .
As I said , we have achieved a huge amount .
We have a register of documents .
We have the jurisprudence of the ECJ , now defining and redefining what was originally agreed on access to documents .
We have accepted the principle that all documents should remain accessible and that , where not accessible , access should be reasoned against quite clearly and specifically in reference to either Article 4 - the exemptions - or Article 9 - sensitive documents .
However , as we have moved on , Parliament has called repeatedly for a revision .
I believe that the revision the Commission placed before Parliament , on which we subsequently voted in committee and the first reading of which was deferred in March of this year , did not go far enough , and I know we have a difference of opinion on this .
Equally there were concerns - and those concerns still remain in this House - that there was an attempt to claw back on access to documents , not least in the redefining of documents - the notion that whole files could be exempted - and attempting to redefine the notion of the third-party veto .
It is interesting that our citizens sitting in the gallery must be thinking that we are talking about something that happens in outer space - articles , third-party vetoes - but actually what we are talking about is a law that allows them to make sure that we are accountable : parliamentarians accountable for what we do in their name , the Commission for what it does in their name , and , equally , the Council .
How can they do that and the NGOs do that if the way we work and who does what within all of the different units remains a well-kept secret , open only to those lobbyists and those lawyers who know ?
That is what I believe is at the heart of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It says that we need to further enhance democracy .
We need to enhance access to documents .
That is why Parliament , in this oral question , is calling for a whole range of recommendations to be undertaken .
Basically , it is about ensuring that the rights that we have are built upon , that they are not diminished , and about recognising that under Lisbon , it is no longer just the three institutions but all of the agencies and the bodies set up by them , including the European Central Bank , in some instances , the European Court of Justice , the European Investment Bank , Europol and Eurojust .
All of these institutions are now accountable under Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 .
We believe that the proposals that have been brought forward since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty do not match either the spirit or the letter of that treaty or , indeed , the obligations that we believe are contained within the original Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , which , for the benefit of our listeners , governs public access to all the documents held , received or produced by the three institutions .
Mr President , as you know , increased transparency is an extremely important issue for the Swedish Presidency .
We have come quite a long way in our EU institutions when it comes to transparency .
However , it is not just about laws and regulations .
Transparency is about attitudes and about how laws and regulations are applied in practice .
This morning , I had the great pleasure of meeting with Commission Vice-President , Margot Wallström , and Parliament 's Vice-President , Diana Wallis , in the Interinstitutional Committee on Public Access to Documents .
The meeting took place on the initiative of the Swedish Presidency .
The committee had not met for two years .
We had some very positive and specific discussions on how we could improve the opportunities for citizens to access the institutions ' documents in practice .
We should have meetings more often , and that was also one of our joint conclusions .
I am pleased that the Treaty of Lisbon places a great deal of importance on transparency , public scrutiny and democracy .
We welcome this .
As regards the review of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 , which we refer to as the Transparency Regulation , the Presidency wishes , first and foremost , to focus on the new legal basis for the Regulation .
This is contained in Article 15 ( 3 ) of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The most important change in the new legal basis is the extension of the institutional scope .
In plain language , this means that , while the previous article only applied to the documents of Parliament , the Council and the Commission , the new article extends the public 's right to access documents to include all of the European Union institutions , bodies , offices and agencies .
There are certain restrictions with regard to the documents of the Court of Justice of the European Union , the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank , but it is a significantly larger area than it was previously .
The Commission has announced that it will bring a proposal before Parliament and the Council with a view to adapting the present Transparency Regulation to the new provisions of the treaty .
In the meantime , the Council 's work on the review of the Transparency Regulation will continue to be based on the proposal that the Commission tabled before Parliament in May 2008 .
Since May 2008 , the Council 's Information Working Group has gone through the proposal twice .
The second technical run-through was completed during June and July of this year and includes a number of the amendments that Parliament approved at the plenary sitting in March 2009 .
In May , Parliament decided not to conclude its formal reading of the Commission 's proposal before the European Parliament .
I would like to remind Parliament that my colleague , Beatrice Ask , who is the Swedish Minister for Justice , explained to the Committee on Civil liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on 2 September 2009 , at the beginning of the Swedish Presidency , that she was prepared to initiate discussions between the institutions .
She asked specifically whether the newly-elected Parliament intended to continue working on the basis of the 92 amendments that had been adopted by Parliament in March 2009 .
The reason for her question was that , as the Presidency , we need to know Parliament 's position , even it if was not necessarily in the form of a completed first reading .
As I understand it , the new Parliament has not had the opportunity to debate the Commission 's proposal yet , but has focussed instead on the possible effects of the Treaty of Lisbon on the ongoing review .
In the Council , we are awaiting the Commission proposal that has been announced relating to the impact of the Treaty of Lisbon on the Transparency Regulation .
We will , of course , continue to be available to discuss the present proposal with you and it goes without saying that , in such discussions , it is only natural that we should take account of the effects of the new treaty .
In my opinion , Article 15 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is an entirely relevant legal basis for the proposal under the new treaty .
Other articles relating to public scrutiny in general , better communication between the institutions and citizens and good administration are of utmost relevance to the institutions ' work in order to reinforce democracy , efficiency and legitimacy .
We also need to discuss how this type of objective should be realised .
However , I am not convinced that there is space for them within the framework of the Transparency Regulation .
For the sake of clarity , the Regulation should contain clear rules relating simply to public access to documents and not a lot else .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , if I may first turn to Mr Cashman .
I think this is the last possibility or opportunity that I will have to say thank you to you .
You are indeed the face of the fight for this particular regulation and for openness and transparency in Parliament .
You have become the face , the symbol and the advocate of it .
I also think that we have a great deal of credibility , being Swedish , both Cecilia Malmström and myself , and I do not think that people will doubt that we will continue to fight for openness and transparency .
At the same time , we have had our rows because we also play different roles and sometimes we have to be very realistic about what we can achieve and we have to fight our corners in each institution .
That is not always easy .
I think the whole political climate has also changed and the political balance has changed and that has affected our discussions on these issues .
But our starting point , I would say , is absolutely the same and we also state that this particular regulation on access to documents has served us very well .
Over the years , this has been an excellent tool that we also want to be used by more than the lobbyists and those who are paid for looking at all the documents .
We want the general public and journalists to be able to use it and have full access to documents .
That is my starting point .
I know that I share this view , as you could hear , with the Minister .
I think also the Swedish Presidency was a golden opportunity to move this issue forward .
Now I really want to thank Parliament for the opportunity to have this debate on transparency and the new Lisbon Treaty because it places more emphasis on openness and what is called participatory democracy .
We all agree that this is a most welcome development .
The concrete question on the table today is : What measures will the Commission take with regard to the revision of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 ?
As you know , with the Lisbon Treaty , the public right of access to documents has been extended , as we heard the minister saying , to documents of all institutions , bodies , offices and agencies of the Union , although there are some restrictions for the Court of Justice , the European Central Bank and the European Investment Bank for natural reasons .

Concerning the review of Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , I want to point out that the new legal base , Article 15 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , is very similar to the former Article 255 and the main difference is the extension of the institutional scope .
This issue was addressed by the Commission in our Communication on 2 December this year .
This was aimed at aligning pending proposals for secondary legislation to the new treaty .
( Some of you here may know it under the EU jargon as the ' omnibus act ' - let 's forget that the minute I have said it ! )
It means that either of the legislators can now introduce an amendment extending the scope of the Regulation to the other bodies and institutions .
This is also to let the Council know that this has been presented by the Commission and adopted by the Commission .
Further progress in the legislative process leading to the adoption of an amended Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 is in the hands of the legislators : Parliament and Council .
We are still in the stage of the first reading .
We do not have a legislative resolution and we do not have the position of the new Parliament .
Of course , the Commission will go on to contribute to reaching an agreement - as in other legislative processes .
The Lisbon Treaty lays down a legal framework for participatory democracy .
From the Commission 's side , we have already taken a number of initiatives aimed at improving public consultation and participation on proposed new policies .
For example , we will assess the Commission 's consultation guidelines against the new provisions of the treaty and decide whether adjustments are necessary to further improve them , and we have already started the work on the citizens ' initiative by launching a public consultation , to listen to the citizens and the stakeholders before presenting a proposal .
The great importance of the citizens ' initiative was also recognised by the European Council last week .
And the incoming Spanish Presidency , I have understood , has put this very high on the agenda .
They want rapid delivery .
This morning , as we have already heard , the Interinstitutional Committee on Public Access to Documents met at the invitation of the Swedish Presidency .
The task of this group is to examine best practice , address possible conflicts and discuss further developments on public access to documents .

So we decided together that we will have an ' Openness ' web portal ; we will have complementarity of our institutions ' public registers ; we will have our respective IT services sit down and coordinate their access efforts and we will now consider the impact on access to documents when our institutions create or change electronic storage systems .
I know that this is the time of year when you write wish lists .
But I think when it comes to openness and transparency , you should not rely on Santa Claus .
I think it is really up to us to deliver now : Parliament , Council and Commission .
Real concrete and direct delivery .
I think we have already started and we have to continue on this track so I am looking forward to our debate .
Mr President , we had agreed with the rapporteur and the shadow rapporteurs from the other groups to submit an oral question about the status of the procedure and the next steps .
On the basis of the response from the Council and the Commission , we planned to discuss how to proceed .
We have just received this response in principle .
It is not entirely clear to me why the rapporteur , contrary to the agreement between the groups , suddenly submitted a resolution in which he anticipated his own point of view .
What answer does he want from the Commission and the Council ?
Mr Cashman , I hold you in great esteem , but all of this happened quietly and secretly , with a complete lack of transparency .
So much for your claim to be fighting for transparency .
You have tried to bypass us .
In addition , I believe that the legitimacy of this resolution is highly questionable under the terms of the Rules of Procedure .
In any case , the content of the resolution is a repeat of your existing report from the last parliamentary term and , therefore , is completely superfluous .
I know that you tried to negotiate with the shadow rapporteurs to introduce a joint resolution , but I am fundamentally opposed to this resolution .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has not , in my opinion , brought about such a change in the legal basis of the dossier that it has resulted in a change in the role of the European Parliament .
The report was and is a dossier in the codecision procedure .
This also explains the concerns of my group about the legitimacy of a resolution under the terms of the Rules of Procedure .
I do not want to discuss the content .
You bring together a lot of different things , including quotations from the Treaty on European Union , from the Treaty of Lisbon and from the Charter of Fundamental Rights , all taken out of context , in order to legitimise your motion for a resolution .
It is certainly not legally tenable in the absolute form in which it is presented .
You have not made a commitment to confidentiality , which is clearly necessary at least to a certain extent .
This is required , for example , in the context of international agreements by third parties as a conditio sine qua non .
You only need to think about the agreement with the US on SWIFT .
There is also no mediation solution , for example , in the form of ex-post transparency .
You fail to provide this .
In addition , other legally protected rights , such as data protection or the right to privacy , are disregarded .
We should not adopt this resolution .
We have received a good response from the Commission and the Council and we should continue on this basis , in other words , the response to our oral question .
I would ask you , Mr Cashman , to withdraw your motion for a resolution .
Thank you Mr President , ladies and gentlemen .
I definitely agree with our colleague Mr Cashman 's opinion that following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the change in the legal situation , now is the most appropriate time to renew discussions on the 2001 regulation on allowing public access to documents , and the fundamental improvement and amendment of that regulation .
With the Treaty of Lisbon , we are aiming for far greater openness to society , which means that decisions must be taken as openly as possible and be as comprehensible as possible to citizens .
All the more so , since judgment of all of the European Union 's work and confidence in its work are linked to our citizens ' understanding of and ability to access the European Union 's work and documents adopted .
Openness here , in particular , is necessary to strengthen the principles of democracy and respect for fundamental rights .
Thus , the opportunity for society to access documents must become a fundamental principle , and secrecy must only be applied in exceptional circumstances .
The European Parliament has already done a lot of work in this area .
In March of this year , it prepared its report on the Commission 's proposal to amend the regulation currently in force , and this new proposal by the European Parliament is a suitable basis for new discussions .
However , we must not forget that here , we are debating the amendment of a regulation and therefore , the continued cooperation of all European Union institutions and common agreement on the revision of transparency rules are imperative .
An improved regulation would establish a better level of transparency .
Since the Treaty of Lisbon is strengthening principles that strive for greater openness in the European Union and closer cooperation with citizens , it is important to establish concrete measures and groundwork for administering European Union institutions in order to achieve this goal .
Therefore , I call on the new Commission to present a proposal as soon as possible and agree on a common position with the Council , in order to fully ensure an open and continuous dialogue with citizens and with the associations that represent them .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I am very pleased with the question and grateful to Mr Cashman for setting out his views .
Indeed , I had thought that all the political groups in this House were agreed upon the resolution .
That was what I was told was the outcome of the meeting this afternoon .
It is clear that with the entry into force of Lisbon , we can go forward with a step change on the whole issue of transparency .
As the Vice-President of this House responsible for transparency , I have not always found it an easy subject , but I do believe that now we have the chance to do better and to reach out even further to our citizens .
Within this House , we are looking at our own arrangements for access to documents and access to information .
For me , it was a real pleasure this morning to meet with Cecilia Malmström and Margot Wallström so that our three institutions for once could sit down together and really make some progress .
It has already been referred to - and I think this , for us , is the big breakthrough - that , rather than this interinstitutional body that meets as and when , and two to three years apart , we have set ourselves six months to meet again and a much more regular timetable .
We are serious , and this is a serious signal that we have made together , that we aim for a real transparency portal between all of us , that we aim to ensure that our citizens can see the legislative process as it progresses through all its stages , and that they can have a real input and real insight into what we do .
So my group - and I believe all the groups - have agreed to amendments that will reflect today 's progress .
It only remains for me to say , thank you , for us as three ladies , that we managed some progress on this issue .
Mr President , in the opinion of many publicists interested in European affairs , what is known as a democracy deficit has been noticeable in the European institutions for many years .
This accusation is sometimes made unfairly , but at other times , it does have a basis in fact .
In the latter case , it is pointed out that when significant decisions are perceived as being made by anonymous European clerks somewhere in far-off Brussels , the democratic mechanism is not working properly .
This is why it should be stressed that openness is an extremely significant element of the European Union 's activity .
Authority must be answerable to society .
Otherwise , as history has always shown , power corrupts .
European society is made up of different nations which live in particular countries .
Therefore , European Union institutions must answer to the citizens of every Member State , and the way to ensure continuous supervision of all authority entrusted to the European Union is to allow full access to documents .
I am thinking primarily of working documents , analyses and consultations carried out by the European Commission or the Council .
It is essential that the influence of interest groups on the development of regulations be recorded and open for everyone .
It is important that not only Parliament have full access to these documents .
The citizens of all Member States of the European Union should have the right of democratic supervision , so that it will be enjoyed by every interested organisation in society and every journalist .
Only transparency can guarantee that the authorities and staff of the European Union will use the powers vested in them for the common good of the citizens of Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , this debate hinges on a question of trust .
The European institutions are always asking the citizens to trust them .
During the Lisbon Treaty process , for better or for worse , they asked the citizens to trust them .
The financial crisis started , and they asked the citizens to trust them .
Well , trust is a two-way street , and you cannot always ask the citizens to trust you if , at the same time , you do not trust the citizens enough to show them all the processes and internal workings that drive the Commission .
Those in power cannot complain that the citizens do not trust politicians if the politicians themselves do not then trust the citizens .
That is a problem of democracy ; not only that , it is also a problem of waste .
Society is itself a vast repository of knowledge that we will be wasting if we do not involve the citizens in the process of leadership and governance of the European Union .
I have absolutely no qualms , then , in saying that I fully endorse the rapporteur 's efforts , that he is doing democracy a good service , and that we should move forward not only towards transparency but , above all , towards ensuring that transparency is not just a fine word but means something concrete .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , the European Union has , in my country and elsewhere too , a richly deserved reputation for taking its decisions furtively , secretly and surreptitiously .
One would suppose , therefore , that the Commission will do its best now to be open and transparent .
Instead , the Commission has produced this proposal - I think it is 1049 - part of which actually restricts access to documents that are currently public .
Beyond this , there is an important objective point which I remember from my time at Harvard University , and it is this : decisions that are made without transparency and no proper public scrutiny have a built-in tendency to be bad decisions .
You should accept that one of the reasons that the Commission puts forward so many ill-considered , ill-thought out , inappropriate and ill-drafted proposals , which we in England and other countries have to put up with , is the lack of transparency .
So in the matter of this legal framework I would urge the Commission to think again , if thinking again is ever actually a possibility for a flawed institution in a flawed system of governing .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I listened very attentively to the speeches by the Commission , the Presidency and my fellow Members .
The Stockholm Programme has indeed further clarified the importance of the right of access to the documents produced by the EU institutions .
The Treaty of Lisbon also reasserts the right of access to documents by natural or legal persons , while nevertheless ensuring that regulations with criteria and limitations in line with the characteristics of each body will be established .
As already mentioned , this year , Parliament has already had occasion to deal with access to documents and views were somewhat varied at that time .
Today , we are all agreed on the need for a factual adaptation of the 2001 regulation , yet the solution proposed by Mr Cashman does not seem plausible , insofar as it extends beyond every reasonable limit the possibility to acquire documents which could , in fact , sometimes go against the prevailing public interest .
I would cite some examples : negotiations with third countries or other sensitive activities require a clear definition , a counterbalance between the legitimate right to transparency , disclosure and knowledge , and the denial of access to documents in accordance with the prevailing and recognised public interest .
We remain convinced of the need to promote the right of access to documents by natural and legal persons , in the knowledge that we must define a reasonable principle to balance conflicting needs : extending the role of the European Ombudsman , setting out precise and appropriate criteria for access and introducing transitional arrangements which will gradually lead to rules in line with citizens ' needs , compatible with the proper functioning of the institutions .
We are relying on the role of the current Presidency , the Spanish Presidency and the activities of the Commission to achieve this .
( NL ) Mr President , which document are you looking for , exactly ?
What is the document number ?
These are just a couple of the responses citizens can expect when they put a question to the European institutions .
Citizens want information , however , not promotional material or indecipherable policy documents , and so a drastic change of course is needed .
The focus must be on citizens .
This forms the basis of the questions by Mr Cashman , whom I should like to thank for his excellent and - I address this to Mrs Sommer , who has unfortunately left the Chamber already - extremely transparent cooperation in the last few months .
I should like to see part of the European information budget being spent on ensuring , via both digital information media and human contact , that citizens receive genuine , complete information and answers to questions such as ' Can you tell me the exact progress of the decisions taken by Europe on the European effort during the Copenhagen Climate Change Conference ? '
This is what citizens want to know , and so I call on the Commission , the Council and , in particular , MEPs , to support our initiatives towards greater transparency .
This strikes me as the only truly clear message .
( FI ) Mr President , public access to documents means the right of citizens to participate in decision making and acquire information in order to do so .
The Treaty of Lisbon endorses this fundamental right of EU citizens .
If the European Parliament does not defend this fundamental right , who will ?
That is why it is very important that we adopt a strong and clear position in favour of transparency in this sitting .
We should not accept any backward steps , or those the Commission is proposing .
I can assure you that there are a lot of misconceptions going around concerning what we are deciding on here .
We do not want to jeopardise international negotiations , but we think that citizens have a right to know what matters are being discussed with foreign powers that affect their rights .
Neither do we conclude here that every Member of the European Parliament should make the contents of his or her e-mail public .
If anyone is afraid of that , there is absolutely no need to be .
( DE ) Mr President , the question of transparency and citizens ' access to documents in the European Union is undoubtedly of importance to the extent that people throughout Europe are still highly dissatisfied with the European integration policy .
It is the case in Austria that a large proportion of people are dissatisfied with or sceptical about the European Union , because they have the feeling that there is no transparency and no access to policy .
The processes for introducing and then pushing through the Treaty of Lisbon together with the election of the President of the European Council and of the High Representative have given citizens the feeling that they cannot see what is going on , that there is no transparency , and that they have no idea why these things have been done .
I believe that if the Treaty of Lisbon is to be a success for the citizens of Europe , it is important that we should give people the feeling that they can identify who is making decisions within the Union and why and how they are being made .
author . - Mr President , I felt it necessary to rise on two points .
Mrs Sommer is still in the Chamber and I thought it appropriate , even though she is not listening , to respond to what she said .
She made a series of accusations .
One that I had not been transparent .
Can I correct the record and say that all political groups and all rapporteurs have been invited to all meetings .
When they have not been able to be there , their positions have been faithfully represented to those meetings .
All decisions subsequently taken have been communicated to all shadow rapporteurs and all political groups .
There has been a suggestion that somehow we should withdraw this motion for resolution that Mrs Sommer says is undemocratic and non-transparent - that her group knew nothing about this .
Well , I find this interesting , when I have been negotiating this afternoon with her group , the EPP , on their draft motion for a resolution on the oral question .
So I can only think that she is misinformed and , on that generous basis , I look forward to negotiating sincerely and in good faith with the EPP and with all other groups .
Finally , it was remiss of me .
It is the last time , Commissioner Wallström and I will face one another here in the Chamber and I just wanted to put on record , if I may , that I and Parliament have never doubted your commitment to openness and transparency .
You have been absolutely right : we have always had to fight our own corner for our own institutions and you have fought yours brilliantly but never deflecting from the principle of openness and transparency .
You have been and will remain , I am sure , a remarkable public servant with an exemplary record .
You have never flinched from doing that which you believed to be right and just and decent and , on behalf of people who will never have the privilege to meet you , may I say thank you .

Mr President , the legislation concerning public access to documents , in other words , what we are referring to here as Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 , has served us well .
I am very proud to have played a part , together with Mr Cashman , and with contributions from the Commission through Mrs Wallström , in its advent .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives us the opportunity to go one step further , as the scope is being extended .
This is a very positive thing .
I regret that it was not possible to initiate an interinstitutional dialogue with the European Parliament during the autumn .
We were waiting for the European Parliament 's opinion before we could continue .
I believe that the Spanish Presidency will also need some indication of the European Parliament 's position on this in order to be able to progress with the interinstitutional talks .
Pending this , there is much we can do .
Both Mrs Wallström and Mrs Wallis referred to the meeting we had this morning , which represents a tangible way of promoting transparency and access to documents and of making our institutions more user-friendly .
One of the things we discussed was how we can use our computer systems in such a way that citizens , journalists , NGOs and others can follow the progress of a piece of legislation from the Commission 's proposal right up until it is finally voted through .
I believe that that could help enormously to increase understanding and knowledge of , and trust in , the EU .
Just as it has been said here , transparency is a good thing and it is necessary and important .
It increases the effectiveness of decisions , it increases trust in the decisions and it reduces the risk of irregularities and suspicion .
If the EU 's legitimacy increases with regard to decisions , it will also be good for the quality of our decisions .
It is therefore excellent that the European Parliament is having this debate and I hope that it will be taken further , even if the Swedish Presidency does not have the opportunity to do this .
Thank you very much Mr Cashman and Parliament for raising this issue .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , this was a very effective way of softening me up a bit as I now speak for the final time .
I could not have chosen a better subject on which to make my last intervention in the European Parliament - which it probably is - than on openness and transparency .
Let me just state some basic facts .
The European Commission has provided a proposal .
It is the only proposal on the table .
We did it in the shape of a recast , which means that we think the basic principles in this regulation are sound ; they are OK .
We can use them but we have to modernise them , upgrade them and make them more effective .
This was the whole idea behind the recast .
We have some different views on a few things - how to define documents , etc . - but these are still the kind of negotiations that we should engage in and make sure that we move things forward .
To do that , we need a first reading from Parliament .
This is the basic message from our side .
We also think , on the basis of a new treaty , that we can do it by expanding the scope of this regulation .
That is the main difference , as we see it in the Commission .
It will now cover all the bodies , agencies , etc. of the European Union .
This is where we are today , so we still hope that Parliament will now provide , as soon as possible , a first reading .
Then we can also have the views of the Council so that we can enter into proper discussions and negotiations and finally have a decision .
Regarding a number of very important issues that you have also raised , Mr Cashman , in your report : I think there are other means that we can use as they are a bit outside the scope of this regulation .
But they are still very important initiatives .
They have to do with registers , with things we discussed - today , for example - where we can improve openness and transparency through other methods and not only through the Regulation .
This is where we will continue .
I know you do not like it very much , but I have taken the initiative to make an openness action plan , parts of which we discussed today , where we can join hands and make efforts to continue on openness and transparency and fight for that .
On that positive note - I really want it to be a positive note - I would like to thank you all and I also want to use the opportunity to say ' Merry Christmas and Happy New Year ' to all of you .
Let me take this opportunity to thank you once more for all your cooperation over all those years .
Merry Christmas and all the best to you .
I have received five motions for resolution tabled under Rule 115 ( 5 ) .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 December 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , the problem of access to the documents of the bodies and institutions of the EU , which we are discussing today , is , in my opinion , extremely important in the European Union legislation process .
Transparency , here , is essential , thanks to which every EU citizen has a right of access to documents , which , in the understanding of Article 15 ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , includes not only parts of the prevailing legal order , but also drafts of legal acts .
This means that every natural or legal person residing or having its registered office in the EU can have a direct influence on new legislation , and this constitutes a special form of public control .
The currently prevailing Regulation No 1049 / 2001 ensures appropriate access to EU documents , but with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 December 2009 , we have been faced with an exceptional challenge , in which the role and real participation of EU citizens has increased .
Unrestricted access to documents is , therefore , a significant determinant of the future form and function of the EU .
Situation in Georgia ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Georgia .
Mr President , we are touching on many different areas here this afternoon , and that is what is so wonderfully exciting about sitting here in the Council Presidency chair .
The subject that we are now going to debate is Georgia .
It is an issue that I know interests the European Parliament and that I personally have very strong feelings about .
Right at the start , I would like to make it clear that the EU is giving its full support to the stabilisation and normalisation of Georgia and to democratic reforms in the country .
We are assisting Georgia in several very specific ways : through the EU monitoring mission ( EUMM ) , through our active involvement and our key role in the talks in Geneva , and through increased EU financial aid to ease the humanitarian situation and to support Georgia 's economic recovery .
With the launch of the Eastern Partnership , the EU has strengthened relations with Georgia , as well as with other countries .
We are offering an opportunity to upgrade relations by means of an association agreement and extensive free-trade areas .
Georgia 's goal is , of course , to achieve stability and prosperity .
We will help them do this .
However , in order for genuine progress to be made , Georgia must maintain its focus on democratic reforms .
We attach a great deal of importance to issues relating to good social management and human rights .
We appreciate the fact that Georgia is determined to continue with its democratic reforms and is particularly resolute about a second wave of reforms .
Becoming an established democracy where citizens enjoy fundamental freedoms and human rights will bring major advantages for Georgia .
It will benefit the country itself and the people who live there , of course , but it will also be beneficial through the creation of better opportunities for those living in the separatist regions .
The political environment is challenging .
Talks between the government and the opposition must continue to work towards a consensus on the central elements of institution building and on issues relating to constitutional reforms , election reforms , freedom of the media and human rights .
Georgia 's government must also continue to maintain contact with the opposition and civil society .
The EU is prepared to provide assistance for this .
In addition to the cooperation described in the European Neighbourhood Policy action plan , the Eastern Partnership 's bilateral track is providing a special opportunity to make progress in this area .
We are also looking at negotiation directives for an association agreement with Georgia and with Armenia and Azerbaijan .
The process of upgrading our relations with these countries will be guided by the principles of participation , differentiation and conditionality , as well as that of shared responsibility .
We welcome Georgia 's commitment to working to improve relations with the EU on the basis of the perspective that the Eastern Partnership creates .
The EU monitoring mission is a very important factor for promoting stability under the present circumstances .
The mandate has now been extended until September 2010 .
Our focus is on measures to promote trust between the parties .
Following the Geneva agreement on incident prevention and response mechanisms , the monitoring mission is playing a prominent part in coordinating the mechanisms between the different parties .
I am referring here to the Georgians , the Russians and the de facto authorities in South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
Despite some difficulties , the parties have reached agreement on a number of points , including the establishment of a ' hotline ' to deal with security-related matters at the administrative borders of South Ossetia and Abkhazia .
The monitoring mechanism has used this to reduce tensions between the parties following the incidents in the Black Sea and to resolve an incident at South Ossetia 's administrative border in which 21 Georgian citizens were detained and then later released .
The monitoring mission will continue to work with the parties involved .
The transition from incident prevention to measures to promote trust will be important in normalising the situation .
The mission is monitoring newly-built settlements , the resettlement of internal refugees from the war in August last year and the facilitation of contact between internal refugees and the Georgian authorities , NGOs and international organisations .
In this regard , it is clear that almost all of the internal refugees who were displaced by earlier conflicts are still living in conditions that do not meet international minimum standards , although the situation has improved since 2008 .
The mission will continue to help wherever it can to facilitate contact with the authorities .
One event that is of key importance for the mission was the implementation of two memorandums of understanding with Georgia 's Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Internal Affairs .
However , we are being vigilant with regard to the risk that the Georgian authorities will cease to apply the memorandums of understanding , as there is a lack of mutual trust between the parties .
As you as aware , a report was published recently by the Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Conflict in Georgia .
All of the parties involved , and the international community as a whole , can learn from this report .
However , it must be seen in its entirety and not viewed selectively .
The EU has consistently reiterated its unswerving support for Georgia 's sovereignty and territorial integrity within its internationally recognised borders .
It is our firm conviction that an international presence is required in Georgia and we will work to secure that .
We regret that , despite support from the majority of States , it was not possible to reach an agreement in the case of the OSCE .
The EU 's position has not changed in respect of the agreements of 12 August and 8 September .
Russia must implement these agreements in full .
In this regard , there are still some important issues to resolve , for example , the border controls and the EU 's general access to the territories of the two breakaway provinces .
We will raise these issues in our talks with Russia .
We also need to look forwards .
In this regard , the talks in Geneva are extremely important , even though they will be difficult .
It will be the only place where representatives from all parties will be present and it is important for us to actually be able to have pragmatic discussions concerning the non-use of violence and on international security arrangements .
This is the only practicable way forward and we are looking forward to the consultation that is planned for the end of January 2010 .
That should be of benefit to everyone who is trying to achieve long-term stability and development for Georgia and for the region as a whole .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , dear future colleague , honourable Members , it is a pleasure to be here .
Let me also say it is a delight to have an opportunity again to share views with you on Georgia .
As you are aware , over the last two years , Georgia has been through very difficult times , both externally and internally .
The war with Russia in August last year , which was just mentioned , left wounds across the whole region and Georgia is still struggling with basic issues such as the essential needs for more than 200 000 displaced people , some of them already uprooted since the beginning of the 1990s .
And internally , last year 's conflict has increased tensions within Georgia .
So disputed elections , for instance , led to months of street protests .
We are doing our utmost to help the country take the necessary steps to resolve the difficulties .
First and foremost , the implementation of our pledge of assistance of up to EUR 500 million in support of Georgia 's recovery is being honoured by us .
The implementation of the post-conflict assistance package is proceeding well and the living conditions of many have already been improved .
We are keeping our promises , and our very substantial assistance is providing assistance for the resettlement of the IDPs , but also for economic stabilisation and support to Georgia 's infrastructure .
In the coming days , the Commission will also release the first tranche of EUR 46 million of macrofinancial assistance in grants to Georgia , another part of this comprehensive package .
However , if we are to succeed in helping Georgia out of its current difficulties , Georgia must also deliver more , in particular , in three areas .
First , Georgia should promote further democratic reforms .
Democracy , rule of law , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms are the backbone of our relations with all our eastern partners , and the Georgian President 's statement earlier this year announcing a ' new wave of democratic reforms ' , and stating that Georgia 's response to Russian aggression will be more democracy , more freedom and more progress , was very welcome .
The local elections in Tbilisi in May will be a test of these commitments , and the local elections will be very important as the Tbilisi mayor will be - for the first time - elected by direct suffrage .
This presents a major opportunity for Georgia to restore its citizens ' trust in the electoral process - and one that must be seized , since the shortcomings of the electoral system remain a significant potential source of political instability in Georgia .
The second area where we need Georgia to deliver is in demonstrating ' strategic patience ' in the aftermath of the conflict .
This is the wording of President Saakashvili himself .
As you know , the European Union played a major role in bringing an end to the hostilities , and will continue to work for a durable solution .
We will not waver in our support , as was said , for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia .
And we will do all we can through our monitoring mission and mediator role at the Geneva talks to work for a normalisation of the situation .
At the same time , the isolation of the breakaway regions will not help efforts for conflict resolution .
On the contrary , a smart policy of engagement with Abkhazia and South Ossetia is needed .
We therefore appreciate the stated Georgian policy of strategic patience , which increasingly recognises the need to maintain links with the breakaway regions without restrictions , in the interest of citizens , and of re-establishing stability in the region .
The Government of Georgia 's efforts to design a state strategy for the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia deserve our support , particularly any effort for closer work in favour of its population .
However , we remain concerned that the Law on Occupied Territories - if too strictly implemented - may unnecessarily increase frictions with the entities and thus complicate the delivery of assistance .
The danger is that it will impede economic relations and ensure that steps to normalise day to day contacts cannot take place .
In spite of the very good advice from the Council of Europe 's Venice Commission , this law has not yet been amended by Georgia , and we will continue to urge Georgia to make the suggested adjustments .
My third point is that Georgia should actively prepare for negotiations for a new EU-Georgia association agreement in the context of the European and Eastern Partnership .
We are not sparing any effort to support Georgia .
Preparations for the establishment of a new legal framework for our bilateral relations are proceeding quite well .
We have swiftly prepared the negotiation directives for an EU-Georgia association agreement , which are now currently under discussion in the Council .
The draft negotiation directives include the future establishment of a deep and comprehensive free trade area .
We have already presented to Georgia key recommendations for steps to be taken before we can judge the country ready to embark on this area of negotiations .
Georgia 's resolve to use the run-up to the negotiations to speed up its own preparations is wise , and I think it is essential that it tackles the key recommendations very actively .
Meanwhile , negotiations on the EU-Georgia visa facilitation and readmission agreements were completed at working level in November , and we are now awaiting final approval on both sides .
These agreements are a milestone in our partnership , demonstrating once again the concrete benefits that our closer relationship can bring for the people of Georgia .
Enhanced mobility will go hand in hand with enhanced security .
I recently signed a joint declaration on a mobility partnership between the European Union and Georgia which now will be completed .
To conclude , we remain deeply committed to supporting Georgia in these difficult times .
We are offering new opportunities that can bring tangible benefits to the country and its citizens , but Georgia also has to help itself , and , if it takes good decisions , we will then be there to help every step of the way .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I am very impressed by the very thorough picture that the President-in-Office and the Commissioner have painted of the present state of relations .
The EU 's relationship with Georgia does raise very far-reaching questions about what we are about , what the EU is , and what we aspire to be .
It could be that this relationship could turn out to be a test case of our commitment to values of solidarity , human rights and democracy - our proclaimed values .
It is clear enough that Georgia - both the elites and society - see the country as belonging to Europe .
At the same time that country - let us admit it - is in a precarious situation , as Russia , the former colonial power , has not given up its aspiration to reclaim some kind of overlordship over Georgia or , indeed , over the rest of the Southern Caucasus .
It is in this sense that there are many people in Russia who do not take Georgia 's status as an independent state seriously , and take the view that Georgia 's return to Russia is just a question of time .
This leaves the great majority of people in Georgia feeling decidedly insecure .
That insecurity has been markedly intensified in the light of last year 's conflict with Russia .
No country likes to be stripped of its sovereign territory , as Georgia was .
All this affects the EU - hence the significance of the Eastern Partnership .
Georgia sees itself as having a European future , not least as a guarantee of its security .
Obviously , there is also the Southern Caucasian energy corridor , which is a future lifeline for Europe 's energy supplies .
These would be compelling enough reasons for the European Union to take Georgia 's European aspirations seriously , as we obviously do , but there is also a final argument , which is that , if Europe neglects these aspirations , then our own credibility in the world will come into question and our opponents will be delighted by this demonstration of Europe 's weakness .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in my opinion , the difficult situation in Georgia calls for particular care in combining the defence of international law with a pragmatic approach and a sense of responsibility .
We think that the EU was right to reaffirm its support for Georgia 's territorial integrity and sovereignty and , at the same time , we welcome the prudence shown in taking note of the elections in Abkhazia , which we feel is consistent with a method based on the constant pursuit of dialogue and political debate and on support for democratic processes .
The internal development of the region and the evolution of the international context underpin this decision to seek dialogue and further increase Europe 's responsibility in the various areas in which it has made commitments : the Commission 's initiatives in support of the democratic process in Georgia and in support of the refugees , efforts to keep the Geneva talks alive and the activities of the European monitoring mission , this last all the more valuable and vital since it is currently the only international mission in Georgia .
We welcome the work undertaken by the mission and its contribution to the stabilisation of the region , to the functioning of the incident prevention and response mechanism and to the arduous process of rebuilding of trust between the parties .
At the same time , we are aware that the development of the democratic process , with regard to which we must be generous and exacting , and the association agreement , could be the key for lasting change in Georgia .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to discuss two subjects in particular .
The first is the relationship between economic aid and support , on the one hand , and democratic development , on the other , and the second concerns some fundamental questions addressed in the Tagliavini report .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , you have rightly said that financial and economic support for Georgia is needed and that the European Union should continue to provide it .
You have also placed three conditions on the provision of this support , which are democratic reform , basic freedoms and legal certainty .
One question is particularly important to me .
In the past , it was sadly the case that Georgia and its government purchased huge quantities of arms , in particular , in the run-up to last year 's conflict .
How do you intend to ensure that the European funding is not used for this purpose ?
Secondly , I would like to mention a human rights case which the Council of Europe and Mr Hammerberg have also addressed .
Two teenagers in South Ossetia are still in custody , although Mr Hammerberg was promised that they would be released .
Have you taken any measures in this respect ?
Do you think it is likely that they will be released in the near future ?
One last point : the Tagliavini report has clearly described for the first time how the conflict came about with the build-up of xenophobia and the language of hate .
What will the Commission and the Council do in this area in order to defuse the situation and to make it clear that these things are the precursors to armed conflict and that it is important to put an end to them before they even begin ?
Mr President , I will not conceal the fact that I am disappointed by both the statements we have heard .
Today , here in the European Parliament , we , the representatives of European Union authority , are quite rightly stressing the role of democracy .
We are lecturing President Saakashvili on the changes which he has to introduce in his country .
I would like to say he has already brought in very many changes , and the Georgia of today and the Georgia of a few years ago are completely different countries .
However , we have not forgotten that today , Russian tanks are to be found on a large part of Georgia 's territory .
Fellow Members , if you think Russian tanks have , at any time in history , brought democracy to anyone , you are profoundly mistaken .
Russian tanks do not bring democracy , Russian tanks bring subjugation .
We are talking , today , about the situation in Georgia , but in the Council representative 's speech , we heard the word ' Russia ' once , while of course , it is Russia which is the key to the situation in Georgia .
I am not saying that everything in Georgia is ideal .
There is certainly much which needs to be improved .
However , the Russians are laughing in our faces by not realising the five-point agreement negotiated on behalf of the European Union by President Sarkozy .
I have to ask : why are Russian army units still present in the village of Pereva ?
Has that matter ever even been mentioned to the Russians ?
If we are talking about the necessity of democracy , human rights , tolerance and freedom of speech , I subscribe to it all .
However , do we think Russia is promoting these values in Georgia today , or that the Russian aggression against Georgia is part of a fight for democracy ?
No , it is an act of brutal imperialism .
We , as the European Union , should oppose that brutal imperialism .
Only then will what we say be credible to our Georgian friends , when we tell them there is still much they must do - and I agree with this - for their country to meet fully our European standards .
However , we must not point the finger at Georgia when , on the other hand , we have Russia , where inconvenient journalists are murdered , where the language of hatred towards neighbours and minorities is the official language of the media , and is the language of leading Russian politicians .
We must say ' no ' to this , because then we will be able to be credible in what we say to all other countries , including Georgia , about democracy .
I want to appeal to the European Union to defend the territorial integrity of Georgia firmly and resolutely in the name of values which we all share , and to defend freedom and democracy in Georgia against Russian aggression .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , in my opinion , the EU 's foreign policy in this region is not really coherent .
The Caucasus is known to be an energy transit region in the same way as Russia , which is an important strategic partner and of major significance to us .
Given the sensitivity of the situation , the EU has allowed itself to be tricked by President Saakashvili in the Georgian crisis , possibly under the influence of the US-dependent approach of some Member States .
Political short-sightedness in the Georgian crisis will not only widen the internal divide within the Union , but will also put massive strain on relations with Russia .
The reckoning will come in the form of the gas dispute .
It remains to be seen whether the new people at the head of the EU will prove their worth in this case .
If Brussels genuinely wants to uphold human rights , then it should intervene in Georgia with regard to possible electoral manipulation , working conditions that are the equivalent of slavery and restrictions placed on the right to demonstrate which are in breach of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Brussels should adopt a balanced approach with regard to the Georgia question by taking equal account of the legitimate interests of both Georgia and Russia .
Mr President , when I was still a young boy , my country was invaded by the Soviets .
At my primary school , we had to learn several new songs .
One of them was Georgian in origin , about a girl whose name was Suliko .
The occupation was bad in every way ; only that song was nice .
Many years have passed , and recently we came across this girl Suliko again , this time with her dark eyes full of tears and showing signs of having been beaten .
She was abused once more a year ago - robbed , beaten and raped .
We , the 27 EU gentlemen , are staring at her afterwards and talking in a strange manner : How it could happen ?
What did she do wrong ?
Did her behaviour irritate the rapist ?
That is exactly what he says : ' She was provocative ' !
Did she oppose his demands ?
That would be unwise : nobody , especially the robber and rapist , may be antagonised or demonised .
She could have been more flexible , meeting the assaults softly , but she tried to defend herself for two full days - that was her greatest mistake .
Nobody can now say who the attacker was : he says she attacked him .
That is the situation in a distant country court on the outskirts of Europe , where the big landlord esquire cannot be sentenced in any case - but she can .
Thus , we now have a fresh problem caused by her , as our business with Mr Rapist has been slightly damaged .
The next time , Mr Rapist is given our special pill ' Mistral ' to increase his male capacities .
Ladies and gentlemen in Europe , do not waver around the next war in this way .
( HU ) I would like to thank Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner and especially Cecilia Malmström , who is currently among us as a minister but is soon to be a commissioner as well .
I would also like first to briefly express my sincere thanks for the report , which contained some very important information .
Please also allow me to say that since the last two enlargement rounds , the European Union 's eastern neighbours have , in fact , moved very close to the European Union , which is a valuable development from numerous perspectives , not only because of the geographical proximity , but partly because of a foreign policy based on the idea of spheres of Russian influence , not to mention the increased importance of energy security .
From this perspective , the Eastern Partnership programme is of paramount importance , as it can also ensure differentiation , yet it still clearly establishes closer ties with these countries .
Georgia is the country in the Caucasus region which is most committed to the European Union 's values .
I would like to mention and emphasise a couple of matters , starting with the preparations for the visa facilitation process .
This measure is not only important from a human relations perspective , but it is also important because we know that South Ossetian and Abkhazian citizens who are Russian passport holders are already enjoying the benefits of this , which has created such tension that this is only aggravating the situation further .
The second matter I would like to stress is that there are unresolved conflicts in four of the countries which come under the Eastern Neighbourhood policy , something we must give our fullest attention to .
Finally , I would like to thank Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner for all the efforts she has made to bring this region closer to the European Union .
( CS ) The European Parliament is monitoring the situation in Georgia closely and devoting much attention to the country .
European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek met President Saakashvili at the end of October , while at the beginning of November , at a joint meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , the delegation for cooperation with Russia and the delegation for cooperation with the South Caucasus countries , Members of the European Parliament discussed the Tagliavini Report on the situation in Georgia and at its extraordinary meeting in Strasbourg on 26 November , Members of the delegation for the South Caucasus met Georgian Government minister , Giorgi Baramidze .
We always support the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Georgia .
We support a peaceful solution to the situation in Georgia and to the conflict between Georgia and Russia .
We are pushing for peace observers to have access not only to areas administered by the Georgian Government but also to occupied areas .
At the same time , we are pushing for the possibility of delivering humanitarian assistance to these occupied territories as well .
We are concerned about the situation of the refugees , who have had to leave their homes under pressure and cannot return to them , and we appreciate the efforts made by the Georgian Government towards securing dignified living conditions for all of the refugees .
We call strongly on both parties to the conflict to abide by the ceasefire agreement and to fulfil the undertakings which they made towards a peaceful resolution .
( RO ) Ladies and gentlemen , several years ago , there were voices which sharply criticised those who supported the strategic importance of the Black Sea region to Europe .
However , time has shown that Europe is closely linked to these countries in the Black Sea region .
Georgia is of particular strategic importance in the Black Sea region for energy security , as supply routes such as the Nabucco gas pipeline , the Baku-Tbilisi oil pipeline and the oil terminal at Supsa are closely linked to the stability of this country .
The conflicts which took place in Georgia in August 2008 highlighted that any unresolved conflict can reignite at any time , with severe repercussions for the entire region 's stability and security .
It is our duty to lead Georgia to the Euro-Atlantic zone of stability and security , even though Russia 's influence is still very strong .
It is just as necessary to recognise the right of refugees , displaced persons and their dependants to return to Abkhazia , irrespective of their ethnic origin .
At the same time , the fact that Russia has granted citizenship to the inhabitants of Abkhazia and Ossetia puts Georgian citizens at a clear disadvantage as there is no visa agreement yet in place from the EU , although we earlier heard the Commission 's representative saying that measures are being taken in this direction .
Romania has been involved as part of the EU monitoring mission in Georgia , both at operational level and on the ground , also as part of the headquarters in Tbilisi .
Our country is also maintaining its commitment to making special efforts to bring Georgia closer to the EU and NATO .
In addition , we are going to send a national expert who will operate from NATO 's office in Tbilisi .
We welcome the stance of the EU Presidency .
We will not recognise , under any circumstances , the so-called states created illegally and as a result of conflict in separatist regions , nor election proceedings organised illegally , such as those carried out recently in Abkhazia .
The president of the pro-Russian Georgian separatist republic won the election with 59.4 % of the vote .
I must also mention that none of the five presidential candidates rejected completely the idea of reunification with Georgia .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Union has a responsibility to make a decisive contribution to stability in its immediate neighbourhood , with respect for international law and belief in its principles .
With Georgia in particular , we must stand by our position on respect for territorial integrity and the country 's internationally recognised borders .
At the same time , however , we must also take account of the reality of unresolved conflicts .
The European Union must be able to mediate and to make a constructive contribution to both sides , Georgia and Russia , so that a solution can be found .
At the present juncture , there are three main messages that we need to send :
Firstly , that unilateral and violent solutions are not acceptable ; secondly , that the debate on whether or not Georgia should join NATO is untimely and that , on the contrary , emphasis should be placed on the continuation and successful outcome of the Geneva talks and , thirdly , that the mission of EU observers in Georgia is a factor for stability and confidence building .
Its positive contribution should therefore be recognised , its action should be strengthened and it should be encouraged to continue its efforts , especially in the field of violations of human rights and international humanitarian law .
( PL ) Mr President , unfortunately , neither in the speech of Mrs Malmström nor in that of Mrs Ferrero-Waldner did we hear about what we are really facing in Georgia .
I refer to the dramatic humanitarian and human situation .
I had the impression that neither we nor the two ladies are responsible for the lack of reaction from the European Union .
The situation is , indeed , dramatic .
The six-point agreement is not being implemented .
Ethnic cleansing is being carried out in Georgian territory .
The Georgian language is banned in many places .
Our mission to Georgia is not being permitted to carry out its work in many places , and it is we who are responsible for this .
Mrs Ferrero-Waldner spoke about the long-term macrofinancial assistance which is foreseen for Georgia , and that we are going to have an association agreement with Georgia .
This is all very well , but a question we all must answer is : what have we done about this ?
I feel deeply disappointed , not only by what has been said here today by the people responsible for this policy , but also by EU policy itself .
( PL ) Commissioner , Mrs Malmström , in contradistinction to my Polish fellow Members , I am not going to be so critical in my evaluation of European Union activities in this area , because I want to express satisfaction at the Council statement of 12 December , which comments unequivocally on the recent Presidential elections in Abkhazia .
I also want to stress support for the European Union 's activities , because the EU is unequivocal in its recognition of the independence of both these regions at international level .
I know what I am talking about from my experience of dealings with Belarus .
Nonetheless , I agree that the European Union must be resolute in the matter of enforcing the six-point ceasefire plan negotiated by President Sarkozy .
I say this especially in view of the disturbing declarations of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Mrs Ashton , that she is going to conduct quiet diplomacy .
I hope quiet diplomacy will not mean consent to the breaking of agreements made on behalf of Russia with representatives of the European Union .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to put a question to those who are defending Mr Saakashvili 's position : have you been to South Ossetia ?
Have you seen what Georgia 's army did with Zhinvali ?
I was there at the time of the war and I saw it all myself .
What the Georgian state authority did is a crime against the people of Ossetia and Abkhazia .
In relation to the occupation , I have spoken with many people from Ossetia and Abkhazia .
The inhabitants of Ossetia and Abkhazia do not want to live in the same country as Mr Saakashvili .
If anybody still wants to solve this major international problem with weapons , as Mr Saakashvili did , then there is a very fine Russian expression : ' Zamučujutsja pilj glatatj ' .
It means that success will never come . Thank you .
( PL ) Mr President , if the Union does not support Tbilisi politically and economically , we will make it easy for Russia to realise its neo-imperialistic policy towards Georgia , and this will destabilise the situation in the Caucasus still further .
Therefore , the Union must try harder .
When we reiterate our support for territorial integrity , do we realise that the six-point plan is , in fact , not being observed at all ?
On the one hand , we say we want a democratic , free and territorially intact Georgia , while on the other , our monitors are not being admitted to areas along the borders with the separatist republics .
Another cause for concern is the phenomenon of kidnappings , which have become routine practice for Russia in the occupied zones .
At the beginning of November , several teenagers became victims of this .
The youngest is barely 14 years old .
The Kremlin is evidently trying to discredit the President of Georgia by attempting to show that he is not able to ensure the security of his citizens .
The destabilising activities of Russia are creating an enormous threat to the security of residents of the border areas and are leading to an escalation of the conflict in the region .
Mr President , we must act more decisively , because a territorially intact and democratic Georgia means greater security for the European Union and Europe .
( ET ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , some time ago , when we were discussing Georgia , I reminded you that , on the eve of the anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall , it was the right time to raise the question of when we could mark the day when South Ossetia and Abkhazia would once again be united with their mother country , Georgia .
Today , we do not have an answer to this question , although in all our documents , whether in this European Parliament or in other institutions , we stress the importance of Georgia 's territorial integrity from the point of view of international law , and it is for the sake of this that we are all standing here .
Last week , a very good discussion took place in Brussels with Carl Bildt , the representative of the country holding the Presidency , who called Georgia a litmus test for the European Union , specifically in connection with the question of whether we will some day be able to stand up for the idea that Georgia 's territorial integrity should be restored , and that all human rights and refugees ' rights should be handled as envisaged by international law .
I am in agreement with all my colleagues who have referred to a bad human rights situation here - it cannot be accepted .
Last but not least , though , I want to make a request .
Last week , I met with the Georgian deputy prime minister , Giorgi Baramidze , whose big , big request was : please , please , please , European Union , do something in terms of preventative diplomacy in order to prevent a possible escalation of any further conflicts .
Mr President , I can only agree with the statement that Georgia 's best response to Russian aggression must be more democratic reforms .
At the same time , the EU has its own responsibility because , as has rightly been said , EU-Georgia relations will become a test case for the success of the Eastern Partnership and the EU 's role in the region .
Considering the importance of Georgia , I wonder whether Georgia was discussed during the recent EU-Russia Summit , because Russia is not implementing the six-point agreement and the EU mission is in the embarrassing situation of not being allowed into the separatist territories .
The EU should take a stronger position on this case .
Commissioner , you mentioned EUR 46 million in aid .
I would just like to ask whether that aid will reach Georgia this year .
What will be the timetable ?
( PL ) I think that in the light of our discussion , we should go back to what Mrs Malmström said at the outset - Georgia needs a new and extensive openness from the European Union .
This should comprise macrofinancial assistance along with the rapid and immediate commencement of talks , as far as this is possible , on an association agreement .
It should also comprise the commencement of talks - this is my third point - on visa facilitation , and , finally , we should enable Georgia to guarantee its security by opening up the way for it to join NATO .
However , I think that , today , not even this matter is the reason why I want to speak in this part of the discussion .
I would like to put a rhetorical question to Mrs Ferrero-Waldner : do you not wonder why almost all the speakers have drawn attention to the matter of the Sarkozy Plan ?
Please answer this question .
Please tell us why , neither in your initial speech nor in your further statements , nor in Mrs Ashton 's statements , has no one heard an answer in the form of a simple assessment of whether the Sarkozy Plan has been implemented or not ?
Is it really the case that the most important institutions of the European Union are not worthy of a clear statement from you on this matter ?
Mr President , yesterday in Ireland , a conference addressed the topic of aid and Eastern Europe .
One of the countries we spoke about was Georgia , and it was really refreshing to hear how much progress had been made for a particular group of individuals with no voice - children with disabilities , both intellectual and physical , and young adults - but also deeply depressing to learn that those involved believe that they are now set back by 10 years because of the conflict .
I would just ask , because I was involved yesterday , that you bear in mind the most vulnerable when we are doing trade agreements and having conversations .
This was a very important debate here , but the horrific humanitarian situation has been spoken about by other colleagues , and there is a group of people who is always forgotten ; I just wanted their voice to be heard here today .
( PL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have to bear in mind that Georgia is a small country , albeit situated in an extremely strategic position in the Southern Caucasus , a fact which causes a situation of conflict with its powerful northern neighbour , Russia .
So I am grateful to the Commissioner for her declaration that the aid for which Georgia has been waiting for so long will be released tomorrow .
Please let us remember that when Georgia embarked on the road to democratic reform and decided to be more closely tied with western Europe than with Russia , as it had been for decades and perhaps even centuries , it lost an economic partner which was buying 80 % of its production .
We have done nothing to move into the vacuum and buy goods produced in Georgia to ensure that the country is able to function .
In relation to this , I very much approve of the declaration , as I do the announcement concerning a macrofinancial plan for Georgia .
There is one more thing : Commissioner , we must not consider Georgia in the political sphere as an entirely distant partner , because Georgia is trapped in an unbelievably complicated geopolitical situation .
In relation to this , I do not imagine that , during the talks which the European Union holds with Russia , nothing at all is said about the situation in Georgia .
I do not want to mention the six-point Sarkozy Plan again , because everyone has done this , but we must remember that our contacts with such a powerful partner as Russia , which are extremely important for us of course , must also have reference to our smaller partners , which are near and dear to us .
Mr President , politics is merely a job when it is self-serving .
It becomes a vocation when it helps others - when the Goliaths come to the aid of the Davids .
In this instance , the European Union is the Goliath coming to the aid of Georgia , the David , and I welcome that .
It has , however , another Goliath alongside it in the form of Russia , with a different agenda for Georgia .
It is important that the European Union flex its muscles in resisting that unwarranted intrusion .
I was in Bonn last week at the EPP Congress , and there the President of Georgia spoke .
He outlined the efforts the country was making in dealing with corruption , its agenda for reform to ensure economic growth , and also its desire to have a free trade agreement .
My question is : when does the Commission see that free trade agreement being brought into being , when the conditions for it are met ?
Mr President , we are discussing the aspirations of Ukraine , Moldova and Georgia .
These are similar aspirations to be closer to the European Union .
It seems that this is a problem for us .
I wonder what will happen in 10 years ' time , when those aspirations turn to disappointment and there are no more aspirations to join the European Union , with no expectations for anything more .
This will be a much more difficult situation for us .
Georgia is the country with the highest support from society for membership of the European Union , and the highest support for NATO , of all the Eastern Partnership countries .
There is also the greatest progress in market reforms .
If we do not move more quickly , we will have the same situation as with Turkey , where society is backing away from its European aspirations .
That will be a really dangerous situation in spite - and maybe because - of other political movements around these countries .
We see what is going on in Russia , and when the aspirations of Georgia for European Union membership falter , we may face a situation that is quite dangerous for all European Union countries .
Mr President , I know that there is a great deal of interest in this matter .
Those of you who have followed this closely will also know that the Swedish Presidency has devoted a lot of time to Georgia .
The Swedish Foreign Minister , Carl Bildt , had the opportunity last Thursday to discuss Georgia with you in the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
The EU will continue to provide considerable political , technical and financial support to Georgia .
This will , in all probability , involve continued appeals for respect for Georgia 's territorial sovereignty and integrity and continuation of the EU monitoring mission , as well as our very important role of mediator in the Geneva talks .
The Geneva talks are the relevant platform .
These talks are progressing slowly , but they are nevertheless progressing and all of the parties are represented there .
We will also provide further financial assistance for the aftermath of the conflict .
As many of you have pointed out , the humanitarian situation is still of great concern .
Mrs McGuinness is , of course , right to say that it is the most vulnerable who are suffering as a result of this .
In the meeting with our Russian dialogue partners , the EU will continue to emphasise that it is necessary to implement the six-point cease-fire agreement and the subsequent implementing measures - the withdrawal of forces to the positions held on 7 August 2008 .
Perevi , Akhalgori and Upper Kodori will be mentioned in particular , just as many of you have done .
The closure of the OSCE mission in Georgia and the UN observer group has resulted in the removal of crucial elements of the important international security structure .
Now , the only remaining international presence is the EU monitoring mission .
It is making a significant contribution to security and to normalisation .
That is why it is so important for the monitoring mission to have access to the breakaway regions .
It is important for Georgia 's security and stability .
This is an important point that the EU will continue to emphasise to all of the relevant dialogue partners .
The EU will , of course , continue to support Georgia 's territorial integrity , but we also have a strategic interest in maintaining contact with the breakaway regions and in keeping open a window to the outside world for the populations of these separatist areas .
This may help us gradually to lay the foundations for a solution to the conflict through continued EU involvement and measures to promote trust across the administrative borders and through contact between the different populations .
The EU will continue to be very active in this matter .
The Commission and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner are very committed to this , as is the European Parliament , and that is something for which I am very grateful .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , thank you for the frank discussion that we have had today .
I thought that many of you knew what we have been doing for Georgia .
Georgia has received a lot of support from us , both political and also economic and humanitarian , but it seems as if we have not done anything .
This is not true at all .
First of all , the war was stopped by the European Union and by Mr Sarkozy .
Second , you are right , there is a six-point plan which , unfortunately , has not yet been fully implemented , but every time we work with the Russians , this is on our agenda .
This is absolutely clear .
It is right , as the Council President said , that the only platform where we really start to go on , even slowly , is in Geneva , and so the Geneva talks have to go on .
We also need support and openness from both sides , because it is a difficult conflict and we are , so to speak , the mediators in this conflict .
This is the number one political issue .
We do have to continue and we know very well that Russia is a huge partner on the other side .
At the same time , we have a common neighbourhood , and therefore we always speak quite clearly about these issues with Russia .
We do need , as I said here , the attitude on both sides to go forward , which is what I said in my speech if you will recall .
This is the first point .
The second concerns the economic and humanitarian front , where we are working very closely indeed .
The EUR 500 million package was the biggest package I could bring through .
There is not so much money in the neighbourhood policy that I could have gone for , but this is what we did because we thought Georgia needed that after the war and all the damage that had been done - particularly for the most vulnerable .
I myself have visited the IDP camps and I have visited the houses that have been restored with our programmes .
I can tell Mrs Lunacek that I myself signed an agreement with the Georgians where they absolutely commit themselves to not using one cent of the European Union money .
We always control our money , so normally there should not be a cent of our money going to re-arming on the Georgian side .
I cannot , of course , control what Georgia is doing on other issues , but on our money I can be clear .
There are other things that have been mentioned .
For instance , the two teenagers that are still in detention in South Ossetia .
These are issues that we do of course mention to the Russians .
We talk about them , but for the moment , unfortunately , we have no solution to it and we ourselves cannot enter South Ossetia .
As regards the principle , of course we are clear on the principle .
There is territorial integrity and there is sovereignty , and this is what we clearly say of Georgia . Absolutely .
It is , however , one thing to speak about principles and another thing to implement these principles immediately .
This , unfortunately , is sometimes quite difficult .
Let me also speak about the Tagliavini report .
The very fact that this report has been publicised is a very important one .
You know we supported this independent report .
I have known Mrs Tagliavini for ages from when I was OSCE chairperson-in-office in the year 2000 as foreign minister of my country .
She was then my special representative for the Caucasus .
She is a very courageous , independent lady , and I must say she has made an excellent report .
This also helps because the report has made the facts clear .
We draw the lessons from that , but we can only continue helping Georgia by diplomatic means .
Having said all of that , I can also say that we have been doing an enormous amount of work first on the neighbourhood policy to the east , and now on the Eastern Partnership .
The other day , we had a very important ministerial meeting under the Swedish Presidency with the six foreign ministers of the Eastern Partnership including the foreign minister from Georgia .
There , we also discussed all the possibilities , but would you really think that we can give everything to every country without them doing their part ?
We cannot .
We have to ask them also to do their part .
That also means on trade , as a free and deep trade agreement can only be there when the right legislation is there .
We cannot just ask them to come into the European Union if the Council is not unanimous on it .
These are things where one has to see one side and the other , but we are supporting Georgia more than anybody else .
So I would rather hope that this policy , as some have said , is really supported by you .
This is a policy where we try to help them as much as we can , but we also want to see the right behaviour from Georgia .
The debate is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.55 and resumed at 21.00 )

Responses to relaunch the economy in the Member States of the European Union in Central and Eastern Europe
The next item is the Commission Statement on responses to relaunch the economy in the Member States of the European Union in Central and Eastern Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economic crisis has affected the whole of Europe .
It could be said that it has affected the whole world , but here in the European Union , it has probably particularly affected the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the new Member States , for a series of reasons .
Firstly , because they are obviously more fragile economies than the more mature , industrialised and consolidated economies of Western Europe , and also because they are economies which do not have a financial system in which the crisis has been generated , and have therefore been dependent on a high proportion of direct investment from outside in order to finance their growth .
When the crisis erupted , and particularly when the crisis worsened in 2008 , this investment came to a halt , and left these economies in need of funding in order to finance their growth , which they were unable to substitute using their savings and internal resources .
Having said this , it is also obvious that not all the economies of Central and Eastern European countries have been equally affected .
Some economies were better prepared to withstand the blows of the crisis .
Some economies had had the wisdom before the crisis to move forward political reforms that have given their model for growth a more solid foundation .
In any case , the European Union , and the Commission as part of the European institutions as a whole , reacted to the crisis , in particular , with a series of measures that responded to a specific concern which , in relative terms , were more beneficial to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe .
The European Economic Recovery Plan , which was adopted at the end of 2008 , is a plan based on fiscal stimuli which have logically been more powerful in the large economies of the euro area in Western Europe .
Nevertheless , by encouraging internal supply in Western European countries , these stimuli have enabled the market to continue to be a source of growth through external demand for Central and Eastern European countries .
In addition to the European Economic Recovery Plan , decisions adopted by the European institutions have increased lending by the European Investment Bank .
The figures for 2009 have obviously not been closed , but I can forecast that lending by the European Investment Bank at the end of this year will probably be over 50 % more than its lending in 2007 , the year before the crisis .
The European Investment Bank has given specific priority to its financing operations in Central and Eastern European countries in a series of lines and activities .
In order to do so , it has used instruments that the Bank had started before the crisis , like Jeremie , Jessica and Jaspers and other actions .
Also , as it is not strictly a European Union institution , the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) has stepped up its action under the impetus of the European countries and the European Commission , who are shareholders in the bank .
The Structural Funds have also played a positive role , which they always do for countries that need to benefit from the cohesion policy , but when the crisis began , decisions were made , for example , to increase the resources that could be advanced from the Structural Funds for countries that benefit from them , in particular for Central and European countries .
Unfortunately , the Council did not support a Commission initiative for the European Social Fund to provide 100 % of the funding during the crisis ( 2009 and 2010 ) for a series of activities to support workers and active policies in the labour market .
As you already know , the balance of payments facility was an instrument that had not been used since 1993 .
This instrument is used to provide finance for countries with difficulties securing external finance , due to their balance of payments , or for countries with difficulties financing their budgetary needs .


Its ceiling has increased from EUR 12 billion to EUR 50 billion , which was at the initiative of the Commission and agreed by the Council , and out of those EUR 50 billion , around EUR 15 billion has been used in financial support operations for three Central and Eastern European countries that are Members of the European Union : Hungary , Latvia and Romania .
Finally I would like to mention the so-called Vienna Initiative , promoted and encouraged by the European institutions , along with international financial institutions .
It has coordinated the action of the private financial system which , in many of these countries , is basically organised around Western European banks that have invested in Central and Eastern European countries and have subsidiaries and offices there .
The Vienna Initiative has meant that action could be coordinated , including maintaining the positions and risks taken by private banks in those countries .
It has been possible to maintain a financial system at maximum level that helps to finance the consequences of the crisis and the investment needed to come out of the crisis .
This is in the face of announcements of excessive risks taken by some Western European banks established in those countries .
The truth is that so far , we have not had to mourn any ' victims ' among those banks , but rather they have maintained a reasonable level of capitalisation and financial activity in the context of the difficult conditions that the system is operating under .
We are already seeing positive signs .
We are , of course , also seeing significant challenges .
This means that we have not finished .
We need to continue paying specific attention to how best to use the instruments available to the European institutions in order to help these countries to set off on the path towards recovery and emerge from the crisis .
If you will allow me to give you a positive example , I will tell you about Poland , which is the only country in the European Union that is continuing to maintain positive growth and has not had negative growth at any time throughout the crisis .
The only one in the whole of the European Union is a country of Central and Eastern Europe and one of the new Member States .
Finally , I would like to mention the importance of the euro as an anchor for the strategies for withstanding the blows of the crisis and emerging from it .
The euro is a point of reference to guide the appropriate strategies for emerging from the crisis .
There is a country in this region that joined the euro area in the middle of the crisis , Slovakia , and yesterday , the Slovakian authorities held a conference in Bratislava welcoming the way in which the euro has protected them from the worse consequences of the crisis and is helping them to get through it in much better conditions than they would have had to withstand if they did not belong to the euro area .
Another country in the region , Estonia , wants to join the euro area and integrate its currency into the euro in 2011 .
So far , the indicators and the degree of compliance with the criteria of the Maastricht Treaty , now the Treaty of Lisbon , indicate that this target is possible .
We will not be able to guarantee this until the corresponding convergence report is published in the spring , but it is possible that Estonia will be in the euro area in 2011 .
For the countries outside the European Union that are part of the region , candidate countries or potential candidate countries , joining the European Union is also a powerful anchor for ensuring that they have adequate strategies and policies .
It is therefore true that there are a great many difficulties .
It is true that these countries have more fragile economies .
It is true that the consequences of a crisis such as the one that we are going through are , for the citizens of those countries , infinitely more painful than the consequences for citizens of countries with social protection systems and with much more established , stronger and more consolidated welfare systems .
It must be said , however , that the instruments available to the European institutions and the very fact that they belong to the European Union and have the opportunity to be part of Economic and Monetary Union is a positive factor rather than an obstacle in terms of tackling a crisis such as the one that we are experiencing .


on behalf of the PPE Group . - ( LV ) Mr President , Mr Almunia , in order to help the economies of the Member States in Central and Eastern Europe to recover , there are two possible approaches : giving fish or giving a fishing-rod .
Of course , what is best is to give a fishing-rod .
The difficulty is to know what kind of fishing-rod it should really be .
The cornerstone and gauge of recovery is the creation of new jobs .
In order for this to happen , investment is needed .
One of the main obstacles to investment in the region is a lack of clarity about the stability of the national exchange rate and the introduction of the euro .
At the moment , the introduction of the euro in the new Member States is like a horse-race , with each state trying to break away from the pack and reach the euro area .
It may happen that in this crisis situation , some Member States do themselves harm ; for instance , by rapidly reducing budget expenditure , they increase unemployment over the level that their economies can withstand .
It may also happen that one Member State , in joining the euro area , may damage the economy of a neighbouring state outside the euro area , by attracting investment to itself and increasing the level of unemployment in the neighbouring state .
The European Union is formed on the basis of the solidarity principle .
When the EU increased the number of its Member States in 2004 , a unified strategy for the reception of these Member States into Europe was developed and adopted .
I believe that the European Commission should have a rethink on the process of introducing the euro and should prepare a clear strategy for its introduction which does not indirectly induce Member States to cause harm to themselves or their neighbours .
It is not necessary to change the stability criteria , but a joint plan and timetable should be developed for the whole region , so that we can introduce a single currency in Europe using an established procedure that is clear to all .
This would be the fishing-rod that would help the economies of that region to recover , by opening the door to investment and the creation of new jobs .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you rightly pointed out , Commissioner Almunia , the consequences of this serious financial and economic crisis have been felt in countries worldwide and naturally in those in Europe .
In the EU , it is the weakest countries , the ones we are discussing now , that have been hit the hardest .
These are countries which joined the Union only recently and which are outside the euro area .
It is therefore important to remember them and identify the most effective actions so that they can be part of Europe as a whole and subsequently participate in life in Europe on an equal footing with others .
There accordingly need to be monetary policy interventions , starting with those of the European Central Bank , since unless we help increase their GDP and invest in their production systems , they will not be able to redress the imbalances that are currently weighing them down , satisfy the Maastricht criteria and join the euro area .
It is also important , as you mentioned , for there to be other actions such as easier access to the resources provided by the European funds and EIB financing .
I believe , however , that we should never forget that these actions must be carried out within a framework of simultaneous actions for other weak countries in Europe too .
It is not just a question of the countries that we are discussing today , as we are all unfortunately aware , and for all these reasons , we can no longer delay the creation of a European financing system capable of supporting investment with a comprehensive vision for Europe .
I am referring to the establishment of a fund financed by Eurobonds , which I believe to be the only practical solution available to Member States and the European Union .
The time has now come at this stage to show political courage and foresight with regard to the desire to overcome the crisis and create the conditions for the competitive development of Europe , a development that would ensure the well-being of all Europeans .
Mr President , the reason why we , along with other Members here present , have requested this debate is because a new iron curtain has emerged with the economic crisis , Commissioner .
This monetary iron curtain separates those outside the euro area from those within it .
Many problems that today affect the majority of the Baltic States , for example - you mentioned Poland , but I could , of course , mention Bulgaria , Romania , Hungary - are due to the fact that they are not in the euro area .
Therefore , they must continue to use their local currency , and this is giving rise to harmful , devastating consequences at present .
We may well talk of an economic recovery , but in those countries , there is no economic recovery for the time being .
In some of these countries , the unemployment rate is over 20 % , and public sector salaries have had to be cut by more than 20 % .
The figures relating to their economic growth are really very negative .
The important thing is that we allow them to join the euro area as soon as possible .
However , at present , they are suffering the harmful effects of this situation .
Clearly , the idea is not to change the conditions of the Stability and Growth Pact - no one has asked for that .
They should not be changed because , as you rightly said , the euro area has acted as a defence against the economic and financial crisis .
All the same , we must help these countries in a different way , not by changing the conditions of the Stability and Growth Pact , but by offsetting the negative effect that they are suffering because they are outside the system .
If we do not do so , it will be several more years before they join the euro area .
We have made a number of suggestions , we have drawn up a six-point plan and asked the European Commission to take it into account .
We therefore need the European Central Bank , the European Commission and the European Investment Bank to cooperate with one another .
Which measures must be implemented in this context ?
Firstly , the Central Bank must also provide liquidity to local banks .
It has granted liquidity to banks in Western Europe ; it has also indirectly provided resources to Swedish banks , for example , but some local banks have received nothing from the European Central Bank .
These six points incorporate other proposals .
For example , why not increase the proportion of EU funding and reduce the proportion of State funding of social , regional and cohesion funds , and so on ?
Indeed , the Member States do not currently have the budgetary resources to finance certain projects .
We could therefore move towards having , for example , 75 % of funding by Europe and 25 % by the Member States , in particular , the Baltic States .
I have mentioned just two of the six very practical ideas that we have put forward and on which a decision can be taken by the European Central Bank or by the Commission or the European Investment Bank .
This is what these countries need .
Personally speaking , I do not see it as progress that the International Monetary Fund is intervening in these countries and dictating how they should behave .
In my view , it is up to Europe instead to decide what must be done .
That is the request we are making .
In any case , I have been to these countries and I have been shocked by the fact that these people feel abandoned by the European Union in their daily struggle .
I urge the next European Commission to come back with a credible plan for the states of Central and Eastern Europe and , more specifically , for the Baltic States .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I come from Latvia , a country hit heavily by the financial crisis .
Due to the irresponsible policy of right-wing governments , Latvia risked going bankrupt without financial assistance from outside .
Now we are speaking about different financial and economic solutions which could change the situation for the better .
Of course , we must properly discuss all the solutions , including the speedy introduction of the euro .
In the meantime , I am afraid that the financial and economic perspective is only one side of the coin .
We have to discuss the social perspective as well .
Now , the EU institutions are perceived as the ' bad guys ' by many residents of Latvia : the bad guys who make our poor government cut pensions and benefits , the bad guys who are to blame for social exclusion and poverty .
There are many politicians who cultivate this perception , mainly inside the ruling coalition , because , if people believe that the current social crisis is our government 's fault , the government will not survive the forthcoming general elections .
Do I believe that Latvia and other countries of the region urgently need the EU 's helping hand ?
Yes , I do .
But I strongly believe that we need a strong mechanism for control and we need very strict conditions in the field of social policy .
EU money should first of all go to save common people , not banks or state bureaucracy .
Therefore , using this opportunity , I would ask all my colleagues and fellow Members to sign Written Declaration 0056 / 2009 , which was initiated by representatives of three political groups , on social conditionality for European Union help .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you , Mr Verhofstadt , for tabling the question .
However , the posing of the question during this evening 's debate may confuse European Union citizens in Western Europe .
' Look , we have to suffer from the financial crisis too , because Eastern and Central Europe , through its clumsy governance , has created these problems for itself and also for us ' .
Such a view debases the already seriously impaired confidence in the European Union 's cohesion policy .
The example of the Baltic States , however , shows that we are in the same boat .
The pursuit by the Scandinavian banking sector of market share and high profits in practice squeezed national currencies in the Baltic States out of the loans market , particularly the home mortgage loans market .
With a fixed national exchange rate , the civil liability of borrowers towards lenders was very high : all the currency risk in the value of an overpriced pledge was borne by borrowers .
In late 2008 , in tense talks between the Latvian Government , the International Monetary Fund , the European Commission and the Swedish Government , a decision was taken to buy up the second largest commercial bank , using only Latvian taxpayers ' money , and to keep the national exchange rate strong .
Thus , we Latvians , having over many years lost our revenue , competitiveness and , possibly , quality of society , saved the banking sector of the Scandinavians and other investors , at least in the Baltic States , since the domino effect in the event of banks failing would go far beyond Latvia 's borders and would reach as far , let us say , as Scandinavian pension funds , as the banks ' shareholders .
Yes , the European Commission helped us , and the International Monetary Fund financed this choice , but the lion 's share of the loan goes to stabilise the banking sector .
By not allowing a default and by retaining a strong exchange rate , we devalued our economy by 20 % of GDP , but in reality , we were helping the neighbouring Estonians , whose advantage , of course , was having had a responsible budget balance for many years , to introduce the euro as early as 2011 .
It appears even more odd that for Europe 's monetary union , an example like Estonia is even crucially necessary .
This , as it were , shows that the Maastricht criteria for the introduction of the euro work even in times of crisis .
It is not that we are not pleased for the Estonians , but our sacrifice , in buying the bank , was a certain measure of solidarity in not foisting off misfortune upon our neighbours and aggressive investors , too .
We only wanted to see a certain solidarity from European financial policy makers , including on the subject of the barrier to new euro area states .
Politicians in Latvia had to take extremely harsh decisions , which the majority of my fellow Members in the older European countries would not have to deal with even in their most terrible nightmares .
However , it is not within our power to take away the currency risk of private debt from our citizens , and we do not want to behave like hooligans by unilaterally introducing the euro or allowing the euro to circulate in tandem with our national currency .
However , the goal of our demographically ageing society cannot be to spend many years exchanging every second lat earned into euros to pay back the banks , while in the evenings , offering up prayers that the lat will hold fast against the euro .

Thank you , Mr President , in my view , on the issue of the modernisation of social policy and assistance to the states of Central and Eastern Europe , there is a lot of rhetoric , but not much actually happening .
A new social policy has not been fully worked into the macro-economics of the European Union .
The budget is small , and is not keeping pace with the enlargement of the European Union .
Striving to extend its area of influence , the European Union often helps countries outside the EU more than the new EU states .
Therefore , it is no accident that in Latvia , for example , the majority of inhabitants are today worse off than before accession to the European Union .
More than 90 % of pensioners are surviving on income which is below subsistence level .
Unemployment in Latvia has reached the 20 % mark , gross domestic product has fallen by 19 % , the State debt exceeds the annual budget , and pensions have fallen by 10 % .
The people are protesting , leaving Latvia , announcing indefinite hunger strikes or offering to sell their internal organs in order to get money to keep their families .
The number of suicides is rising .
The European Union 's neoliberal social security policy must be changed .
Capitalism caused the crisis , but it is workers and pensioners who are paying to find a way out of it .
Investment by the major capitalist multinational companies and banks in solving the problems caused by the crisis is minimal .
The European Union is allowing the upper classes and the banks to be saved with the tax revenue of the state , that is to say , with the people 's money .
The countries of Eastern Europe want an equal allocation of subsidies to agriculture , since at the moment , subsidies are more concentrated towards the older Member States , which , at the same time , distorts the free market in labour .
There must be an end to the unequal approach in the calculation and payment of direct payments , and to the separation of these payments from the manufacture of specific products .
The European Commission and Parliament must democratically adopt regulations to protect not only the interests of large producers and bankers but also the needy in the rich , democratic European Union .
The economic and financial crisis has had a much harsher effect on the transforming countries of Central and Eastern Europe than on the stable democracies of Western Europe .
It is therefore right to look for ways to counter this unfavourable economic development .
We must not forget , however that miracles happen only in fairy tales .
Therefore , the primary and fundamental requirement in terms of changes for the better is a responsible financial and economic policy of the government and a modern , right-wing working legislature in every affected country .
Only then will it be possible through targeted industrial measures to play a part in gradually assisting economic development .
If such assistance is to be effective , its financial resources must not be spent on social benefits or consumption , nor must they be spent on artificially-created nonsensical jobs .
It should not be possible , for example , for a government to use such assistance to resume the operation of an old thermal power station which produces more emissions than electrical energy only because it allegedly creates a few new jobs .
If we really want to help the affected countries , we must support only financial projects that have a high degree of innovation and which consistently conserve the environment .
Let us take care that the funds invested in these support programmes contribute to a restructuring of companies and bring a long-term effect to the affected countries , and thereby to the whole of Europe as well .
( HU ) First and foremost , we should find a solution to avoiding a similar crisis in the future .
The mess caused by the global financial system is sweeping across the world , having a direct impact on the real economy because companies have no access to credit , which is the vital lifeblood of the economy .
The lesson from this is obvious .
It is clear that we must get rid of the belief placed in the market 's self-regulation and supremacy , and accept and enforce the state 's regulatory role .
We talk about economic recovery , but obviously , the ultimate aim we want to achieve through this is to protect jobs .
This means that priority is given to support for small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe as well , as they actually provide the majority of jobs .
The terms for gaining access to credit are a fundamental issue .
Certainly , the banks have operated sensibly , as we heard from Mr Almunia .
This applies to Hungary as well , for instance , where all the commercial banks are subsidiaries of foreign owned banks .
Therefore , because of their prudence , they have tried to withhold credit in such a way that it has also paralysed the domestic economy .
Direct subsidies , which the EU also allows , are also obviously required , but they should not be given to those governments , like the current Hungarian Government , which primarily supports the settlement of multinational firms rather than small and medium-sized enterprises .
Today , we discussed the matter of the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development when dealing with the modification to the European Commission 's 2009 Finance Bill .
In its draft , the Commission has taken the significant and drastic measure of holding back these funds , even though they are precisely earmarked for maintaining the rural population .
Why are we talking about this region separately ?
The reason is that it has become much more vulnerable than the western part of Europe .
We need to go back in time to the 1990s , when it became clear that our hope - that our economy in Hungary would also become independent in this democracy - was in vain .
This region suffered from the ever-increasing burden of the instalment repayments covering the inherited debts , as well as the using up of its cheap natural and human resources , while all these generated very significant financial revenue in the Western countries .
This is why I feel obliged to say now , with proper justification , that this region should receive more support , as this is a matter of obtaining partial compensation .
( HU ) Ladies and gentlemen , the crisis has demonstrated that the countries of Central and Eastern Europe outside the euro area are much more vulnerable than those where the single currency is used .
As a result of their dependence on strong exports and foreign capital , as well as the population 's high level of foreign currency debt , the rate of recovery is also slower than in those countries enjoying the security of the euro area .
If the solidarity between Member States does not work in practice , rather than just as a sound bite in slogans , the European Union 's internal cohesion will diminish , thereby hampering the whole EU 's performance .
However , we do not need any new EU instruments to achieve this solidarity , especially not handouts .
The existing opportunities and resources must be used sensibly .
In this respect , the European Central Bank can help in constantly maintaining the liquidity of the banks in the region .
The European Investment Bank can also help by providing targeted credit to the region 's small and medium-sized enterprises , while the EU 's institutions can help by adapting the rules for using the money from the Cohesion and Structural Funds to suit the extreme situation .
I would particularly like to draw your attention to the fact that many people like to treat Central and Eastern European countries en masse , even though these countries are very diverse , with different crisis exit strategies as well .
For instance , after nearly eight years of incompetent socialist administration , Hungary has used up all its reserves .
At the moment , it is forced to exercise restraint , which is in stark contrast to the practical actions adopted in other European countries for managing the crisis , based on economic recovery .
While the Western European governments are already thinking about drawing up their exit strategies , some countries in Central and Eastern Europe which have been worst affected by the crisis are still facing major recession in 2010 as well .
Therefore , when it comes to devising exit strategies , it is vitally important to have some way of differentiating between countries .
EU leaders should not devise standard rules which would only exacerbate further the situation of some countries and that of their population .
When drawing up the new financial system regulations , attention must be focused on ensuring that the tightening of capital requirements does not generate unfair competition between banks .
The banks in Central and Eastern Europe which have turned out to be healthy have not received any injection of capital from anyone .
This means that they would only find it more difficult to deal with the stricter capital requirement regulations than their rescued counterparts in Western Europe .
This would result in a decline in their desire for credit , which was not very great anyway , with small and medium-sized enterprises ultimately ending up the victims of this situation .
We must avoid this scenario at all costs .
( ET ) Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mr Almunia sincerely for his very effective work up to this point .
For all the Member States of the European Union , there are many common problems and , at the same time , each country has its own economic policy and its own specific problems , and we must definitely all be self-critical here .
The argument that only the new Member States of the European Union have been especially severely affected by the crisis is not true .
Look at the countries where the banks have needed economic support - they are mainly the old Member States , not the new ones .
Similarly , fiscal problems are bigger in the euro area than outside it .
At the same time , it is clear that banks operating across borders did not create an additional risk .
The situation was exactly the opposite .
The banks which operated in various countries were the most secure , and they were able to stabilise the situation in many recipient partner states .
The banks which had problems are the banks which simply made bad commercial decisions , as was the case , for example , with the Royal Bank of Scotland .
Mr President , I would like to join the previous speaker in thanking Commissioner Almunia .
He has a clear view on the differences in different countries in Central and Eastern Europe and the current state of their economic and financial situation .
The Commissioner mentioned Estonia .
I come from Estonia , and it has not been an easy job to fulfil our aspirations of joining the euro area , but the one thing I think we might share with the other countries around is self-responsibility .
I have not heard the word ' self-responsibility ' in this assembly in this debate so far ; there is only the word ' solidarity ' .
How can we expect solidarity if we have big world competitors like China and India racing ahead ?
I think in the European Union we should be much more pragmatic and think what our national governments are responsible for .
It is difficult in these times to make cuts .
In Estonia , it has been very difficult to cut expenditure in state government , yet we have been doing this for years .
In the good years - in the booming years - we were able to make reserves , and nobody else - only the Member States ' governments - is responsible for that .

( PL ) Mr President , I represent Poland - a country which perhaps does not have to worry about the crisis in the way that , for example , Hungary or Latvia do , but in my country , in spite of government propaganda , unemployment is also clearly rising , and a demonstration today in Warsaw was attended by protesting shipyard workers who have just received the last part of their redundancy money .
According to an analysis carried out by the National Bank of Poland , the dynamics of the recession in nine countries of Central and Eastern Europe were definitely stronger than in the countries of Western Europe .
What is worse , the differences between the individual countries of our region are greater than those in the ' old ' EU .
This is partly a result , not only of the greater stability of the economies of the old 15 , but also , and let us say this directly , of their greater ability to use or bend certain financial instruments which theoretically have been banned by the European Union .
The European Commission and Mrs Kroes turned a blind eye to the help which Berlin gave the German shipyards , but condemned Poland for doing the same and ordered the return of EU aid given to Polish shipyards .
It turns out in practice that some are more equal than others , and that double standards are being employed .
The French motor industry can receive more government aid than the motor industry in the countries of the ' new ' EU .
This only increases the disproportions .
The Commissioner spoke about the salutary role of the euro , but it was surely a joke .
Poland does not have the euro , and the crisis has affected us to a lesser degree than Slovakia , which has adopted the euro and where the consequences of the crisis are more serious than in Poland .
I appeal for solidarity , of which the representative of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) spoke , but I have the impression that he is , on this matter , a hypocrite .
In this context , hypocrisy is not a tribute to virtue .

Mr President , I expected Commissioner Almunia and indeed Mr Verhofstadt to perhaps offer us an explanation , and an analysis , for the reasons behind the disaster which has befallen most countries in Central and Eastern Europe in the economic arena .
Twenty years ago , we had an heroic movement of working people in those countries which brought down the Stalinist monolith .
Unfortunately , instead of replacing that monolith by going on to genuine democratic socialism , it was the restoration of capitalism which followed .
But that was what was prescribed by the entire political European capitalist establishment : the EU , the big business media all promised that capitalism would herald a bright new era for the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe .
The market was to be God ; competition was to be king .
So we have the imposition of the neoliberal agenda so beloved of the European Commissioner : the wholesale privatisation of public property - the robbery of public property , in fact - and putting the economies of these countries at the mercy of the sharks on the international financial markets .
We even set up a special bank to oversee this process , and it has been an unmitigated disaster .
The Baltic States are in freefall : Latvia 18 % down in the third quarter , unemployment at 20 % .
What do the EU Commission and Mr Verhofstadt offer ?
The prescription of the International Monetary Fund and of the western European banks .
Slash and burn the living standards of working people ; slash and burn public services .
Therefore , we have in Latvia the threat that half the hospitals will be closed by the end of this year .
The policies of the EU establishment mean a nightmare for the ordinary people of these countries - the threat of barbaric conditions for the ordinary people .
So I would commend the people of Central and Eastern Europe to reject this fatal prescription of the European Union establishment , nationalise their banks , put them under democratic control so that they invest for people and for jobs , nationalise or renationalise the major sectors of the economy , but this time under the control of working people so that they can plan their economy for people and not have themselves at the mercy of the sharks , of corporate Europe and financial Europe , which has brought about this dreadful disaster for the peoples of this region .
You may laugh , Commissioner , but I await your response .
( EL ) Mr President , thank you very much for giving me the floor and my thanks also to Commissioner Almunia for the very detailed report which he submitted to Parliament .
I was particularly gladdened by the fact that the Commission agreed to relax the Stability Pact , acknowledging of course that the strict Maastricht criteria , such as the 3 % , are very hard to achieve in times of serious economic crisis such as we are experiencing at present .
I should like , first of all , to highlight the fact that , in recent days and weeks , the country which I come from , Greece , has been under attack from a specific credit rating agency , a consultancy firm , as regards its creditworthiness .
This begs the question of whether we should seriously consider the creation of an EU agency to do this job , so that not just anyone can do it and so that it has nothing to do with hidden commercial or other competitive agendas .
I wish to voice the complaint that the European Union helps a great many third countries more than its members .
I also wish to call for the solidarity to be shown which my country , Greece , needs in order to deal with its problems .
( BG ) Thank you , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that the sensible policy for combating the crisis in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe must be based on the principle of a social market economy , unlike the suggestions made by the previous speaker .
This is why only a strong economy which respects the freedom of private ownership , the rule of law and personal liability can guarantee the cost of the sustainable social policy which our society deserves .
I firmly believe that our efforts and responsibility must be focused on a number of basic pillars .
Firstly , stable public finances .
An alarming number of Member States have high levels of national debt .
We need to be very vigilant and disciplined .
We must aim for budget deficits that are not only within the 3 % GDP limit , but also do our utmost to achieve balanced budgets .
As part of the Stability and Growth Pact , the European Commission and Council must closely monitor Member States for macroeconomic imbalances .
Secondly , we must support small and medium-sized enterprises .
The reason for this is not only that they provide more than 65 % of employment in Europe , but also that they offer the most flexibility and dynamic growth potential , especially during a crisis .
Thirdly , it is important for us to support the unemployed and the most vulnerable groups in our society , as well as to provide sufficient investments in education , obtaining qualifications and research .
The last point , and the number one priority for Member States who recently joined , is the expansion of the euro area .
I want to ask for your support and thank my fellow Members , as well as urge the European Commission and Member States to review their position with regard to the area 's expansion .
We need your understanding and solidarity , especially in countries like Bulgaria , where I am from , which has made great efforts to comply with the Maastricht criteria and also has one of the lowest budget deficits in the European Union , along with an extremely disciplined fiscal policy .
Fellow Members , I believe that it is important for us to continue with our joint , coordinated efforts in order to help our economies recover and emerge from the crisis stronger than before .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin my one-minute speech by thanking my fellow Members from countries in the euro area for considering it important to attend this debate .
Their very presence at this debate is where solidarity begins .
Without forgetting about Member States ' own responsibility , as my fellow Member said , the new Member States are facing general difficulties which definitely seem like objective difficulties to us .
One such difficulty is the enforced procedure for the twenty-year accession process , which caused serious economic problems for these countries and expected genuine social solidarity from their inhabitants .
Another one is these countries ' lack of the defence mechanism offered by the euro area , which meant that they were in a much more defenceless position when the crisis hit them .
Lastly , there is the proportion of SMEs and the people employed by them in these countries , compared to the figures for the European Union .
All in all , I firmly believe that , in order to achieve economic recovery in the countries of the European Union and Central and Eastern Europe , we must join forces and tackle a threefold objective involving employment , financial balance and economic growth .
I believe that the small and medium-sized enterprises package contained some of these elements .
At any rate , we ought to overcome somehow the financial difficulties of the small and medium-sized enterprise sector .
We would definitely need the European Central Bank 's assistance mechanisms to achieve this .
The smaller an enterprise is , the more difficult the access the EU has to it .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ET ) Mr President , above all , I would like to draw your attention to the three Baltic States , whose situation is perhaps the most serious of all in this region .
Here are some examples .
Estonia 's economic output has fallen by over 15 % , while the European Union average is -4.1 % .
In no other European country apart from the three Baltic States has there been a drop in economic output of more than 10 % .
In all three Baltic States , unemployment has risen up till now to more than 15 % .
I very much hope that the proposals by the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe to revive the economy and to improve the financial situation will receive very concrete attention and a response from the Commission .
Last year , Estonia had to cut the budget three times and shrink public sector expenses , and further cuts will aggravate the already serious social situation .
I very much hope that Estonia will join the euro area on 1 January 2011 , in order to create an area for economic growth and for the resolution of financial difficulties .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are currently in the middle of a financial and economic crisis and I believe that liquidity is the most important factor in a crisis , not only for banks and businesses , but in particular for employees .
Creditworthiness is , of course , always a prerequisite of liquidity and , therefore , the discussion about the creditworthiness of companies , banks and employees is particularly important .
Of course , creditworthiness is based on earnings , whether you are an employee , a company or a bank .
If you are not earning anything , you have , of course , no creditworthiness and no liquidity and this is where the negative spiral begins .
For this reason , it is highly important for us to ensure that no additional taxes are imposed in future on commodity trading .
Instead , we should be considering how we can make a financial transaction levy on purely financial transactions which are not based on a service or on commodity trading .
This levy could be used to refinance the banks and national budgets and could therefore form the basis for creating new jobs .
In reality , unemployment is completely unacceptable .
It is ultimately the main factor behind the emergence of the financial and economic crisis .
( RO ) According to the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union 's economy is a social market economy .
Our main concern must be to create new jobs , reduce unemployment and emerge from the economic crisis .
Member States in South-Eastern Europe are faced with huge deficits .
They must stimulate the creation of new jobs , while maintaining a long-term , sustainable fiscal policy .
Education , health , agriculture and development of the transport and energy infrastructure remain the main priorities for these Member States .
It is important for the level of agricultural subsidies in these Member States to be on a par with those in older Member States .
Assistance offered by the EU over a period of five years for balance of payments can be granted if the beneficiary Member States commit to reforming their system of taxes and duties or if they adopt measures to boost their administrative capacity in order to increase and achieve maximum absorption of European funds .
These Member States also need to be supported in modernising their heavily polluting industrial sectors in order to reduce emissions , but preserve jobs and ensure economic development .
I would like to add as a final point that I believe that support for these Member States requires the cohesion policy for the 2014-2020 period to continue to help Europe 's regions which are less well developed economically .
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the promoters of this debate , because it really is very important that we discuss the situation of economically weaker countries and countries outside the euro area .
That is particularly so at a time when we are discussing strategies for coming out of the crisis , when we will have to bear in mind the different situations the various countries are facing .
The situation is difficult in many economies in Eastern and Central Europe , but things are now starting to become difficult in many economies in the western part that are inside the euro area .
My country , Portugal , is an example .
The strategy must take account of the various situations , which differ from one country to another .
Several different paths can be taken .
It is extremely important to have a suitable monetary and budgetary policy , if possible , one that is increasingly determined by political criteria that take into account the need for liquidity for companies and small and medium-sized enterprises , that do not create or perpetuate obstacles that are very difficult for countries outside the euro area to overcome , and that exert pressure on national governments to carry out the medium- and long-term reforms that are needed .
To conclude , we have to move on from words to deeds .
Cohesion has to be effective .
( RO ) Thanks to the successful implementation of the European Economic Recovery Plan , we will notice a slight improvement next year , in 2010 , for the European Union 's Member States .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe have been affected in different ways by the economic crisis .
On the one hand , Poland has recorded slight economic growth , thereby avoiding the crisis , whereas Romania and Hungary have been severely affected by the economic crisis .
Romania has experienced an unprecedented economic crisis this year , which has also been exacerbated by the serious political instability triggered by the Socialists , who wanted to leave the government for electoral purposes due to the forthcoming presidential elections .
The presidential elections were only two months away .
The Socialists ' departure from government and the introduction of a motion of censure in parliament left Romania for two months with a temporary government with curtailed powers , which was unable to finalise and adopt a draft budget in parliament .
As a result , the International Monetary Fund postponed delivering to us the third tranche of a loan amounting to EUR 1.5 billion .
However , the Swiss Government decided to grant us a non-refundable loan amounting to approximately EUR 120 million .
My country has recorded 8 % negative economic growth and an unemployment level two points below the European Union average .
In the future , the EU requires a strategy focused on getting governments to step back from supporting their national economies .
However , this will not be possible in Romania until 2010 as we are not allowed to do so by the agreement signed with the IMF .
( RO ) I agree with the proverb that if you are coming from a fishing trip and you meet someone on the way , you should teach them to fish instead of giving them a fish .
However , we have to know that we need to teach them to fish .
I am referring on this point to the states which have recently joined the EU and still need to learn .
However , they cannot learn off their own bat .
We also need to give them the financial resources to do so .
I personally believe that a healthy economy is mainly made up of medium-sized enterprises .
As a result , economic , social and territorial cohesion policies must be targeted primarily at allocating European cohesion funds for this type of economy .
I would like to add that the EU 's economic , social and territorial cohesion policy has been neglected recently in terms of defining the European Union 's priorities .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) While listening to Mrs Băsescu , I cannot help but declare : ' O , les pauvres !
What holy simplicity in the European Parliament ' .
Returning to more serious matters , the economic contraction in the countries of Central Europe has reached drastic proportions .
The disparities are growing between these countries and the rich countries of Western Europe .
Furthermore , these countries ' capacities to generate economic and financial incentives remains at such a low level that it is almost negligible .
I want to draw the European Commission 's attention to the fact that , as a result of the social costs , the considerable rise in unemployment and swingeing budget cuts , these countries ' capacities to provide cofinancing for projects with European funding is also diminished .
All these factors may condemn the countries of Central Europe ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) I would like to put a few very simple questions to Mr Almunia , without the difficulties of translation .
What do you think about amending the Maastricht Treaty criteria to perhaps include a new criterion relating to the balance of payments , a maximum limit on the current account deficit and external debt ?
What do you think about the exchange rate policy ?
Is it better to maintain a fixed or flexible exchange rate during a recession ?
Also , with regard to the countries that have adopted the euro without being members of the European Union , is this an advantage or a disadvantage for them in the negotiations for taking on the responsibilities of the euro area in the future ?
( HU ) Mr President , influenza strikes down those who have a weak constitution .
Therefore , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe not only need a ' vaccination ' , but also something to fortify their constitution .
You know what I am referring to here .
The change of regime should be supported , not only the economy , although that should , of course , be supported too .
The reason is that , in a large number of the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , the economy , media and politics are still in the hands today of those who systematically ruined this region over the last 40 years .
Therefore , we should support what we call European values so that one country will not be debating - in the Europe of multilingualism - the need for a language law and another will not seek to sneak collective guilt as a mere footnote into the treaty , rather than European values .
Therefore , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe need ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( LT ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner , at one stage in 2006 , we Lithuanians actually also attempted to introduce the euro but , sadly , we missed the criteria by one hundredth .
Nevertheless , I really want to thank you , Commissioner , for the previous period , for the work done and for very good cooperation .
As for today 's problem , I really think that the conditions have changed and there really were some good proposals to review some things .
By no means am I proposing Maastricht criteria , rather very elementary things that will give every state some opportunity to regulate prices .
These are the various exchange rate mechanisms and many other things .
I would like the European Commission to bear this proposal in mind and thank Mr Verhofstadt who suggested that , in future , we might be able to sit down and calmly discuss how we can help the states of Eastern Europe , the Baltic States , as unemployment really ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

Mr President , thank you very much to Mr Verhofstadt , who initiated this debate , and to everyone who has spoken .
I am very grateful to you for your contributions and ideas .
Allow me to begin with a phrase used by Mr Verhofstadt .
He said that the fact that there are countries in Central and Eastern Europe that are not part of the euro area means that there is a ' rideau de fer ' ( an iron curtain ) .
I do not agree , because some of the Central and Eastern European countries that are not yet in the euro are in extraordinarily difficult economic situations , but there are others whose economic situations are no more difficult than those of more mature , more advanced economies .
The latter have belonged to the European Union for much longer , have been receiving finance from the European Investment Bank and the Structural Funds for much longer and are in the euro area , and they have equally serious or sometimes more serious problems than many of the economies of Central and Eastern Europe .
The problem is therefore not an iron curtain , which has not existed for twenty years , and it is not that the instruments available to the European Union are not being used in that region , because they are being used as I said in my initial speech .
Some of you have alluded to this while others appear to be unaware that instruments are being used to a much greater extent than we could have imagined when this crisis began in 2007 .
With the greatest respect , the problem is not how the criteria for entering the euro are interpreted , and we have debated this many times in this House .
That is not the problem .
There has been criticism in this House of those who , at the time , decided to allow some current members of the euro area to join it when it was not very clear whether the conditions had been fulfilled .
What we are now seeing is that the economies that are not well prepared to deal with a crisis such as this are suffering the most , both within and outside the euro area .
This is the problem that we should be concerned with .
Do we need to cooperate more ?
Of course we do .
Do we need to strengthen the European instruments ?
Of course we do .
The Commission is asking the Council and Parliament to do so .
Parliament is also asking the Commission to do so , and what I am asking Parliament is to ask the Council to do so , because the Commission 's proposal for the actions of the European Social Fund in 2009 and 2010 to be 100 % funded by European resources in those countries that benefit from the European Social Fund has not been accepted by the Council .
I would be very grateful if you could say this to the Council .
( FR ) This is the last time that I will be here in my role as Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , and I want to convey your position , which is also my own , to the ECOFIN Council .
Indeed , I believe that it is important , at times like these , to use the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund in a different way from that envisaged under normal circumstances .
I shall continue in my mother tongue .
( ES ) I agree .
I agree with many of the ideas in the six points that Mr Verhofstadt mentioned , which he included in a letter to the President of the European Commission and to the President of the European Investment Bank .
We agree in many respects .
In many respects , we are already acting in line with the points that he made .
I cited these straight away when I first spoke .
However , to think that by using European instruments , it is possible to avoid having to make difficult adjustments in order to deal with the consequences of a recession such as this shows a lack of awareness of the depth of the recession that we have suffered , both within and outside the euro area , in Central and Eastern Europe as well as in Western Europe .
It has been of such depth that we can imagine how , for example , Ireland has made such extremely difficult adjustments , not because the International Money Fund says so , or because it has been imposed by anyone from Brussels , but because the Irish authorities consider it to be the best way to adjust its economy as soon as possible and move forward with the same impetus that it had before the crisis .
The social consequences of these adjustments concern us and concern me personally , just as much or even more than they concern Parliament .
I can tell you , as it is public knowledge , that by using the balance of payments facility , the Commission has reduced many of the adjustments proposed by the governments of the countries benefiting from those resources .
We are going to continue to do this .
We have also tried , as far as possible , to preserve the amounts in the national budgets in order to be able to jointly finance the European funds , because otherwise , the reductions in investment expenditure that would have to be used to jointly finance European funds would have had very negative consequences in those countries .
We are , however , seeing positive signs , which it is also important to say in a debate such as this .
We would not have been able to say this in a similar debate in October 2008 .
In December 2009 , it must be said that there are positive signs , that we are beginning to see the light at the end of the tunnel , including in the countries that are suffering the most as a result of this crisis , such as Latvia , Lithuania , Estonia and Ireland .
We are still facing a great deal of uncertainty , and the obstacles that we have to tackle are very significant , but there is light at the end of the tunnel .
So once the recession has been overcome , will we go back to doing the same as we did before it ?
I really hope not !
As this is my last speech in Parliament on the economy as Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , allow me to give you five points that are not among Mr Verhofstadt 's six points , which we should all debate .
Firstly , in the light of our experience of this crisis , the countries of Central and Eastern Europe need a much more balanced model for growth .
They cannot depend solely and exclusively on finance from foreign investment .
Many of you have talked about small and medium-sized enterprises , and I agree with you .
They also cannot depend solely and exclusively , or almost exclusively , on foreign banks , because when it comes to supervising the actions of the financial system , it is very difficult to have supervisory authorities and a financial policy that serves the interests of each country if practically all the banks are not from that country and take strategic decisions based on the interests of their country of origin .
Having said that , it must be said that the foreign banks in those countries are conducting themselves extraordinarily well , as I have already said .
We must increase the take-up rate of the Structural Funds .
In the current financial perspectives , we have proposed a very large amount of resources for your approval , which can be channelled through the Structural Funds during this financial perspectives period .
In many cases , countries are not managing to use these resources , and there is still scope for action , in some countries amounting to 4 % of their annual GDP .
4 % of annual GDP and this money is not being used adequately .
We need to provide much more support for the integration of infrastructures , and we need to continue to debate how to do so .
There are bottlenecks in parts of the region that have not yet been overcome through infrastructures to integrate their economic area and productive fabric sufficiently within Western Europe .
Finally the consequences of the crisis are being felt more , in social terms , in the countries that do not have a sufficient social protection system or welfare state .
This is the case partly because they do not have a sufficient level of growth , income or wealth , but it is partly the case because , it has to be said , during the years prior to the crisis , in some of those countries , there was a ' less is more ' tax policy , and when money is needed to fund public action there is none , because there is no income .
This is also something to consider for the future .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
At a time when the global economic crisis is continuing to affect Europe , the states of Central and Eastern Europe are feeling its effects more intensely due to the existing disparities in economic development between the old Member States and those which have joined during the last accession rounds .
The economic crisis magnifies these disparities , placing additional pressures on the governments in these countries , which have to deal with stringent macroeconomic conditions , the social repercussions of the crisis , while also having to resolve problems arising from the vulnerability of the financial system and the sustainability of the public health care and social insurance systems .
Taking into account these economic and social policy constraints , I hope that the Commission will adopt an integrated plan focusing on the specific problems in this region .
It must be a plan which supports the efforts made by these states to maintain an economic and social balance .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe have taken up loans granted by the IMF , the World Bank and the European Union in an attempt to overcome their domestic problems .
However , the financial resources are not supplied at the rate required to support the measures adopted by these governments .
For this reason , I call for these resources to be made available more quickly and for a plan to be adopted which will support the economies in this region .
Romania and Bulgaria are feeling the full impact of the global economic recession which has hit the last two countries to join the European Union , against the background of a disparity with the developed economies of the other Member States .
The latest Eurobarometer survey highlights that the populations of both countries state that they are very greatly concerned about their countries ' economic path of development , as well as about the way in which the crisis is affecting every citizen personally .
On top of the conclusions of the Eurobarometer survey , the crisis 's impact , in the middle of winter , is only going to get worse .
National governments have the duty to adopt the best measures to enable them to get through the winter without any drastic social consequences .
The International Monetary Fund and the European Commission have been involved in helping Romania and Bulgaria , both financially and through providing expertise , by setting certain macroeconomic indicators .
Greater involvement by the European Commission in stabilising the Romanian and Bulgarian economies will have a beneficial impact across the whole of the European Union , which cannot afford any major imbalances at the moment .
All of the European Union 's Member States are being affected by the different aspects of the crisis .
However , it is evident that the new Member States are going through more difficult times than the well-tuned economies of the old Member States .
Solidarity is one of the European Union 's fundamental values , and an economic recession is a good time to show it .
At the start of the year , we were pleased to note that more than EUR 3 billion were earmarked for energy improvements as part of the economic stimulus package introduced at that time .
The European Commission rightly acknowledged that support was required for both the creation of alternative supply routes and the interconnection of energy networks .
However , our delight is mixed with a degree of disappointment .
If we look at the specific support sums , we can see that the support package neglects Central and Eastern Europe , the very region which is most vulnerable in terms of energy supply .
The Franco-Belgian gas interconnection receives more support than the Central and Eastern European interconnections .
While the Franco-Belgian interconnection will be the seventh , joining the existing six , this kind of infrastructure is very often lacking in the new Member States .
In addition to this matter , we were also unhappy that the energy efficiency improvements were completely left out of the support package .
However , this was precisely the area where the package 's main aim could have been easiest to achieve , namely , job creation .
Due to the shortcomings mentioned , we believe that two things are of paramount importance .
Firstly , future support plans must focus on those regions where energy investments have the greatest added value .
Secondly , energy efficiency , which is frequently mentioned in EU circles , cannot be forgotten when budget decisions are being made in the future , especially if we know that a more efficient use of energy can already produce absolutely spectacular results in the short term .
in writing . - I congratulate the Commission for the efforts they have made to help European economies .
The knowledge that the EU provides measures for those most in need reaffirms and ensures that we will all come out of this economic crisis stronger than before .
I would like to emphasise the importance of losing all currently existing barriers on economy , trade and free movement on the labour market .
Completing the integration of the European single market must be the main target in the short term .
Only this helps us effectively stand against any future crisis .
One of the strongest incentives the EU has is being part of the euro area .
The euro is an important incentive for investments and economic growth , reducing vulnerability .
I truly hope that my own country , Estonia , will succeed in fulfilling the criteria necessary for joining the euro area .
Estonia has one of the lowest foreign debts in Europe and has managed to put aside enough reserves during economic growth to be able now to face the crisis with its own means .
Furthermore , I am convinced that the current means from European funds and the prospects for joining the euro area soon will allow us to reduce unemployment efficiently next year .
Ladies and gentlemen , over a year after the greatest shock to American society since 9 / 11 , the declaration of bankruptcy by the Lehman Brothers Bank , we are wiser as the result of further experience .
What has happened in the last 12 months is clear proof of the erroneous assumptions of neoliberal politics and , as was the case with 9 / 11 , has persuaded us to look at the world in a different way .
The economic crisis has affected basically every part of the world , but , most importantly for me , it has affected many millions of Europeans .
The report published by the World Bank several days ago does not leave any doubt that the EU Member States in Eastern Europe need aid , and not only in the area of their internal affairs .
If the crisis can reduce 11 million inhabitants of Eastern Europe and Central Asia to poverty , with a further 23 million set to follow suit by the end of 2010 , under no circumstances can we be complacent .
Financial support is essential , but so is intellectual support , to establish suitable social programmes for the countries which are feeling the effects of the crisis the most .
During previous crises , families were able to save themselves by emigrating or by holding down several jobs .
Today 's crisis has a global dimension , which renders this type of solution impossible .
If we do not want to see more effects of the events of a year ago , we should mobilise significantly more European funds , make it our aim to promote employment and strengthen international cooperation .
All of these actions should focus on one thing - social policy .
The countries of Central and Eastern Europe have felt the effects of the economic crisis exceptionally hard .
Falling economic indicators were a reality of the last year in many countries , and not only in our region .
However , it should be stressed that different countries coped with the crisis with differing degrees of success .
The clear leader of countries in the region with favourable results is Poland .
As Mr Almunia admitted during the debate , Poland is the only country to have avoided a recession , maintaining a positive growth dynamic throughout the crisis .
Despite the fact that the economic situation in the region is slowly stabilising , it is worth thinking about what measures should be taken to restore economic growth and avoid similar turbulence in the future .
In the short term , the governments of the countries concerned should adopt more resolute strategies of escape from the crisis .
They need to balance budget expenditures , actively fight unemployment and social exclusion , and create conditions for the development of businesses , on the one hand , and conditions for an increase in demand , on the other .
Equally as important as action at national level is external help .
European and international financial institutions should establish a special credit line for small and medium-sized enterprises and for the support of infrastructure projects .
These measures would certainly bring a growth in employment and an improvement in the social situation .
In the long term , the best solution seems to be entry to the euro area and creating the conditions for balanced and stable growth .
During the past year , the battle against the crisis was waged primarily at Member State level , using Member State instruments .
The EU 's Member States considered taking action mainly at national rather than EU level when it came to economic recovery , providing assistance to companies and preserving jobs .
In some cases , even the minimum expected level of coordination , agreement and cooperation was lacking .
The old Member States , with their stronger economies and more room for manoeuvre in budgetary terms , put together packages which primarily focused on their domestic markets and , in many instances , protectionist instruments that distort competition were used .
One glaring example of this was the support offered by France 's President Nicolas Sarkozy to the Peugeot company , stipulating as a condition the retention of jobs in France , while redundancies had to be made at the company 's more efficient plant in Slovenia .
Similar discrimination can be encountered in connection with the financial sector in Central Europe and the Baltic region , as Western parent companies continue to this day to divert profits generated at their subsidiaries operating in the region .
The credit crunch is having a particularly tough impact on the small and medium-sized enterprise sector , which provides the majority of jobs and is sacking employees in huge numbers as a result of the contraction of export markets and reduction in development opportunities .
This means that the economic crisis is inevitably turning into an employment and social crisis .
For this reason , I am asking the EU15 governments once again to do their utmost to block protectionist measures and take a stance against the behaviour of the domestic banks , which is infringing internal market principles .
in writing . - ( HU ) The global economic crisis has had a varying effect on the European Union 's different Member States .
The new Member States in Central and Eastern Europe have proven to be the most vulnerable .
The reality of the situation has shown that Member States have had unequal access to the instruments contained in the European Economic Recovery Plan .
We have also noticed that Member States in the euro area have enjoyed the best protection against the crisis .
It is no coincidence that the consequences of the crisis were felt harder in those countries which did not have the benefit of recovery instruments and were not members of the euro area .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon has marked the end of the European Union 's period of institutional reform .
Now a joint effort is required to strengthen the European Union 's cohesion .
This is a vital condition for the EU to emerge from the crisis revitalised , as a crucial global player .
The impact of the social and employment crisis will be felt most in 2010 .
The new Member States will definitely be its main victims .
What we need is an economic recovery plan that is , in actual fact , equally accessible to all Member States .
In addition , the terms for joining the euro area must be made more flexible .
These obvious measures will contribute to creating a strong Europe , making it a community of half a billion citizens who profess the same values and are guided by the same ideas .
Experience gained in applying the food hygiene regulations of the European Parliament and of the Council ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question by Horst Schnellhardt , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , to the Commission on the experience gained in applying the food hygiene Regulations of the European Parliament and the Council ( EC ) No 852 / 2004 , ( EC ) No 853 / 2004 and ( EC ) No 854 / 2004 - B7-0237 / 2009 ) .


Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the Commission warmly for its communication on the experience gained in applying the food hygiene regulations .
It is very important and the content of the communication is very convincing .
I would like to give my support to this communication , which describes what has happened in practice over the last three years .
It is important for us to be aware that the hygiene regulations have undergone a paradigm shift .
We have strengthened the internal market , we have improved food safety and we have increased the responsibility of food producers and suppliers .
This is a significant change and therefore we have , of course , identified a few problems , in particular in relation to the licensing of small and medium-sized enterprises .
Some butchers ' shops have ceased trading .
We should once again review the situation , as this is due to the fact that very often , the flexibility built into the regulations is not being made use of and there has been no exchange of information between the local supervisory authorities and the European Food and Veterinary Office , which I feel is a very bad thing .
If the Commission now decides that it does not want to make any changes , I will be forced to object .
I believe that it is necessary , even if these are only cosmetic changes , that we should look in particular at the following issues .
We should be aware that the information within the food supply chain is being interpreted too narrowly and this needs to change .
We should consider whether other methods for inspecting meat would be appropriate .
In particular , we should not continue with the accreditation of trichina laboratories described in Regulation ( EC ) No 882 .
We need reliable planning for the areas which apply regulations .
This is specifically why I am opposed to the intended regulation .
We should be making a brief and concise proposal for changes so that we are not involved in authorising transitional rules until 2013 .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , Commissioner Vassiliou has asked me to pass on her apologies for being unable to be present to speak on this oral question relating to the Commission report on experience gained from application of the food hygiene regulations .
On behalf of the Commission , I would like to underline that the report is based on information received from relevant stakeholders , from both the public and private sectors , and the outcome of these consultations has been positive .
No major difficulties were identified , but in some areas , there is still room for improvement .
Turning to specific issues , firstly , I am aware of the problem of the reapproval of small capacity establishments .
Solutions to such problems can be found through the flexibility provisions in the regulations to be adopted at national level .
Where this approach has not been followed , difficulties have arisen in certain Member States .
The Food and Veterinary Office is currently carrying out specific missions to identify best practice of such flexibility for small capacity slaughterhouses , with a view to their wider dissemination .
Due to the fact that Member States have until the end of this year to decide whether to grant or refuse approvals , I cannot say at this stage how many small and medium-sized enterprises were refused approval .
Secondly , the flexibility provisions aim more generally to protect food diversity and help small scale producers .
The adoption of national measures to apply flexibility and the notification to the Commission provide legal certainty for small scale producers and acknowledges the specificities of smaller scale establishments .
At the same time , food diversity , such as traditional production methods for sausages or cheese , is ensured without compromising food safety .
In order to encourage the correct use of flexibility provisions , the Commission has published several guidance documents .
This should further contribute to ensuring transparency and legal certainty .
It is also important to recall that the Commission , in an effort to contribute towards a reduction of administrative burdens , notably for very small enterprises , has already suggested amending the regulation accordingly .
However , this suggestion is still pending , as you know .
Thirdly , food chain information includes a written communication from the farmer to the slaughterhouse and its official veterinarian .
This information provides essential data to ensure a risk based inspection .
The competent authorities have recently been allowed a derogation from the provision that the information must be delivered to the slaughterhouse at least 24 hours in advance .
Additionally , I am pleased to announce that next April , the next Commission will organise a round table with all parties concerned on a possible revision of meat inspections in order to consider its effectiveness , taking into account recent trends of hazards .
Finally , I would stress that laboratories involved in official controls must be accredited to ensure high quality and uniformity of analytical results so as not to jeopardise the safety of food .
This is essential for the smooth day to day running of intra-EU trade and for facilitating trade with third countries .
However , the Commission has recently agreed to an extension of a transitional period for trichinella testing until the end of 2013 to allow more time for laboratories to become accredited .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank my colleague , Mr Schnellhardt , for his question .
This gives us the opportunity to identify positive and less positive experiences of the implementation of the regulation .
The food hygiene regulation specifies the hygiene rules for meat production .
The Commission 's consultation shows that good progress has been made and that overall , the application of the regulations is functioning effectively .
The fear that excessively strict regulations would result in small and artisan companies going bankrupt has , in most cases , not become reality as a result of the exceptions for small companies .
However , the consultation also clearly shows that there are problems in applying the rules in many cases .
This is confirmed by the information that I have received from companies and supervisory authorities in the region which I come from .
As a result of the fact that the authorities in the regions have a great deal of leeway in their decision making , they can meet the needs of smaller and artisan butchers ' shops in individual cases .
This is definitely a good thing , as it is the only way in which we can ensure that smaller butchers , which offer a wide variety of products , with the accompanying challenges for freshness and quality , are not crushed under the weight of excessive bureaucracy .
However , this flexibility does have its limits when it results in exceptions and regulations being interpreted differently according to the whims of the supervisory authorities .
This causes serious distortions of competition , not only between the Member States , but also within them .
Therefore , we need to introduce improvements in the food hygiene regulation so that inspectors have more legal certainty and more legal powers .
The inspectors must have adequate legal measures available to them , for example , in the form of criminal fines .
Mr Almunia , there is a great deal of legal uncertainty in this area which must be removed and we are expecting a proposal from the Commission .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to congratulate everyone involved in putting in place the food hygiene regulations , because this communication from the Commission gives a mainly positive picture of the experiences of applying the regulations .
This should not be underestimated , because as has already been explained , these new regulations represent a paradigm shift in food hygiene policy .
The innovative character of the regulations was the reason why an initial report on the experiences with the regulations was planned only three years after they came into force .
The Member States and the food suppliers and producers were generally happy with the regulations and have reported making good progress in applying them .
In the opinion of the Member States and the private interest groups , there are no major difficulties either for the companies or for the authorities .
They are unanimously of the view that these regulations need some adjustments , but that a fundamental review is not required .
The challenge of ensuring that consumers receive the highest possible quality and safety with regard to product hygiene and of responding flexibly to the needs of the companies and , in particular , very small companies , is met by the current regulations .
In line with the saying ' If you stop improving , you stop being good ' , the problems identified in the process of drawing up the report , as Mr Schnellhardt has already mentioned , will have to be investigated in order to determine the cause and , if necessary , solutions will have to be found .
It is , of course , also necessary to continue to follow closely the implementation of the hygiene package , as it was too early for some Member States to provide a balanced and detailed evaluation .
Only when we have a comprehensive assessment in front of us should we decide whether changes should be made to the food hygiene regulations and , if so , which changes those should be .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , first of all , I would like to thank everyone for their contributions to this discussion .
We consider that the July report serves as a starting point for discussion of possible improvements on the regulations and , in due course , the Commission will examine the need to make legislative changes .
We very much welcome Members ' contributions ; your inputs are very useful to us for our work to prepare in due course new initiatives .
We look forward to continued collaboration with Parliament , and also with the Member States , with stakeholders , both from the private and public sector , and I am sure that all of us have a common aim of achieving the highest possible level of food safety .
This , I think , is the most important conclusion which we can draw from this evening 's discussion .
The debate is closed .
European Action on victims of terrorism ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on European Action on victims of terrorism .
Madam President , I echo the remarks made by my colleague , Mr Almunia .
Victims of terrorism are victims of attacks perpetrated against the democratic values of our societies .
These victims , of course , illustrate for us this human tragedy that is terrorism .
We have a duty to support , acknowledge and assist them .
The Commission has a dual role in this area .
Firstly , to make our citizens aware of what victims of terrorism go through , how they suffer , and to ensure greater representation of victims ' interests at European level .
Secondly , to strive to ensure that there are no more victims , so that this terrorism can stop .
This is the terrorism prevention policy .
Since 2004 , the Commission has been providing financial assistance to a number of projects aimed at providing victims and their families with the aid and the social or psychological support they need .
These projects fulfil the objective of increasing the solidarity shown by European citizens towards victims of terrorism .
A budget of EUR 2 200 000 was allocated to this initiative for 2008 alone .
In addition to these actions , since 2008 , the Commission has been operating a European Network of Associations of Victims of Terrorism .
The aim of this network is to encourage transnational cooperation among associations of victims of terrorism and to provide greater protection of victims ' interests at EU level .
We have devoted a budget of EUR 200 000 to it .
This network operates in several areas : it assesses the support and protection currently offered to these victims , and also promotes activities aimed at disseminating best practices .
The activities identified by this network constitute a very useful basis for the Commission 's work .
Lastly , in a context in which protection of the citizens must remain at the centre of our policies , the Commission hopes to step up actions aimed at protecting victims .
It intends to support measures aimed at encouraging victims of terrorism to share their experiences .
The idea , in fact , is to make European citizens more aware of the reality of terrorism , to prevent terrorism .
It must not be forgotten that terrorism is often the result of a phenomenon of indoctrination and radicalisation .
What is more , with these actions , it should be possible to convey a message of peace that promotes democratic values .
Thus , the Commission intends to draft a charter of the rights of victims of terrorism .
I personally join with all those who have expressed their anger over all these terrorist attacks and support our efforts to show solidarity with the victims of terrorism .
Madam President , I am now going to listen to the speeches of the various MEPs and I will respond to them as fully as possible .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to say that the majority of governments and citizens only remember the victims of terrorism after a serious attack such as the ones in Madrid , New York or London .
Once the wave of emotion has passed , they tend to forget about the terrorist threat and the rights of victims .
Today , however , there is no doubt about the European Union 's commitment to the fight against terrorism .
As Commissioner Barrot has just told us , this commitment has also been reflected in the recently adopted Stockholm Programme , which recognises the courage and dignity of the victims and the need to defend their rights .
Despite this progress , the fight against terrorism has always been based on trust and mutual cooperation between the Member States .
Taking into account the perspective offered by the Treaty of Lisbon , I wonder whether it would be a good idea for the European Union to promote harmonisation of the legislation of the Member States on the rights of victims of terrorism .
The adoption of a European charter of the rights of victims of terrorism would be a big step forward that would help those fighting terrorism and would be a strong blow for those that defend it .
It is the courage and dignity of the victims that is the greatest failure of terrorism and therefore the greatest triumph of democracy .
We should never forget that the only weapon that innocent victims have against terrorism is their word and the recognition of society .
Therefore , you should also not forget , ladies and gentlemen , that none of us are safe from being victims of terrorism .
My question is , therefore : would the Commission agree with adopting a European charter to recognise the defence of the rights of the victims of terrorism and to promote those rights ?
If so , what measures would the new Commission take to drive forward this Charter under its new mandate ?
Madam President , Commissioner , thank you for your heartfelt expression of a commitment that has finally become part of European policy since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is subject to the European law in which Parliament is also going to play a decisive role , a more decisive role than ever .
This is confirmed by the adoption of the Stockholm Programme .
Its multiannual programme for 2009-2014 includes an express , necessary reference to the dignity of victims of terrorism , the suffering caused by this terrible form of crime , their particular vulnerability , but also , and above all , to the mandate for protecting them .
I therefore think that it is worth pointing out that as the Spanish Presidency is coming up in the next six-month period , and as the determination of the Spanish Government and Spanish society to fight all forms of terrorism is so consistent and persistent , it will certainly be an opportunity to include this harmonisation , this framework programme for the protection of the rights of victims of terrorism in the action plan .
As it is a plan for multiannual legislation , it is going to be the responsibility of the Spanish Government to draw it up , which will have to be supported subsequently by the Belgian and Hungarian presidencies in defining the legislation and implementing the objectives of the Stockholm Programme .
I therefore think that it is time for Parliament to confirm this determination to protect the victims of terrorism in order to close in the fight against all forms of terrorism and establish the dignity that the victims of terrorism need .
It is time to make a commitment that , in the legislative plan of the Stockholm Programme , and in the action plan that the Spanish Presidency will be responsible for defining , the protection of the victims of terrorism will receive the treatment that it deserves .
Madam President , I would like to say that this initiative is in line with the amendment tabled by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality and myself to the Stockholm Programme , because it was not included in it .
The victims of all types of terrorism needed it , and what is more , they are asking us for it .
I have learned a great deal about dignity , public spiritedness and suffering from the victims that I have worked with in recent years .
Their testimonies drive me to advocate a European standard of looking after the victims of terrorism from a material , emotional and legal point of view .
We have constructed a common discourse based on four pillars .
Firstly , recognising their suffering , protecting them and assuming that the victims are not only those who are killed and injured but also their families , those who are threatened and their freedom , which is the freedom of all .
Secondly , repairing the material damage caused , fostering their memory and working to ensure that justice is done .
Thirdly , humanising the debate about the victims , who are people who are suffering and need to be protected , defended , recognised , helped and supported .
In politics , we need to learn to put ourselves in their shoes .
Finally , de-politicising the debate .
We need to be generous in order to ensure that we do not make terrorism an electoral affair .
In Europe , murder has been committed in the name of religion , Marxism , private property , environmentalism , the independence of a region or the unity of the State of which it is a part .
There have even been governments implicated in terrorist actions .
This is not , however , a question of principles .
Totalitarians and fanatics kill , the perversion of the basic values of humanity kills .
These are the things that lead to violence , but the free exchange of democratic ideas does not .
I dedicate this speech to all the victims of terrorism .

( ES ) Madam President , the Stockholm Programme contains the following reference , among others , in support of the victims of terrorism : victims of terrorism also need special attention , support and social recognition .
In my view , the Union must ensure that they receive that support , and promote their full recognition by society .
Those who have suffered the barbarity of terrorism should be an ethical reference point for our societies .
Therefore , defending victims and their rights must be one of the European Union 's priority policies .
We need to maintain and strengthen the funds for victims of terrorism with adequate finance , as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) proposed in the amendments tabled for the draft European Union budget for 2010 .
For this reason , aid has increased by EUR 1 million , which will be used to fund projects aimed at helping the victims of terrorism and their families to recover , through social or psychological support offered by organisations and their networks .
It will also be used to fund projects aimed at mobilising public opinion against all forms of terrorism .
Part of the money is to be used in particular to improve legal assistance and advice for victims and their families .
Here is some incidental , illustrative information : terrorism equals victims .
The total funds allocated for preparation for and prevention of terrorist attacks will amount to EUR 21 420 000 next year .
The idea suggested by Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio of making victims more visible in the Union should have the unconditional support of this House .
First of all , we need to equip ourselves with the necessary legal instruments , starting with a written declaration and then moving on to a resolution , so that we finally have a political declaration of support from the European institutions for the victims of terror .
This will also raise awareness among European citizens of the value of those victims .
Victims provoke in us feelings of solidarity , compassion , recognition , dignity , sustainable support and remembrance , along with feelings of contempt and a desire for justice for the terrorists who caused so much pain and death .

( ES ) Madam President , Mr Barrot , it is no coincidence that a whole series of Spanish MEPs have spoken .
In the Basque Country , in addition to the suffering caused by a terrorist attack , victims have frequently suffered contempt or silence after the event .
This is why a movement has been forming seeking the recognition of victims , which I think requires a policy for the victims of terrorism .
If I may , I would like to add to what has been said by all my fellow Members in favour of a charter or of a common approach to this policy by giving you a very brief summary of ten aspects that I feel are key in this respect .
Firstly , the victims ' policy requires public sympathy , recognition and social support for victims .
Secondly , it requires swift and effective compensation for the damage suffered .
Thirdly , it requires equal treatment for all victims .
Fourthly , it requires a political and social consensus regarding the measures to be used for victims of terrorism .
Fifthly , it requires a policy of discrediting the social and political discourse of violent people .
Sixthly , it requires that those guilty of terrorism are punished in exemplary fashion , with swift , efficient access to justice for victims .
Seventhly , it requires education and teaching against violence in the population .
Eighthly it requires a guarantee for victims that the attacks suffered will not be repeated , which can also happen .
Ninthly , it requires policies of remembrance so that the victims are not forgotten .
Finally , it requires a policy of social reconciliation in order to heal the wounds caused by terrorism .
These are the ten commandments that I propose for a common policy for the victims of terrorism .
( EL ) Madam President , the attacks in Madrid and London and the recent attacks in my country , Greece , demonstrate the extent of the problem of terrorism .
Terrorism threatens our way of life and our freedom .
It targets not only the direct victims and their families , which are also directly injured , but also society as a whole .
The European pilot programmes referred to for the victims of terrorist attacks are a positive sample in terms of relieving the wounds , but a great deal still needs to be done .
Help for victims and their families is not only a moral imperative .
It is an imperative in order to send terrorists a clear message that we do not forget .
We do not forget disgusting deeds which put a stain on our democracy and cohesion .
We do not forget that victims of terrorism are often unsuspecting citizens who are injured or killed while they are going about their daily business .
We do not forget that in the Europe which teaches tolerance and democracy , acts of violence will never be acceptable .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to voice my support for Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio 's proposal for a European charter on the rights of families who are victims of terrorism , and stress that this constitutes an extraordinary opportunity for Europe to send an unambiguous message on terrorism , bearing in mind that the lack of this message led to the breakdown of the Barcelona Process in 2005 when the Heads of State or Government of the Euro-Mediterranean countries failed to reach an agreement .
I would also stress that today this offers an extraordinary opportunity to renew dialogue on a new footing with the other side of the Mediterranean , starting with a clear statement on the concept that is the cornerstone of our humanity and our civilisation , namely the sanctity of life .
Madam President , I am grateful for your support for the victims of terrorism .
This is both right and proper and , of course , I do recognise the European Union 's support for victims in Northern Ireland through the PEACE programmes that have been funded there .
The Commission should be aware that Northern Ireland is facing once again a growing terrorist threat from dissident Republican organisations .
That threat has been described by the Police Service of Northern Ireland as ' critical ' and by the International Monitoring Commission as ' very serious ' .
In the most recent brutal attacks , two soldiers just about to go to Afghanistan were murdered , as well as one police officer .
In its initial funding to victims of terrorism , the Commission identified the key objective to mobilise the public against terrorism in all its forms .
However , I feel with the transition to the broader CIPS programme , this objective seems to have been lost .
I am grateful for your proposed work on a Victims ' Charter and I would urge that this starts off by making a very clear distinction between the victims of terrorism and the perpetrators of terrorism .
( DE ) Madam President , in Austria we have , thank goodness , not been subjected to terrorist attacks for many years .
However , Vienna has not always escaped unscathed .
I would like to add to the remarks made by Mr Jáuregui Atondo .
On the one hand , we definitely need the victims ' charter and the support for victims of terrorism .
However , at the same time , we need as an accompanying measure to change the environment in which the violence occurs that leads to terrorism .
In my opinion , we need to start with education and information .
In addition , this House must clearly reject the brutalisation of language .
We are constantly calling for tolerance in many areas .
However , in one area , we must show no tolerance and that is with regard to violence .
These speeches are full of dignity and emotion , because I believe that you have spoken on behalf of those who can no longer speak today , and I thank you on behalf of the Presidency .
Madam President , you were right to stress just how emotionally charged this debate is , and right now , we are thinking of all the victims .
They have all been struck by terrorism in a completely indiscriminate and completely unjust way .
As Mr López Aguilar said , terrorism is a terrible form of crime .
What I would like to say to you first of all is that the Stockholm Programme really has taken account of the fate of victims .
We must , in fact , launch a European policy that takes far greater account of victims of organised crime and terrorism .
I would like to say to Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio that we are going to take steps to introduce a charter of the rights of victims of terrorism .
Indeed , you made your desire for this charter very clear , and I believe you did so , Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio , by drawing on all the painful first-hand experience you have had .
We have analysed , and we will continue to analyse , in 2010 , all the gaps that exist today with regard to the protection of victims of terrorism in the various Member States .
Indeed , you are right : one way or the other , we need to succeed in harmonising our laws on terrorism , on victims of terrorism .
Europe really must be united in combating terrorism .
On the basis of this study , we are going to see how we can harmonise and bring together all the measures so as to improve the situation of victims of terrorism in Europe .
This will be the aim of the action plan , and there is no doubt that we will deal with this problem of victim protection by taking account of what has been said during the debate , namely the need to try , first of all , to make people aware of the tragedy and the suffering of victims , who are often the subject of silence , if not contempt .
Next , we must ensure that they receive compensation quickly .
You have rightly insisted on swift compensation for these completely undeserved and unjustified acts of suffering .
You have also mentioned the delegitimisation of dialogue , since we cannot tolerate a dialogue that could , one way or another , give the impression that killing innocent people , injuring innocent people , can be a way of serving mankind .
We must be extremely firm with regard to such language , as it denies every single one of the European Union 's values .
In addition , I must congratulate the European Parliament , Madam President , on having provided EUR 1 million for all our victim support programmes .
Once again , I am very pleased to have Mr Almunia by my side this evening , because we are both genuinely encouraging the Commission to take measures in this regard .
Indeed , the European Union must equip itself with exemplary legislation on the protection and assistance of victims of terrorism as part of this multiannual Stockholm Programme .
That is what I wished to say in response to the various speeches .
Rest assured that they have left neither Mr Almunia nor I indifferent .
In order to ensure that we do not move straight on to another debate , I propose a minute 's silence in memory of the victims .
( The House rose and observed a minute 's silence )
Defence of the principle of subsidiarity - Display of religious and cultural symbols in public places ( debate )
The next item is the debate on :
the oral question to the Commission ( B7-0238 / 2009 ) by Mario Borghezio , on behalf of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group , on defence of the principle of subsidiarity ;
the oral question to the Commission ( B7-0239 / 2009 ) by Antonio Cancian , Mario Mauro , Fiorello Provera , Elisabetta Gardini , Salvatore Iacolino , Crescenzio Rivellini , Sergio Paolo Frances Silvestris , Aldo Patriciello , Paolo Bartolozzi , Cristiana Muscardini , Mara Bizzotto , Barbara Matera , Lara Comi , Antonello Antinoro , Lorenzo Fontana , Roberta Angelilli , Amalia Sartori , Iva Zanicchi , Licia Ronzulli , Giovanni Collino , Marco Scurria , Giancarlo Scotta ' , Potito Salatto , Pablo Arias Echeverría , Raffaele Baldassarre , Pilar Ayuso , Luis de Grandes Pascual , Pilar del Castillo Vera , Santiago Fisas Ayxela , Carmen Fraga Estévez , Salvador Garriga Polledo , Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines , Esther Herranz García , Carlos José Iturgaiz Angulo , Veronica Lope Fontagné , Antonio López-Istúriz White , Gabriel Mato Adrover , Jaime Mayor Oreja , Pablo Zalba Bidegain , Salvatore Tatarella , Magdi Cristiano Allam , Mirosław Piotrowski and Konrad Szymański , on the display of religious and cultural symbols in public places .

Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the position of the group that I represent , the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group , is crystal clear : with this oral question , we are asking the Commission to challenge the implementation of the ruling against crucifixes in school classrooms , handed down by the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg which , I would emphasise , is not an EU institution .
In our view , this decision , and I want this to be absolutely clear , is an unacceptable breach of the principle of subsidiarity .
This principle is a mainstay of the European Union as well as a guarantee of the rights of the peoples and of the Member States .
The European Union , as we conceive and support it , would be unthinkable without the support and grounding of the principle of subsidiarity .
I will start with a general remark : obviously nobody - let us look first at the substance of this ruling - could consider the removal of someone and something which was already there to be an act of democracy and freedom , as some have claimed , but rather an action of the thought police , an anti-democratic act .
If a crucifix is hanging on a school wall and it is torn down , that wall is not a secular wall but an empty wall , with the void intended as a confessional symbol , an act of negative education , the worst kind imaginable , which can be viewed as one of the many signs of the cultural and spiritual suicide of the West .
The ruling of the Strasbourg Court presupposes a concept of religious freedom which , if taken to its logical conclusion , would go so far as to ensure , to impose a sense of predominance over each citizen , required to live in an environment in keeping with the Court 's beliefs .
I do not believe that this is religious freedom : this distorts the true sense of religious freedom ; we are dealing with a negative right , or rather the right to be free of the obligation to perform religious practices .
There must be no misunderstandings when we speak of religious freedom : we are not talking about something vague by any means .
We are dealing with something quite different here : displaying a crucifix is not just a matter of faith in our culture , but something much more important , something with a universal value .
The symbol of the cross , the symbolism of the cross conveys a message that is universal in scope ; a message , moreover , of peace and fraternity , as taught to us by René Guénon , the great metaphysicist , to mention just one name .
From the traditional point of view of these great scholars of traditional culture , this value is extremely clear but , at the same time , it is just as clear that with this ruling , we are dealing with the expression of anti-traditional views which encourage everyone to think in the same way .
This is something that runs counter to the true spirit of the European Union , and this is what is astonishing .
It is almost as if there is the intention to turn the peoples away from any reminder of values and symbols that express verticality and spirituality .
Leaving aside the historical facts , the link to a specific religion , this is , I repeat , a universal symbol .
The European Union , on the other hand , must safeguard the right of the peoples to continue using symbols , starting with the symbol of the cross .
Europe must be bold enough to take a metahistorical perspective on these fundamental questions , and resume its role as a cradle and centre , including in spiritual terms .
It must return to the European peoples the freedom to keep and venerate the symbols of their identity in accordance with a cardinal principle of the legal and political structure of the European Union : the principle of subsidiarity .
The whole question turns precisely on this aspect , on the fundamental nature of the principle of subsidiarity .
In conclusion , this issue enables us to reflect on and to debate a key question : what does religious freedom mean for Europe ?
Well , I would like to say that it is precisely the ruling of the Strasbourg Court that is riding roughshod over the fundamental right to religious freedom , and which wants to prevent a people such as the Italians from keeping the symbol of the cross in classrooms as an indispensable reminder of their Christian roots .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , on 3 November 2009 , the European Court of Human Rights approved an application from an Italo-Finnish citizen seeking to remove crucifixes from classrooms .
Similar episodes had occurred in the past in Spain , Germany , France and also in Italy where , in 1988 , the Council of State established that the crucifix is not just a Christian symbol but that it also has a value unrelated to that specific religion .
The Italian Council of State , expressing its opinion again in 2006 , specified that the principle of secularity of the state cannot disregard a people 's cultural identity and its civilisation .
With our question , we wanted to highlight the most secular aspect of this matter , not least by pointing out that the next step could even be to take before the Strasbourg Court Catholic symbols which are part of the common traditions of the Member States , as well as the artistic and cultural portrayals found throughout our cities .
Even the flag of the European Union , created for the Council of Europe , was inspired by Marian iconography according to its designer .
The decision of the Court of Human Rights seeks to impose from above - so much for subsidiarity - a secular model which many Member States cannot identify with or , worse still , seeks to lead us to nihilism : there you have the empty wall which Mr Borghezio just mentioned .
The ruling calls into question our very identity , our European values of peace , love and civil harmony , of equality and freedom , and the ruling therefore undermines freedom and equal rights .
The EU institutions are champions of the prerogatives of freedom .
Displaying religious and cultural symbols with which peoples identity is an expression of the freedom of thought - and the Sakharov Prize will be awarded in this very Chamber tomorrow - and should be safeguarded as such by the EU institutions themselves and by international organisations founded on democratic principles .

Madam President , I would have been only too happy to have listened to Mr Mauro , but he will be able to take the floor after me .
I am obliged to adhere to a number of rules of law .
The Commission is very committed to freedom of thought , conscience and religion , as laid down in Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 10 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
However , it is true that the Commission can act only within the context of applying EU law .
The fact is , within the EU , national laws on religious symbols in public buildings come under the domestic legal system of the Member States .
The principle of subsidiarity is to be applied within the context of the Union .
It is true that this principle of subsidiarity does not apply to the implementation of judgments by the European Court of Human Rights , the international court in charge of enforcing the European Convention on Human Rights .
It is true that the responsibility for implementing European Court of Human Rights judgments lies with the Council of Europe .
It is also true that the implementation of European Court of Human Rights judgments is mandatory for all States that are party to the European Convention on Human Rights , and Italy , like any other party involved in this case , has the right , under Article 43 of the Convention , to request a transfer of proceedings to the Grand Chamber within three months of the date of the judgment .
According to the information we have - the information we have read in the press - the Italian State is using its right to appeal before the Grand Chamber .
Those are the points that I wanted to clear up .
With regard , once again , to European Union law , we are dealing in this case with the domestic legal system of the Member States .
That being said , I cannot answer for the Council of Europe or for the European Court of Human Rights , which have issued a decision that I understand may raise some issues for Parliament .
That is what I can honestly say , but I am going to listen carefully to the speeches that follow .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank the Commissioner for his clarity of judgment which effectively puts the power to regulate this area back in the hands of the Member States .
I must say that I am convinced , more than most , of the need for our institutions to be secular and just as convinced that religion is not the solution to any political problem .
At the same time , we cannot solve political issues by waging war on religions .
It is precisely for this reason that I will explain my thinking by means of a paradox : what would happen if we applied the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights , that is , if , at the same time , we applied the reasoning which obliges us to remove crucifixes from Italian classrooms to all places where crosses are displayed on the grounds of public interest ?
What should be done about this flag , the flag of Sweden , and what should be done about this flag , the flag of Finland , and the flag of the Slovak Republic , and the flag of Malta , and the flag of Denmark , and the flag of Greece , and the flag of the United Kingdom which has three crosses , no less ?
Because , ladies and gentlemen , the reason why these crosses appear on these flags is no different from the reason why crucifixes are displayed in Italian classrooms , and it is not a religious reason but rather a cultural and traditional one .
Let us therefore leave it to the Member States to judge , on a case by case basis , the suitability of solutions in line with the sensitivities of their peoples , in keeping with their religious freedom and the secular nature of the institutions .
This is all we are asking and we are doing so because , above and beyond anything else , it is not the abstract concept of the law which must be upheld , but every individual 's personal truth and desire for the infinite .
Madam President , as a lawyer and a Member of the European Parliament , I am sure that there are many citizens following our debate who share my feeling that it lacks focus .
We are therefore going to try to clarify a few things .
Firstly , we are talking about a judgment of the European Court of Human Rights , which is not a European Union institution but rather a court - one that is part of a concentric circle of the European Union , but is separate - which is committed to the Rule of Law , representative democracy and human rights .
Secondly , we are talking about a judicial resolution , and no resolution by Parliament can revoke or amend any resolution passed down by a court of justice .
Thirdly , the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights is highly respectful of religious freedom and its corollary , which is religious pluralism .
Religious freedom is part of our common constitutional traditions and of the constitutional law of the Member States , and it is also a fundamental right protected by the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms .
The judgment therefore gives reasons , with a solid legal basis , for the protection of religious freedom .
It does not deny it at all .
What is more , it is done unanimously by a prestigious court that has influenced the formation of the culture of human rights for almost sixty years .
Ultimately , however , and this is important , we need to remember that no judgment of the European Court of Human Rights means that the legislation of any Member State that has signed up to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights has to be amended , because the judgment recognises a right in response to an infringement in a specific case .
It is only on that basis that it is up to the Member States to make the appropriate decisions about amendments to legislation or policies that might be inspired by the doctrine of the European Court of Human Rights , but under no circumstances are they obliged or compelled to do so by any judgment of the European Court of Human Rights .
There is therefore no reason for any Member State to be concerned .
None of them are obliged to amend their legislation or its public policies as a result of a specific judgment of the European Court of Human Rights .
Therefore , neither Italy nor any other country has any reason to adopt any general rules as a result of this judgment .
Lastly , however , subsidiarity has been invoked .
We have to say that subsidiarity is a rule of European law that has no application in this case , because its concept and applications have nothing to do with this case .
I even think that a rule of European law could be invoked that allows a vote to be postponed if there are doubts as to the relevance of a vote that has nothing to do with affairs that concern the European Parliament , which , in my view , is the case here .
I therefore think that although this debate is legitimate , it is definitely lacking in focus and does not require an urgent pronouncement , and even less a protest or a revocation of a judgment that was passed down by a court of justice that is not a European Union institution .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the somewhat misleading title of today 's debate includes the word ' subsidiarity ' .
Subsidiarity , as I understand it , means taking decisions at the level closest to the citizen , and that level is the citizen - the individual citizen .
What you are saying in your resolutions is that the rights of a national state are above the rights of individual citizens .
It is our job in this House to protect the rights of citizens , not the rights of states .
Secondly , if we consider - as you claim - that this is not a matter for the European Union , I would like to understand why these matters are included in the Copenhagen criteria , and why we demand from candidate countries that they respect the separation of church and state when we cannot demand that of our own Member States .
Thirdly , colleagues , if you say that the European Parliament is not competent to talk about these matters , I wonder why we are competent to discuss matters like the shape of cucumbers but not the fundamental rights of our citizens .
As to the European Convention on Human Rights and the Court ruling , we are now two weeks after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , which requires that the EU accede to the Convention on Human Rights .
Would it not be incomprehensible if we , at the same time , refused to accept the authority of the Court of Strasbourg ?
We cannot explain that to our citizens .
Secondly , I think - and this has been said by Mr López before - politicians have no business interfering in Court rulings .
Let the judges do their jobs .
We may have an opinion - we may like the ruling or we may not like it - but we should not interfere in their work .
My group , the ALDE Group - the European Liberals - is the champion of a Europe that is for all citizens .
ALDE believes in a Europe of diversity , where everybody has the right to their own conscience , their own religion and even the freedom from religion .
I will now conclude .
The states - not the courts , the states - must ensure an environment where all citizens can live freely , according to their own conscience .
They should be protected by the state , and I think the situation is very serious if they feel the need to go to court in order to defend themselves from the states .
Colleagues , reject the EPP and ECR resolutions .
Madam President , in view of the historical fact that the founding fathers of the European Union were Christian Democrats : Konrad Adenauer , Alcide De Gasperi , Robert Schuman and Jean Monnet , who based what they built on Christian values and symbols , I will remind you that the flag adopted by the European Union , which shows a circle of 12 gold stars on a blue background , and which is hanging behind you , Madam President , refers to the 12 stars upon the head of the Holy Virgin Mary - the Revelation of St John , chapter 12 .
Over half a century on , it is worth asking if the philosophy of the founding fathers is still relevant .
In the context of the scandalous judgment of the European Court of Human Rights , which ordered crosses to be removed from an Italian school , it should be stated emphatically that no group of judges appointed by politicians , not even the Council of Europe , can order the removal of a cross , which has universal and religious significance .
This verdict tramples underfoot freedom of religion and the cultural heritage of Europe .
In this connection , I would like to ask the Commissioner : do you not think that an attack on Christian symbols is also the destruction of the basis of the European Union ?
Could you not , on behalf of the Commission , start a debate on the role and significance of Christian symbols in the European Union ?
( DE ) Madam President , I am grateful for the opportunity to hold this debate .
Mr López Aguilar referred to the fact that in his opinion , as a lawyer , we are not responsible .
I am not speaking as a lawyer , but as a politician .
Millions of people in Europe are affected by this judgment by the judges in Strasbourg .
This is why it is a good thing that we are discussing it here .
The relationship between church and state in Europe has always been disputed and has led to bloody conflicts .
It is right and proper that the European Union has managed to separate the state from religion .
This is a good thing .
However , we have a wide range of different models in Europe .
France is clearly a non-religious state , while in Great Britain , the Head of State , the Queen , is also the head of the church .
We have different models of how the relationship between church and state has developed .
For this reason , I believe it is a good thing that we are calling for subsidiarity in this area and that every country can go its own way .
I would even like to take things a step further .
I do not want to talk about subsidiarity , but about the basic issue that , from my perspective , the European values of solidarity , subsidiarity and freedom are unthinkable without a foundation in Christianity and in the Judaeo-Christian understanding of religion .
Why do we not find these values in China or in the Middle East ?
This is because they are based on our culture and our religions .
It is possible to mention this without forcing anyone to accept the same faith .
We are proud of our religious freedom .
There is religious freedom in the sense that it is possible for me to decide to be an atheist .
That is acceptable and legitimate and we have fought for this .
However , there is also the right to have a faith .
In my region , where more than one million people live , over 80 % are Catholics .
Just as atheists call for others to show them tolerance , so the Catholics who make up more than 80 % of the population are calling for non-believers to be tolerant of their faith .
They want to be able to show their faith in public , to represent it and to have Christian symbols accepted by the minority in this majority society .
This is also legitimate in terms of religious freedom .
Anyone who calls for tolerance must also show tolerance to those who practise a Christian faith .
( PL ) Madam President , the European Court of Human Rights has rightly ruled that hanging crosses in school classrooms violates the religious freedom of pupils and the right of parents to raise their children in accordance with their own convictions .
The judges decided unanimously that a cross at school breaks the European Convention on Human Rights .
The decision is simple , clear and universally comprehensible .
This is why it has evoked such fury and aggression among the clergy and Right-wing politicians .
They pretend they do not understand , and demand explanations from the Commission and that Parliament adopt an official position .
This is unlawful .
EU institutions are not empowered to evaluate that judgment , or indeed any other .
Let us not forget that there is a tri-partite division of power , and that the Court is a body of the Council of Europe , and not of the European Union .
I will answer the questioners , since they have such doubts : the judgment about crosses does not violate the principle of subsidiarity .
Quite the opposite , it gives help in observing the law to those European states which have forgotten that in their constitution , there is a provision , if not about the division of church and state , then at least about neutrality of worldview .
The judgment of the Court helps national authorities and courts which are subject to the church to realise the fundamental rights of citizens which are being broken as a result of the clericalisation of social life .
The citizens of church states cannot defend their rights before national courts .
It is a good thing that they can turn to the Court of Human Rights and obtain justice .
The judgment accords with respect for the national identity of Member States and should be implemented .
It does not concern a ban on displaying religious symbols in public , but only in a very small section of public space , in state schools .
No one is calling for the removal of crosses from churches , squares or flags , as one fellow Member rashly said .
It is not interference in church-state relations , but only defence of citizens whose rights are being violated .
In my country , too , advancing clericalisation is restricting the fundamental rights of Poles .
I cannot imagine that the European Parliament and the Commission would prevent my fellow Poles from pursuing their just rights before the Court in Strasbourg .
A critical position of the Commission and Parliament concerning this judgment would be unauthorised interference , and would , in addition , expose us to ridicule .
I must warn you of this .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the decision of the European Court of Human Rights has upset not only worshippers but also everyone who , for centuries , has viewed the crucifix as a sign of hope and solidarity , something providing solace and freedom from fear and pain .
We hope that that decision will be modified by the Grand Chamber since it is clearly irrational .
Should we do away with the very name of the Red Cross ?
Should we remove the huge crucifixes on mountain tops which tower over cities and valleys ?
Will it be prohibited for the Queen of England , as has already been mentioned , to be the head of the Anglican Church ?
Nevertheless , the case invites a very important reflection from a civil and political point of view : are human rights merely the rights of individuals , as parties isolated from a social environment , or is the right to express a specific form of piety also a right of the peoples ?
Do tradition , history , intelligence and art count for nothing when , for millennia , they have characterised a people 's identity ?
Furthermore , the question also rightly concerns the relationship between subsidiarity and human rights , and I note that the latter , aside from certain fundamental principles which must be considered universal and irrefutable , may be interpreted in different ways , and human rights may even conflict with each other .
Why should a state be denied the chance , through its laws , to resolve these conflicts and to interpret and implement human rights according to the ethical views of its people ?
The issue therefore goes beyond the question of crucifixes .
On other occasions , the European Court has recognised , with regard to the right to life , the exclusive power of the States to decide on the most controversial matters , such as the regulation of abortion and euthanasia .
Now , the Treaty of Lisbon requires us to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights and consequently , as the European Union , also to respect the decisions of the European Court of Human Rights .
Therefore , we ought to think about the new and different direction currently being taken by the Court .
It would be a serious matter if a supranational power , especially if exercised by a limited number of people and not as the democratic expression of popular will , were to become repressive and demeaning , insensitive to people 's feelings and hearts and therefore ultimately opposed to freedom .
This is why I hope that the resolution tabled by the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will be adopted with the votes of a large number of Members .
( SK ) The history of Europe , its individual states and therefore also the EU is , like it nor not , closely connected with the Christian heritage .
Consequently , even the constitutions of many states contain a reference to Christian traditions .
Even the Treaty on European Union in its preamble draws inspiration , inter alia , from Europe 's religious heritage , from which universal values have developed .
Fundamental rights in the EU are today guaranteed in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and in the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms but , above all , they arise from constitutional traditions common to the Member States which have developed over centuries .
I therefore believe that the EU must fully respect national history , culture and traditions and resolutely refuse to penalise Member States who defend their right to their own special make-up and character , including the Christian heritage and Christian symbols .
In conclusion , I would merely like to add that neither the Charter nor the European Convention enlarge the powers of the Union .
( ES ) Madam President , I would like to start by asking to borrow some words that I am going to make my own .
The crucifix is not a sign of imposition .
It is a symbol that represents positive values , which are part of our history , our culture and a society that dates back more than 2 000 years .
We cannot claim to protect fundamental rights by denying the very values that created them .
Democracy works through freedom and respect , facilitating the exercise of rights , not through imposition or limitation .
Yes of course , the principle of subsidiarity must be respected and recognised by all European institutions , organisations and courts , especially freedom , whether it is freedom of opinion or freedom of belief .
The authority of the Member States to display religious symbols in public places as a symbol that represents the traditions and identity of their peoples should not and cannot be infringed .
Freedom is an essential element of our society and the basic pillar on which the single area of freedom , security and justice is built .
If it were to be limited or censored , the very foundations of the European Union would collapse .
( EL ) Madam President , I , too , consider that the Court is wrong to find that having a crucifix in schoolrooms is tantamount to disrespect for other people 's religious faith .
The issue we are debating today is a social rather than a legal issue .
Obviously we must abide by the principle of subsidiarity .
The presence of religious symbols is not a sign of religious discrimination or coercion .
It is a result of the tradition and history of every country and often of its Constitution , as is the case in my country , Greece .
In Greece , we have religious icons in schoolrooms , not in order to impose some specific religion on pupils , but because it forms part of our tradition and is directly connected to the values and structures of our society , directly connected to four centuries of persecution and religious oppression by the Ottoman Empire .
( SK ) I would like to respond briefly to three points .
On this evening at the close of the year and in the run-up to Christmas , before midnight on a Tuesday , almost sixty years after the founding of the European Union , we are still discussing one of the pillars of European integration .
We are discussing the principle of subsidiarity .
Secondly , the question of Mr Borghezio relates to the decision of the European Court in Strasbourg that the presence of crosses in Italian schools is a breach of the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights .
This decision has provoked fears in many states .
The Slovak parliament last week passed a resolution in which it stated that this decision is in conflict with the cultural heritage and Christian history of Europe .
And finally , I did not feel entirely comfortable during the reading of the draft joint resolution on which we will vote on Thursday .
I am disappointed that we lack the courage to include in a resolution that talks about subsidiarity those points from the Lisbon Treaty that are directly connected to the programme that has been passed .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , if we consider that hardly anyone is here right now to talk about the question of crucifixes , given that to discuss crucifixes we must invoke the question of subsidiarity , the only logical conclusion is that we find ourselves in a Europe which is ashamed of the historical truth of its own Judeo-Christian roots and the historical truth of Christianity which , as Goethe said , is the common language of Europe .
Within the European Parliament , there are 23 official languages which demonstrate that there is nothing that unites Europe if not Christianity .
I would like to ask Mr Barrot a question : why , after a popular referendum in Switzerland said ' no ' to minarets , did the European Commission , the European Union , the United Nations , the Arab League and the Organisation of the Islamic Conference all rally round to condemn the outcome of that referendum - even though Switzerland is not a member of the European Union - yet today , you are taking a neutral position over a question which concerns our roots , our identity and our soul ?
( HU ) As a Protestant clergyman , whose tradition regards the eight-pointed star and not the cross as the most important symbol , allow me to make a brief contribution to this debate .
I am actually from an electoral constituency where 99 % of the electorate are Catholic .
My four children go to school with Catholic children .
The cross does not bother us .
I would like to make a distinction here - if I may , on a technical point - between the crucifix and the cross .
We must be aware , even though it does not bother me personally , that there are people who are bothered by the cross or crucifix because the cross or crucifix reminds them of the Inquisition .
I feel that this is appropriate in those countries where the practice has developed because of the Catholic tradition of having a cross in schools , especially in faith schools .
However , Parliament should not be discussing these matters , but rather poverty , the economic crisis or how Eastern Europe is going to catch up .
This is an unproductive debate we are having .
We need to look at who it was who protested in that Italian school and why .
We should have examined this one-off case rather than discuss a matter here which is already something from the past .
I want , of course , to emphasise once again that I have nothing against the cross as I , too , live everyday looking at the cross , which does not bother me .
We must create the right living conditions in Italy or Romania so that this does not become a subject of debate .
Madam President , in recent years , we have witnessed an ongoing campaign to suppress freedom of religious expression .
Christian nurses have been disciplined for offering to pray with patients and , only today , Lillian Ladele , a Christian registrar who was told to perform civil partnerships or face dismissal , has lost her case for religious discrimination at the Court of Appeal in the United Kingdom .
Equality laws have failed to protect Christians - indeed , quite the opposite .
An amendment to the Equality Bill to protect the religious liberty of churches was voted down in the House of Commons two weeks ago , amid accusations of interference from the EU Commission .
The Commission , in their reasoned opinion , argued that the UK needs to narrow the religious liberty safeguard in its employment laws .
I say : shame on the Commission .
There must be a recognition that people have faith and have the right to express that faith .
Christians ought to be protected , and not punished , by the law .
Madam President , the country with which I am most familiar has seen some harsh confrontations on these subjects , and I would like very simply , but on a personal level , to express the wish that the European Parliament 's policy remains one of mutual tolerance and respect .
There are , in fact , families that wish to follow a Christian tradition .
There are families that may question that tradition .
This religious and cultural diversity is what makes us , is what makes Europe .
I believe that we must remain very prudent when dealing with an issue such as this .
I take the liberty of saying this quite simply because I myself have suffered , in the country with which I am most familiar , from extremes on both sides .
That being said , I am a lawyer and , quite honestly , I do not see how this debate can be held here , when it should have been held first at the Assembly of the Council of Europe and in our national parliaments .
That is where I believe this debate should really take place .
Moreover , we are obliged - I am obliged , on behalf of the Commission - to say that the Commission is certainly very committed to respect for the principle of religious freedom and that it would obviously be compelled to react against any form of discrimination against persons belonging to a particular religion .
Having said that , the Commission may not act outside the legal framework laid down by the treaties .
Moreover , it may not intervene as guardian of the treaties on issues concerning a Member State when those issues do not relate to European Union law .
I am obliged to say this , quite simply .
The Commission can only note the various positions that have been expressed in this House , but it cannot express an opinion on an issue that does not come under European law .
Once again , these issues come under the domestic legal system of the Member States .
That is what I can say for my part , as a lawyer .
Nonetheless , I believe that this debate is useful and that it was interesting , of course , even though I would quite simply encourage all those who have taken part in this debate to keep a necessary sense of proportion and to allow the Council of Europe and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe in turn to usefully debate the interpretations that could be given to a European Declaration of Human Rights .
Quite honestly , however , as guardians of the treaties we cannot intervene in a debate that essentially concerns the Council of Europe and the European Court of Human Rights .
I apologise for not being able to give you a better answer this evening , but I am obliged , in all honesty and in accordance with the law , to respond in this way .
I honestly believe that we are talking about problems that are dealt with today in the Union within the framework of the domestic legal system of each Member State .
I have received six motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 115 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure , .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 December 2009 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - ( DE ) The ruling of the European Court of Human Rights is the expression of an aggressive secularism and gives authority to those who want the public domain to be religion-free .
In so doing , they are overlooking the fact that our continent cannot exist without Christianity .
Christianity has defined Europe , its people , culture and art and its way of thinking to the extent that the continent would lose its identity if all traces of Christianity were to be removed .
It is certainly not about calling into question the freedom of religion .
The separation of the Church and the State is a supreme benefit of our democracy and I would like us to take care to ensure that both carry out their own tasks with mutual respect for one another .
However , this respect is exactly what it is all about .
The Christian Church must not demand that everyone subscribe to its beliefs , but it is entitled to demand to be respected by everyone .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , what does freedom of religion actually mean ?
The answer is quite simple .
It is the freedom to practise religion .
Freedom of religion is not freedom from religion but the freedom to have religion .
Freedom of religion does not create a religion-free society , but rather gives people the right to practice their religion openly within society .
A crucifix in the classroom does not force anyone to believe , or not to believe .
Therefore , it does not violate the freedom of religion .
Nor have I ever heard of a right entitling someone not to be confronted with religious symbols .
If this were the case , we would , in fact , immediately have to prohibit all crosses on gravestones and all church spires .
The crucifix ruling of the European Court of Human Rights is therefore not only an attack on the principle of subsidiarity , but it also violates the right to religious freedom itself .
We , the European Parliament , cannot and must not accept this ruling .
The European Court of Human Rights should administer justice and not become a puppet for ideological and anti-Christian interests .
Otherwise , we will have to seriously consider whether this Court actually still has a purpose at all .
In my opinion , the ruling of the Court has nothing to do with protecting freedom of religion .
The presence of a cross in a classroom does not , on its own , exert pressure on a person 's worldview and does not violate the right of parents to raise their children in accordance with their own convictions , just as that right is not violated by wearing clothes which testify to the profession of a particular faith .
A mutual understanding and openness to others lies at the foundation of a common , united Europe , as does respect for cultural differences between countries and the roots and traditions of the nations which make up the European Union .
It is no secret that the sources of our European identity derive directly from the Christian tradition .
Therefore , for a clear majority of Europeans , a cross is a religious symbol and , at the same time , a symbol which represents their values .
I do not imagine that the mutual dialogue which we conduct with each other every day should be devoid of the values which we hold .
Neither do I imagine that , in the name of religious freedom , we should be forced to deny what is , for us , an important and sacred symbol , irrespective of whether it be a cross , a Star of David or a crescent moon .
Just as no one has the right to force anyone to adhere to a particular religion or value system , so also no one has the right to compel , in the name of freedom , anyone to remove symbols which are important for the whole of humanity .
By its ruling , the Court of Human Rights is not , in fact , upholding religious freedom , but is discriminating against all those in whose lives symbols of faith have significant meaning .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Mr President , at the beginning of this week 's part-session , you answered a question from my Austrian colleague , Jörg Leichtfried , on the new Members joining this Parliament as a result of the Lisbon Treaty and when that could take place .
You answered that this is now up to the Council .
I agree as regards them joining this Parliament as full Members , but I am not sure that this is the case when it comes to their status as observers as an introduction to actually becoming full Members .
I interpret the decision we took recently on David Martin 's report on our own internal rules so that we are actually free to let them start working as observers as soon as they are elected and their election confirmed by their Member State , and that we as a parliament can decide ourselves on the conditions for their position as observers .
Mr President , could you please discuss this with the rapporteur , Mr Martin , in order to come to a solution as soon as possible ?
It would be unreasonable if new Members who are already elected and whose election has been confirmed by the national authorities have to wait for months and months before they can actually start working .
Many of them are prepared to start immediately .
As I said before , I have asked about the decision of the European Council , and the Committee on Constitutional Affairs should also take into account and study the problem .
There is no final decision yet about the number of new seats and from which country they should come .
There is no final decision .
I know it is the decision of the European Parliament , but it is not final , so it is not so easy to take observers without having the final decision about the number and from which country they should come .
So we must wait .
I am thinking about that and taking care about that very strongly .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree that this is a difficult matter to settle .
I do not think it is impossible , but , from the point of view of my group , I would like to say that , with regard to the discussion in France , we find it unacceptable for observers , whatever their status , to at the same time remain members of their national parliaments .
We believe that those who come here as observers should relinquish their national mandates .
( FR ) Mr President , in accordance with Rule 110 of the Rules of Procedure , we are gathered here to debate the results of the Swedish Presidency - I applaud Prime Minister Reinfeldt , who has given us a courageous , useful and effective Presidency - but we are also here to examine the results of the European Council of 10 and 11 December .
On this matter , I would like to draw the attention of the President of the Commission , which is the guardian of the treaties and their application , to Article 15 ( 6 ) of the Treaty on European Union , which stipulates that the President of the European Council must present a report after every European Council meeting .
It seems certain that Mr Van Rompuy , the new President of the European Council , will not be joining us , and I regret that .
Indeed , he has been in office since 1 December 2009 , he carries out an intense diplomatic role , and I believe that his first political act should have been to come and present himself to the European Parliament .
It was therefore up to him to come and present the conclusions of the European Council of 10 and 11 December 2009 .
If I may explain : an understanding was made between the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , and the President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Reinfeldt , that this last month of the Presidency will be conducted according to the old principles .
That understanding is in force .
The President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , will take up office on 1 January 2010 .
( FR ) Mr President , it is not the responsibility of the Heads of State or Government to deal with the application of treaties that have been ratified by the peoples .
I will explain in greater detail : inviting and working with the President of the European Council and the serving Prime Minister who represents the rotating presidency is a decision which belongs to all Members of Parliament .
We , too , will decide who is invited and in what order .
We are also going to agree between the institutions - the European Parliament and the European Council - how we are going to work together .
In addition , I think your remarks are premature .
An interinstitutional agreement must be made .
The European Commission is also involved in this .
It is too early to discuss this .
It is very important that we maintain an appropriate balance between the current presidency and Head of Government , and the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy .
Our presidencies change , while the President remains the same , but we also need to cooperate with the Heads of Government .
We need cooperation with governments , because as a legislative body , we must have permanent contact with the government of the country which has the presidency .
Furthermore , the way in which we are going to work together , and whom we invite , is also our decision - in consultation with the European Council , of course .
We are going to hold talks about this .
I would like to tell you that it is far too early to be doing this .
Meanwhile , Mr Reinfeldt is giving the report of the last six months ' activity of the European Council .
Mr Van Rompuy was not involved in this work , because he was nominated only a few weeks ago , so he could not discuss this matter at all today .
The matter is absolutely clear .
Implementing measures ( Rule 88 ) : see Minutes
Results of the Swedish Presidency - Outcome of the European Council on 10 and 11 December 2009 ( debate )
I would like to warmly welcome Prime Minister Reinfeldt , who has been with us for nearly half a year as President-in-Office .
I would also like to welcome President Barroso .
The next item is the joint debate on :
the Council statement on the results of the Swedish Presidency ;
the European Council report and Commission statement on the outcome of the European Council on 10 and 11 December 2009 .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I am grateful for this opportunity to address the European Parliament once again and at such a crucial time .
As we speak , representatives from 193 countries are gathered in a conference centre in Copenhagen , talking , arguing , negotiating and trying to meet the expectations of millions of people around the world .
In just two days , the UN climate conference will be over .
Soon we will be looking back at a meeting that was crucial , not only for the EU but for the world ; a meeting that was decisive for those who cannot grow their crops because of a lack of water , decisive for those who have lost their homes in tornadoes or floods , and decisive for those who are vainly building walls against a sea level that rises every year .
We know what is at risk , so why is it then so difficult to act ?
Is it because we fear any change of our way of life ?
Still , we know that if we keep on using the world 's resources the way we do , our current way of life will no longer be an option and we will face even more drastic changes .
We have much greater things than our everyday comfort to fear .
The fight against climate change has been at the top of the agenda throughout the Swedish Presidency , at all our European Council meetings and in all our summits with the Union 's major partners .
As you probably know , we adopted a comprehensive mandate at our October European Council to keep the EU 's leading position in the climate negotiations .
We agreed on a long-term goal for emissions reductions of 80-95 % by 2050 and we renewed our offer to reduce emissions - 30 % , provided that others make comparable efforts .
We agreed on emission reductions for international transport and , despite resistance from some corners , we put figures on the global financial need in developing countries to fight climate change .
Last week - after weeks of bilateral consultations - we took yet another step : a collectively put-together financial package earmarked for the ' fast start ' of climate action in developing countries , offering EUR 7.2 billion for the coming three years .
I know that this is not enough .
Therefore I must say that , while I am satisfied that the European Council could agree to this step , the time is now ripe for other developed countries to join us .
So , what do we need to do in Copenhagen ?
We need binding commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , not just from the developed countries , but also from developing countries , to ensure that global warming keeps below the 2 ° C target that science tells us is necessary .
I have sat down with the Indian and Chinese leadership .
I know what they say about this .
Why should they agree to develop clean and green , when we have polluted the world for decades ?
That is one way of looking at it , but the problem is this : the developed world cannot solve the problem alone .
Emissions from the developing world are already starting to exceed those from the developed world .
That is why we must work together to solve the problem .
From our side , we can compensate for years of irresponsible behaviour .
We can help finance climate action in the developing world .
The European Union took its responsibility last week .
It is not the form that matters in Copenhagen but the substance .
We can be satisfied if we get a deal on emissions reductions and on financing , and a commitment to start immediate action and , more importantly , we can start fighting climate change .
Last year , we were suddenly faced with the most serious financial crisis since the 1930s .
The ground was literally shaking under our feet .
Suddenly it became clear to us how interlinked the financial markets were and how interdependent we all were in finding a common response .
In the course of only a few months , governments in the EU adopted extraordinary support measures .
It was a fast and impressive response but it came with a price .
Our aggregated deficit in public finances now amounts to almost 7 % of GDP - over three times more than last year .
Twenty Member States are experiencing excessive deficit procedures .
So the follow-up to the economic and financial crisis has , quite naturally , been another main priority throughout this autumn .
Let me briefly touch on what we have done .
At the end of October , we agreed on a fiscal exit strategy , and at last week 's European Council , we agreed on principles for exiting from financial support schemes .
In addition , we agreed on a fundamentally new structure for financial supervision in Europe .
When financial flows are international , supervision can no longer be national .
Now it is up to the European Parliament to agree to the final steps .
It was also clear to us that the ' bonus culture ' could not continue in the way in which people had become used to .
I am pleased that the EU managed to convince the G20 to agree on far-reaching changes to this policy .
The new rules will reinforce the need for a link between result and reward .
The economic and financial crisis hit us hard but we have shown the ability to act and we have strengthened our resistance .
Once we have secured our recovery , the EU will stand stronger , thanks to the measures we have adopted .
The Swedish Presidency took place during a period of institutional change .
When we took over on 1 July , this Parliament was newly elected .
We had not yet appointed a President of the European Commission .
The outcome of the then pending Irish referendum was uncertain .
It was not clear whether the Treaty of Lisbon would be ratified by all Member States .
It was not even clear whether it could enter into force during the Swedish Presidency .
Then the drama unravelled .
In close consultation with this Parliament , José Manuel Barroso was appointed President of the European Commission for a second term .
The Presidency now had a stable counterpart in the Commission to work with .
The outcome of the Irish referendum was a victory for Ireland .
It was a victory for European cooperation .
It brought us one step closer to the Treaty of Lisbon .
But then the unexpected happened .
At a late stage , the Czech President came with new conditions before he would sign .
We had to handle these requests in a way that did not trigger similar conditions from other Member States and we managed to do this at the European Council in October .
A few days later , the Czech President signed .
Immediately after the signature , I started to consult my colleagues again .
We had to agree on high-ranking positions - on the President of the European Council , and to nominate the High Representative .
I am not exaggerating when I say it was a relief when all preparations were finalised on 1 December .
The Treaty of Lisbon could finally enter into force .
Now , the European Union will be more efficient .
It will have better tools to fight climate change and influence the global economic agenda .
The new President of the European Council will ensure continuity .
The High Representative will assure coordination in our external relations .
We will have a more democratic Union with the greater involvement of the European Parliament and of our national parliaments .
A new era for the European Union has begun .
When I stood here before you on 15 July , we were still in the throes of the financial and economic crisis .
There was uncertainty on the transition of the new treaty .
We did not know whether we would manage to unite ourselves and encourage others on the not so long - but very winding - road to Copenhagen .
With the European Council meeting last week , the Swedish Presidency has delivered on all five of its priorities : a strong EU mandate for climate change ; follow-up of the economic and financial crisis ; the EU Baltic Sea Strategy ; the Stockholm Programme for justice and home affairs ; reinforcing the EU as a global actor , including enlargement , and a new external action service .
As I said , with the Treaty of Lisbon in place , a new era has begun in the European Union .
I would like to end by thanking all of you .
The Presidency needed the help of the European Parliament in tackling the challenges we were facing .
Thank you for giving us that help .
I would also like to thank the Commission , and especially José Manuel Barroso .
I have probably spent more than a healthy amount of time with José Manuel this autumn .
He has been a tremendous support to me and to the Swedish Presidency .
Finally , I would like to thank the Member States for their will to put aside differences and start compromising - with the best for Europe at heart - to find solutions that are not only of benefit to them , but to Europe as a whole .
This unity is our strength .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , Prime Minister , during the past six months , we have seen a new treaty come into force , ending almost a decade of debate and opening the door to new opportunities for this new , enlarged European Union we have today .
We have seen the first evidence that decisive action taken to stabilise the European economy in the face of crisis is bearing some results .
And as we enter the end game in Copenhagen , we can be clear that the European Union has been working hard to maintain the momentum it has championed towards decisive global action on climate change .
I would therefore like to pay a very sincere tribute to Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt and all the team of the Swedish Presidency for a highly successful presidency .
It is particularly important that the Swedish Presidency has been so effective in ensuring the completion of the ratification process of the Lisbon Treaty , managing the transition to this new treaty while achieving all the other objectives .
We have seen the appointment of the first President of the European Council and of the first High Representative , the Vice-President of the Commission , by the European Council .
And let us not forget - because it was a very important moment for this Parliament , following the unanimous designation by the European Council - we have seen the election by this Parliament of the President of the next Commission with a qualified majority .
Last week 's European Council was the first time that it has met as a fully fledged institution .
It was also the first time that the new High Representative and Vice-President of the Commission , Catherine Ashton , has attended .
The new President of the European Council will be fully functioning by 1 January 2010 and has presented his ideas on how to organise the European Council in the future .
I very much welcome all the proposals to give the European Council more consistency and more continuity in its work .
I also welcome the ideas of having more political , frank discussions and short and punchy conclusions .
There were many other issues that were the object of the European Council .
I would like to highlight just some , not forgetting one very important one , the definition of the Baltic Strategy , which can be a model for other regional cooperation inside the European Union and with some of our partners .
On the economy , we are keeping the right balance between maintaining the stimulus and preparing our exit strategies .
I presented the scene for our European 2020 Strategy .
I hope the European Council will focus on the discussion of this very important agenda for the future of Europe , namely through discussions in the next meetings , in the formal European Council in February and in the spring European Council .
I would like to reiterate here my offer to come to this plenary so that Parliament can organise a specific debate on this very important issue .
I think it is extremely important that there is full ownership by the European Parliament and , on the side of the Council , by the European Council , of this European Union 2020 Strategy , which is where our future will be played .
On the Stockholm Programme , the Commission 's proposals have now been translated into an agreed approach for the next five years .
I know that many in this Parliament share our determination to use this springboard to seize the opportunities of the Lisbon Treaty for a step change in European action on freedom , security and justice .
That was one of the major reasons why I decided to reorganise the portfolios of the next College in this area .
It is going to be one of the most important areas of the European Union 's work in the next five years .
The European Council had a particular significance for climate change .
In the past few years , the European Union has developed a consistent and ambitious approach on climate change .
I am very proud that the Commission has been the initiator of this very ambitious agenda .
The impact of reduced emissions may only be felt in several decades ' time , but we are already taking concrete steps , giving our targets the force of law .
Let us be frank about this .
Some of our partners are announcing their intentions by press statements ; but we have announced our intentions by law , law that is already agreed by all the Member States .
The developed world must act , but it must also help the developing world to decouple growth and emissions .
I think that it is right that the European Council last week centred on how we can put this global leadership at the service of an ambitious deal at Copenhagen : by promising help to developing countries not in some distant future but already next year ; by making clear that the deal must be comprehensive and must have the verification mechanisms to make it stick ; by maintaining our readiness to up our targets , but only if others put ambitious commitments on the table as well .
I think the European Council achieved very important results , namely on two matters .
First , on finance , the Council was able successfully to put together a fast-start finance package , bigger than expected and , critically , with every Member State involved .
Of course , some have said that this is not enough coming from the European Union , but EUR 7.2 billion , more than USD 10 billion in the current circumstances , and for three years , is a very serious commitment .
I hope the money is now guaranteed , not just an aspiration .
It is now for others to match it .
The European Council also reiterated its commitment for medium-term financing , to ensure it gives the fair contribution that is necessary for 2020 .
Second , action on climate has sometimes been a divisive point for the European Council .
However , the atmosphere this time was different .
There was a strong shared sense that everyone has an interest in the European Union pulling its weight .
We should now be getting the benefits from the investment we have made as the pioneers in this agenda .
What I did find generally encouraging was recognition that the European Union has to stand together .
Let us hope that this determination holds firm under the pressures of the next two or three days .
What can we expect over the next few days ?
Prime Minister Rasmussen of Denmark will probably put forward a text today - but with a lot of the key numbers still left blank .
The leaders ' task will be to move this forward to a deal .
This is why I am going to Copenhagen immediately after this debate .
Together with Prime Minister Reinfeldt , we will do our best for the European Union to lead this debate .
We know that the atmosphere at the moment is not easy at Copenhagen .
We also know that this is part of the usual rhythm of a top negotiation .
However , the arrival of so many Heads of State or Government will be a powerful driver to reach a deal .
If that deal includes real commitment to cut emissions from both developed and developing countries ; a clear commitment on financing to make this happen ; and an agreement on how this is to be applied and verified - if this agreement includes the different elements of the Bali road map and can be seen to be in the right ball park to respect the 2 ° C limit , then I think we will say rightly that it will be a major achievement .
We are not there yet , but I believe it is possible to reach that agreement .
The next few days will show whether the ambitions we have discussed in this Parliament so often are going to be realised , but I sense already that there is a compelling need for change and that we need to make this success in Copenhagen .
There is a huge amount at stake .
There is , of course , a balance to be found , but there is also a sense that today 's generation knows that there is a challenge which cannot be avoided .
I believe last week 's European Council left the European Union ready to meet the challenge .
I hope that with European leadership , we will achieve success at Copenhagen .



Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Reinfeldt , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) identifies with the way in which you , Mr Reinfeldt , have managed the rotating presidency , in accordance with the Treaty of Nice .
It also identifies with the latest proposals by the European Council , whether on climate change , the crisis or the creation of a Europe of security , of a Europe that protects .
Indeed , my group supports the honest and responsible management of European affairs , which has been the hallmark of the Swedish Presidency .
Honest management , because , at a time when so many of our friends , neighbours and relatives are being hit by the crisis because they have lost their jobs or their jobs are still under threat , Europe has not made false promises to them .
It is building the future , our future , by making sure that businesses once again have the means to create , to innovate and thus to create jobs .
Responsible management , because , on climate change , on security , but also on employment and the economy , Europe is implementing the social market economy model .
It is organising the timetable , the arrangements for a concerted , gradual but also difficult exit from the crisis .
It is cleaning up the disastrous practices that we have seen on the financial markets over the past few decades .
It is supporting SMEs and strengthening social cohesion , without which nothing lasting can be achieved .
Let us be careful , however , not to repeat the mistakes of the Lisbon Strategy which , by setting unrealistic goals , has been more disappointing than anything else .
Let us be careful to ensure that the new economic strategy , dubbed ' European Union 2020 ' , does not become yet another complicated beast .
Mr Reinfeldt , Mr Barroso , on climate change , too , Europe is showing a sense of responsibility .
With its decision to release EUR 2.4 billion in aid each year for three years , Europe is setting an example by providing a third of the international aid earmarked for the poorest countries .
I now expect our partners to do the same .
From Copenhagen I expect balanced commitments , short- and medium-term commitments , and verifiable commitments , together with financial penalties in the event of non-compliance .
In other words , I expect Copenhagen not to mislead Europe .
To conclude , the PPE Group supports the Council 's guidelines on security under the new Stockholm Programme .
Our fellow citizens want more security , but also respect for public freedoms .
They want to be protected in their daily lives , they want to know what they are eating and what they are consuming but , at the same time , they expect - and this is only natural - to live in a fairer society that is more respectful of others .
This is precisely the kind of Europe that we , the PPE Group , defend and promote .
Ladies and gentlemen , now that the acute crises and the institutional ups and downs are over , the time has come to take big decisions , and our margin for error is small .
In a few days ' time , we will see whether Europe 's courageous stand on climate change has paid off .
We will see whether the United States , China and the others are simply playing for time or whether they want to qualify for the final to become the world 's responsible stakeholders .
I wish to thank the Swedish Presidency for its efforts and , above all , now that Christmas is here , Mr Reinfeldt .
You have worked hard over the last six months ; it was not easy , as we all know .
I also wish the best of luck to Mr Van Rompuy , who will take over for two and a half years , and I ask the Council not to forget that , from now on , the Council and Parliament are playing in the same league under somewhat more transparent circumstances .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the concept of transition has been mentioned several times today and I believe that it an appropriate term to describe the Swedish Presidency .
It was a presidency of transition from one treaty , the Treaty of Nice , which had proved to be totally impracticable , to the Treaty of Lisbon , which is overloaded with expectations , not all of which , in my opinion , can be met , as the Treaty of Lisbon cannot be the end of institutional development in Europe .
In this regard , we must be careful not to expect the Treaty of Lisbon to fulfil all of our wishes for all solutions to all of the problems of the world , because we can see how difficult it is to work with the Treaty of Lisbon by all the points of order that have been raised .
I would like to begin with the institutional problems that this treaty has created .
We still have the Swedish Prime Minister here today .
Who will represent the Council Presidency next time ?
Mr Van Rompuy , the rotating Council Presidency , then the President of the Commission , then Baroness Ashton - if they all speak then at least , for the first time , for the first four speeches we will not have this permanent PPE conference , and we will then have Baroness Ashton and hence a proper socialist , who will stir things up .
That is definitely one benefit .
( Heckling )
Of course , I do not know whether it will be Mr Van Rompuy or Mr Zapatero who will attend , but thank you , Mr Langen .


If you already know that it is Mr Zapatero who will attend , you have made a useful contribution for once .
Thank you very much .
The Swedish Presidency was a presidency of transition , but also a presidency that once again had to experience Mrs Merkel and Mr Sarkozy playing their cards very close to their chests to the very end , letting the current Presidency run its course - while the public said ' it does not know what is going on , it cannot do anything ' - and has to pay the price for their tactical game .
That has been the fate of Mr Reinfeldt over the last few months .
Thank goodness , that has now come to an end .
That is the progress we have made with the Treaty of Lisbon : a bit more transparency in our institutional structures .
And surely something else , too : the enhancement of the power of the European Parliament .
However , more power for the European Parliament also means that the other institutions will have to deal with Parliament .
For the President of the European Council , this means that he will have to coordinate decisions that he wishes to prepare in the Council - legislative decisions at least - with Parliament .
He would be wise not to view the President of the European Parliament as a spectator at the Council meetings , but as the representative of an institution that has been given greater power .
That is what I expect from Mr Van Rompuy , for example .
The Council , and the Commission , too , would be well advised to try to seek a majority in Parliament , on the basis of this new treaty , that will also be able to meet the social , environmental and finance policy challenges that they themselves formulate in their programmes because , for legislation , they ultimately need a qualified majority in this Parliament if they want to push through their initiatives .
Therefore , the Commission would be well advised to seek a majority throughout the whole breadth of Parliament , which is perhaps something that does not go well with the fact that Members of the Commission are deputy leaders of European parties and are therefore evidence of the one-sidedness of certain political trends .
That is something , Mr Barroso , that you need to think very seriously about .
The Swedish Presidency has put in a lot of effort .
I will gladly admit that here .
However , ultimately - and this is not your fault , Mr Reinfeldt , but the fault of the system - it has had no influence on the big decisions , including those that are currently being made in Copenhagen , because a single rotating presidency cannot influence very much at all , it can only coordinate , and there is a difference between coordinating and influencing .
Influencing the supervision of the financial markets , climate change , the efforts for economic recovery - these are things that only Europe as a whole can do , with its institutions in collaboration .
I therefore believe that the Treaty of Lisbon represents progress .
The fact that the Swedish Presidency ultimately put it in place seems to me to have been the big success of this transition Presidency .
Mr President , firstly , I will not be talking this morning about institutional matters , as others before me have done .
We will certainly have time to discuss these matters , since the Council is apparently going to implement a protocol that requires an intergovernmental conference .
We must think about whether or not we want a conference .
I believe that we in the European Parliament will nonetheless have a few ideas on this subject to ensure that we make progress with European democracy and that we compensate for the lack of transparency and democracy in the cooptations being proposed .
That being said , I should especially like to thank the Presidency , Prime Minister Reinfeldt and Mrs Malmström for the excellent relations they have maintained with Parliament and for their fine management of what were , after all , very difficult issues - I am , of course , talking about the ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon .
We even had to overcome the ' Klaus obstacle ' ; from now on , we will talk about the Klaus obstacle and the excellent way in which the Swedish Presidency solved that problem .
Secondly , I believe that the other most important element is the Stockholm Programme , which has been adopted and which now needs to be implemented .
However , for you , Mr Reinfeldt , the Presidency does not end here of course , since there is still the Copenhagen Summit , where you must gain some ground .
I would like to send out , today , before this House , an optimistic and purposeful message , which somewhat contradicts what we read in today 's press .
Today 's press is characterised by pessimism : will an agreement be reached or not ?
I believe that an agreement is possible because serious partners are out there , and we must try to find and motivate them .
The fact that President Obama and the Chinese Prime Minister are arriving tomorrow and the day after tomorrow testifies to their will to reach an agreement .
I believe that we must follow a strategy .
Which one , though , ladies and gentlemen ?
I believe that we must follow a strategy whereby we try to establish three-way cooperation between the United States , China and Europe .
If , in the next two days , these three reach an initial agreement , then we will have a serious basis on which to convince the others - India , Brazil and the other countries - to join in this effort .
I therefore call for a proactive approach .
The most important thing is to strive for this three-way alliance , which is necessary in order to reach an agreement , and to propose , from the outset , a 30 % reduction in emissions .
A sense of purpose must be shown in this proposal .
In my view , we must let ourselves be guided , in this final phase of the negotiations , in Copenhagen , by Hegel , who said that it is not the impossible that drives one to despair , but what was possible but was not achieved .
I believe that , with the Swedish Presidency 's persistence , we will achieve success at the Copenhagen Summit .


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Reinfeldt , after having spent four days in Copenhagen , I find it extremely difficult to listen to the words ' leading role of the European Union ' .
Leadership - and I learnt this back in nursery school - is primarily achieved by setting a good example .
I would now like to ask you , Mr Reinfeldt and Mr Barroso , whether you actually believe that , with a strategy based on lies , self-deception and large-scale international deception , we can achieve a leading role in an international process such as that in Copenhagen .

You should know , Mr Reinfeldt - and Mr Barroso certainly knows this because he has been involved long enough - that the two-degree goal is a ' mission impossible ' if the Europeans stick with the offers that they have so far brought to the table .
The reduction target is inadequate .
At the same time , we Europeans have opened all the back doors in order to avoid a reduction policy at home .
There are no limits to off-setting any more .
Hot air has become the order of the day not only for Poland , but for Sweden , too .
The inclusion of forests , which you and your government in particular have been promoting , Mr Reinfeldt , is another contribution from Europe to avoiding having an active reduction policy .
It has been assessed by many experts in Copenhagen that what you , yourselves , have so far proposed as being the best we can do would not result in emissions in Europe falling by 2020 , but rising .
So , Mr Reinfeldt , please explain how we are to achieve the two-degree target if you stick to what has so far been offered .
To make matters worse , a German newspaper , the Financial Times , announced today that you have given up on the 30 % target for 2020 and now want to offer this for 2025 instead .
If you really want to promote this process , I would ask you , as a matter of urgency , to take back what has been published in the newspaper today as the European line .
I will say one last thing to finish .
There will be thousands of official observers standing outside the doors of the Bella Centre over the next few days - even though they have accreditation for the conference .
These are people who have been working extremely hard for climate policy for years , some of them for decades .
Please ensure that , because these people are suddenly no longer able to be involved , they do not end up in cages or having to sit for hours with their hands bound on the frozen ground .
There are a lot of leading roles to lose in Copenhagen .
However , the way in which the rule of law in the EU is presented there - I do not care for disruptive crowds , not one bit - and the disproportionate treatment of the peaceful demonstrators - Cecilia Malmström is , of course , an expert in law - is also something that you really ought to explain in Copenhagen .
Mr President , it is a pity you only spoke about keeping to time just before my speech .
I will try to observe the time limit .
Mr Reinfeldt , you do , of course , deserve our thanks .
As has been said , the Swedish Presidency came at a difficult period of transition and turbulence associated with adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
That is behind us now , but the presidency also came at a time of economic crisis .
I would like to begin my speech , which is not going to be all complimentary , by thanking you that the Swedish Presidency avoided the temptation of populism , so easy to fall into , in these difficult times of crisis .
Mr Reinfeldt , you have proved there are no easy answers to difficult questions .
The Swedish Presidency has shown that in times of crisis , the European Union is able to look for good and non-populist solutions which can help not only Europe , but the whole world , to get out of this difficult situation .
I would like to thank you very sincerely for doing that difficult work , for your respect for the Member States , and also for the respect you have shown for the European Parliament .
It was a difficult time , and I think you have passed the exam here .
You will be able to end your mission in two weeks ' time with complete satisfaction .
I think it was not without reason that in your speech , you did not mention foreign policy .
Unfortunately , I am forced , here , to say some severe words .
I think that in the field of foreign policy , particularly in two areas , the Swedish Presidency and the last six months cannot be accounted successful .
Firstly , what I think was a completely unnecessary crisis related to the unfortunate article about Israeli soldiers in a Swedish newspaper , and the whole unnecessary aggravation of relations between the Swedish Presidency and Israel cast a shadow over the last six months .
I want to say it was wrong that the presidency did not unequivocally condemn the article in the Swedish paper .
I and my entire group think Israeli soldiers are not only defending Israel , but the whole of our civilisation .
I think the last six months have been lacking in unequivocal support for our main ally in the Middle East , Israel .
Evidence of this is the outcome of the last European Council concerning the Middle East , which , although it is , in my opinion , better than what was proposed , does not give us a leading role in the Middle East .
The European Union should be leading the peace process , and should be the main force striving for peace in the Middle East .
If we want to play this role , we must overcome our own differences .
We cannot adopt unilateral pro-Palestinian positions .
The last six months of foreign policy have , unfortunately , not put a stop to this .
We spoke about this yesterday during the debate on Georgia .
I think that rising Russian imperialism is one of the European Union 's most serious problems .
It is dangerous not only for Russia 's neighbours , but for the entire European Union .
Nevertheless , I would like to thank you , Mr Reinfeldt , for your leadership and for the Swedish leadership of the European Union .
The role of Parliament is to draw attention to that which is not always , in our opinion , the best .
I think that , on balance , in spite of the negative comments I have made , the Swedish Presidency has been a positive one .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

( HU ) I would like to ask Mr Kamiński whether he considers the actions carried out by Israeli soldiers in Gaza as part of the fight for human civilisation .
It is you who is biased , because anyone who wants peace in this region should primarily stand up , in accordance with the UN resolutions , for the Palestinians ' right to an independent state .
You are the one unfairly calling Sweden to account for a stance which it adopted .
I think Israel is the only democracy in the Middle East .
The state of Israel is a shining example to the countries of the Middle East in the area of democracy .
War is , of course , a difficult thing , which always brings painful consequences .
This is why we are for peace .
In my opinion , our role is to support the peace process in the Middle East and to oppose terrorism resolutely .
Mr President , my colleague , Mrs Svensson , will speak on the subject of the Swedish Presidency .
I would like to highlight two points from the conclusions of the first summit following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Firstly , I regret the fact that the European Council did not communicate any clear messages with regard to the future strategy of the EU .
On the contrary , it fell into line with the old Commission , which wanted to hold on to the basic principles of the failed Lisbon strategy .
However , even though it has been acknowledged that a new political approach is needed , where is it ?
I have not seen it .
With the new Commission , the new Parliament and the President of the European Council , however , there would now be a chance to start a totally new debate .
Of course , there is the new treaty and the still to be implemented opportunity for the citizens initiative , too .
Our starting point is clear : our priority , above all others , in particular , above the interests of profits , must remain the social and environmental concerns of the people .
That needs to become the new basic principle of the European Union 's strategies and legislation , as only then will the citizens perceive the EU as representing progress in the long term .
My second point is that we on the Left in the European Parliament welcome the fact that the Council is finally fulfilling the request for a capital transfer tax .
In yesterday 's debate , we were pleased to hear Mr Barroso promise that the new Commission under his leadership would table the relevant proposals in the near future .
We will continue to bring this subject up and we remain of the opinion that the European Union can and must take the first step in cases of doubt .
Waiting for someone else at a global level to take this role away from us is not something we can continue to do .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of the financial crisis , it certainly cannot be argued that the Swedish Presidency has behaved logically and adopted a clear-sighted and clear-cut stance .
Why did you lack the courage to give the names and surnames of those responsible for the financial crisis , clearly stating measures to clip the wings of speculation , or spell out to European citizens that our banks and our financial institutions are still peddling many of the financial products subject to speculation , and polluting our market ?
Why did you not offer a clear gesture of support to the real economy , which is represented above all by the archipelago of small and medium-sized enterprises , by the world of production , by the healthy world of our European economy , to which , I repeat , it is and always will be necessary to offer signs of encouragement and of true support ?
Perhaps the most significant challenge that the Swedish Presidency had to face concerned freedom , security and justice , and that also applies to implementation of the Stockholm Programme .
What conclusion can be drawn from this ?
I believe that this Presidency has not taken sufficient action against illegal immigration , and that the action it has taken has been extremely ineffective .
The Presidency has not been active in opposing illegal immigration even with regard to integration projects and dealing with the problem of refugees .
It appears that Europe has spoken out feebly , not merely in general about foreign policy - and I am fully in agreement with those who have objected to this - but also on this specific topic .
Europe has apparently lacked authority on such a key subject as immigration , however you look at it ; whether from the viewpoint of people like me who are very concerned about illegal immigration , or from the perspective of those who are more concerned with implementing integration policies .
We have high hopes that the new Spanish Presidency will implement the ideas that have already been disclosed in some influential statements , which argue that Europe must not think of immigration as a problem exclusive to countries bordering the Mediterranean .
This is evidently a problem that concerns all of Europe , but there is one point on which the government of my country expressed a clear request , which was nonetheless disregarded .
It suggested adopting a serious Europe-wide strategy to fight the legacy of organised crime ; a strategy that has yielded exceptional results in Italy .
This legacy is present throughout Europe : the Mafia , the organised Mafias have invaded all of Europe , infiltrating the real economy and particularly the financial economy .
We are still awaiting a clear signal that we will see the introduction of a European legal system against this type of organised crime , which is so very powerful in several countries - if not in all the countries of the European Union .
Since this type of crime can operate too freely , it has taken advantage of our freedoms , moving as it pleases between financial marketplaces , tax havens and markets dealing in property and other assets .
It is precisely on this point that we could have done with a much greater degree of clarity , a more clear-cut line of action by the Swedish Presidency .
We accuse the Swedish Presidency openly .
And then we come to the statements of certain representatives of this Presidency on another important and symbolic question , that of the Swiss referendum on minarets .
The Swedish Foreign Ministry defined a ' no ' to the building of minarets as the ' expression of a prejudice ' .
It went even further , claiming that Berne 's very decision to hold a referendum on a matter like this was questionable .
So here we have a question that lies outside the scope of the referendum , and that is the question of whether or not to hold a referendum .
How can the European Union lawmakers bring themselves to reproach a small country that has always been democratic , ever since the Middle Ages ?
Should it really be us , the slaves of a bureaucracy elected by nobody , teaching the Swiss people about democracy ?
Should we be the ones to deny them the right to hold a referendum on an important question , on which everyone is entitled to their own opinion ?
On the contrary , the European Union should learn from Swiss democracy how to tackle the most sensitive problems , by giving a voice to the people , the people , the people , not the bureaucracies , the lobbies and the banks of this European superpower , which always makes decisions about citizens ' lives without consulting them !
( SV ) Mr President , I am glad that the spineless , cowardly Swedish Presidency is over .
( NL ) Thankfully , this weak Swedish Presidency has come to an end , as not much good has come out of Sweden .
There has been no tough line on Turkey , which continues to occupy Cyprus illegally .
Sweden has left Israel in the lurch , and its proposal to divide Jerusalem illustrates its naivety about the objectionable , barbarous ideology that is Islam .
Sweden would have done better to strongly support the holding of European referendums in all Member States , as Switzerland did on the minaret ban .
That is what the European public wants .
The travelling circus between Brussels and Strasbourg has not even made it onto the agenda , Mr Reinfeldt .
We did ask you for this , but obviously you did not dare comply , no doubt scared off by France .
Then you go squandering money on climate policy in Copenhagen even though climate change is not a scientific certainty .
The Netherlands pays out a large amount of money .
Its net contribution per capita is still two to three times that of other rich countries .
This situation must be rectified as soon as possible .
We hope that the next presidency will show more courage .
Mr President , I have noticed that you have given almost one minute more speaking time to some of our colleagues .
I would like to remind you that we from small countries , as newly elected Members , have only one strict minute for ' catch the eye ' , and this time has been taken away from our opportunity to express our views .
Please respect us as well .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , I have two brief remarks to make .
Firstly I would like to thank Members for their kind words - also other words , but mainly kind words and kind comments .
We now have a new European Union based on the Lisbon Treaty , and I could say , being involved in the rotating presidency , that , to make this Europe work for the future , it will be a combination of taking responsibility on the part of Member States , the Commission and this Parliament .
It will be very difficult , without full responsibility taken by all these parties , to get this work on track .
Just a few comments on trying to coordinate 27 Member States .
That takes time , but , without doing that , we get a situation where this European Union is managed by just a few or by someone else .
We have taken that time .
I know how much time you need to make this coordination , and I think that will be obvious also for Herman Van Rompuy and also the still ongoing rotating presidency .
My second comment concerns Copenhagen .
I frequently hear this : Europe is not leading , and in my country the opposition says that Sweden is not leading : it is the will to bash on ourselves .
Then show me who the leader is .
I would like to know that , because it would be perfect to see that leader and to follow their initiatives .
I have not seen that yet .
We are committing ourselves to reductions , legally based , earlier on the table , with concrete financing that I have not seen from other parts of the developing world .
Also , when it comes to Copenhagen , I think it is very important to remember that we need to keep the 2 ° C target . I am not sure that we will be able to deliver that .
I know that Europe has done its part and is ready to move to 30 % , but we cannot solve the problem alone .
We only stand for 13 % of global emissions .
If this is to be a global answer , it must be a global response , and then we also need the other major emitters to make bigger commitments .
A few words on Sweden , since that was mentioned .
I think it is very important , after making these kinds of commitments - whether it is Kyoto or now an agreement in Copenhagen - to go home and do your job .
We updated just yesterday the reduction of emissions that has been done in Sweden since 1990 .
We are now down to -12 % .
We are following how this is internationally respected , the way it is presented .
We could always say that that is the wrong way of dealing with it , but that is the global agreement the world has .
Concerning that , we have presented these kinds of figures .
Of course , it is troublesome that some other countries are going in the other direction , and they are getting criticised for that .
So it is not just striking a deal : it is also about making the changes in your economy using emission trading and other means to get the change in place .
That is also an area where you see a lot of European countries acting in a way that is lacking in other parts of the world .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , just two remarks : the first on Copenhagen , and the other on the successful Swedish Presidency .
First of all , regarding Copenhagen , I am also very surprised when I see many European colleagues with a self-defeating rhetoric .
In fact , if there is a field where we can be proud of the leadership role of the European Union , it is precisely on climate change .
Show me one relevant player or a group of countries that have committed as far as we have been committing ourselves .
As I said earlier , some others have announced their intentions through press statements .
The European Union has announced its intentions through legislation which is already binding : legislation which originated from the European Commission , which received the support of the European Council and of this Parliament , and - unilaterally and unconditionally - the European Union has already put the reduction of greenhouse gases at 20 % by 2020 .
No other player has done anything comparable so far .
So let us ask others to do something similar to our effort .
( Applause )
Is this enough to reach the 2 ° C ?
No , it is not enough .
That is why we are telling others that we can negotiate with each other .
Politicians and diplomats can negotiate , but we cannot negotiate with science ; we cannot negotiate with physics .
So let us have a global deal which allows us to reach an agreement compatible with what science tells us .
That cannot be done only by Europe , because Europe is responsible for about 14 % of global emissions , and the trend is to go down in relevant terms .
So , even if Europe , tomorrow , stops completely its greenhouse gas emissions , it will not solve the problem .
So we need Americans on board , we need Chinese on board , we need Indians on board .
During these six months , together with Prime Minister Reinfeldt , we spoke with Obama ; we spoke with Hu and Wen ; we spoke with Singh ; we spoke with Medvedev ; we spoke with Lola .
And I can say that , in all those meetings , we were the ones asking them to come with more important offers .
This is what we are now doing at Copenhagen - not to forget - because sometimes people tend to forget - that it is not just a game between those players but also with developing countries : the poorest , most vulnerable , the African countries .
We also spoke with Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia and others .
That is why the European Union was the first to put some money on the table .
So let us be honest with each other .
We can always have more ambition , and the European Union has been showing its ambition .
But let us ask also for more ambition from others , because only with this ambition can we have a deal which is compatible with our ambition .
It is a global problem and we need a global solution .
Finally , let me say a word to Prime Minister Reinfeldt and the Swedish Presidency .
This is the last time we will have a President of the European Council only for six months , so it was the end of many years of European Union work .
I want to say - and I said it to President Reinfeldt during these six months - that he was the 11th President of the European Council with whom I have worked , so I really welcome the fact that now we are going to have a permanent President of the European Council .
But I would like to say to Prime Minster Reinfeldt that he was the 11th in the order of working with the Commission , but certainly he deserves a place on the podium as one of the best presidencies we have had during this period for the European Union .
Thank you for everything you and the Swedish Presidency have been doing during these six months .
Mr President , transparency towards Parliament is very often highlighted now that the Lisbon Treaty is in place .
Is there a new proposal of the European Council for Copenhagen with a 30 % target - a greater offsetting than the 20 % target - for 2025 ?
There is a leaked document circulating in Copenhagen and I want clarification now , based on contacts with the Commission , whether this is the true strategy of the Council .
Please tell us the truth .
Mr President , I hesitate to phrase it in this way because it does not sound very modest as a Swede , but I think it is fair to say that the European Union and Europe will not be the same after this Presidency .
It is a different European Union - a stronger and a better Union - for a number of reasons , some of which I as a Swede am very proud to mention .
First of all , of course , the treaty that is now in place is changing the institutional balance of this Union , but it is also making it more capable of achieving our political goals .
I would like to point to the fact that we have opened up the process of enlargement by the agreement between Slovenia and Croatia , which is important for Croatia , but also in the perspective of the Western Balkans and their ongoing future process of enlargement .
This is one of the strengths of the European Union , but it is also an opportunity for all of us .
I think it is also important to point to the fact that , during this Presidency and while we are standing here , the European Union is , for the first time , a leading global actor in one of the most important international issues mankind is facing .
This is new and it gives great responsibilities for the future because it is obvious that , whatever is achieved in Copenhagen , the European Union has been playing a fundamental and crucial role in setting the agenda for the things that we should achieve .
However successful we are , the job will not be finished , but it underlines the great responsibilities of the European Union .
Then we have the economic recovery , with strict rules for getting public finances in order and for hindering protectionism .
I am a Swede , so I may be a little subjective on this issue , but I think we all have a reason to be proud of what we have achieved during this period .
But we should , in all modesty , also remember that those achievements give us a great responsibility for the future .
( SV ) Mr President , I want to start by saying that the Presidency has lived up to the high expectations placed on it as an efficient , diplomatic machine .
That is much appreciated , particularly in view of the chaos that sometimes prevailed during the Czech Presidency .
The concluding rounds relating to the Treaty of Lisbon were also dealt with in a very positive way .
Finally , the Presidency also succeeded in introducing the permanent President of the European Council and the new High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy .
Unfortunately , its direct political impact on people 's everyday lives has been somewhat less substantial .
Europe 's wage-earners have been given no support with bringing about an end to wage dumping in the wake of the Laval ruling , neither have they seen any new initiatives to deal with unemployment and create more jobs .
The environmental movement is disappointed with Sweden for not standing up for environmental issues .
In fact , Sweden has taken a step backwards rather than taking the opportunity to push for more challenging objectives in the area of the environment and climate change .
The fact that Sweden does not have a more significant role at the climate conference currently taking place in Copenhagen , however , is more likely to be due to Prime Minister Reinfeldt himself , for party political reasons , having played down expectations of the conference at an early stage .
This was contrary to the EU 's negotiating strategy and exasperated a significant number of other European leaders .
More serious than this , however , is the fact that it undermined the opportunity to bring about a good agreement on climate change .
Finally , I would like to mention the Stockholm Programme - one of the few things that will live on after the Swedish Presidency is over .
As a native of Stockholm myself , I am concerned that my home town may come to be associated with a political programme based more on a fortress Europe than on safeguarding human rights .
We Swedish Social Democrats are nonetheless pleased that , in the end , you did listen in part to the demands from us and from Parliament to include more about the rights of women and children in this programme .
We have great expectations that Mrs Malmström will do her utmost to reinforce these elements further in her new role .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Reinfeldt , your calm and steady Presidency was a success .
You had difficult political issues to resolve and overall you did a good job .

The people chosen by you for the important new EU posts can now define these without any preconceived ideas , as they are as yet largely unknown to most European citizens .
As an aside , if I may say so , your best decision is sitting on your right .
Nevertheless , Mr Reinfeldt , I cannot give your Presidency full marks .
There are two reasons for this .
Firstly , you increased the development towards making the European Council into a kind of EU ' supergovernment ' .
Its comprehensive jurisdiction is increasing , from the environment to financial policy .
At the same time , you are closing the doors ever tighter .
This is not what transparent debates by representatives of the people look like .
The second reason is this : the fact that you pushed SWIFT through the Council just hours before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon demonstrates a clear disregard for the European Parliament and hence a lack of respect for the citizens .
Nevertheless , I would like to thank you for the last six months .
( SV ) Mr President , the Swedish Presidency has functioned well in practical and institutional terms .
It has been like a well-oiled , efficient machine - and yet it never got into gear .
What happened to the social legislation ?
Work on anti-discrimination has come to a standstill .
The proposal to introduce a Eurovignette to stop emissions from heavy goods vehicles has stalled , as has climate policy .
On these matters it is researchers and the European Parliament that are showing leadership - the Council has failed !
The Council has provided a loophole for forestry , shipping and airlines in the climate negotiations .
Where is the money for the developing countries - the specific EUR 30 billion called for by Parliament ?
What happened to the emissions targets ?
Parliament called for reductions of 32-40 percent .
Now we hear that the documents the Council is working on water down our emissions targets even further .
The Council 's climate policy has such large holes in it that it can only be compared with a fishing net for catching whales !
Finally , I would like to mention Vattenfall .
Stop Vattenfall 's legal proceedings !
They are obstructing our work on climate change .
You have power over this enterprise .
At the very least , you should make sure that Vattenfall minds its own business and stops calling into question the environmental legislation of Germany and the EU .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Swedish Government for its Presidency of this Council .
It took office with a very heavy agenda and has been able to achieve a great deal , much of which we welcome .
I have spoken in this Chamber repeatedly of the need to reinvigorate the Lisbon strategy ; the European Union has , for far too long , pursued political and institutional reform with a degree of energy and determination which it has simply been unable to muster for economic reform .
Yet our global trading position , relative economic weight and international competitiveness are in jeopardy .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's EU 2020 initiative , now endorsed by the European Council , and I congratulate particularly Mr Barroso for his part in this .
The future prosperity and well-being of our citizens depend on a dynamic economy able to generate jobs and wealth by unleashing the creative energies of entrepreneurs and by stimulating the growth of successful businesses .
Part of this economic regeneration will be the greening of our economies , and we all hope that an agreement in Copenhagen this week will draw up a realistic framework to tackle climate change whilst facilitating economic growth and development .
On the adoption of the Stockholm Programme , we support the principle that the Member States of the Union must cooperate more to combat problems related to immigration , cross-border crime and terrorism .
But these are also areas which lie at the heart of national sovereignty ; and defending the laws and ensuring security and protecting the public are amongst the most important duties of a democratic state .
We must therefore balance the need for joint action with respect for the rights of our Member States .
Parts of the Stockholm Programme simply fail to get the balance right .
Some of the proposals will simply centralise power , create unnecessary expense and add further bureaucracy for very little added value .
Our priorities must lie in the direction of fitness to compete , deregulation , innovation and job creation .
The people of Europe deserve nothing less .
( SV ) Mr President , I would also like to give the Swedish Presidency top marks for its organisational skills .
The Swedish national administration has lived up to everyone 's expectations .
Unfortunately , I cannot be as positive when it comes to my political evaluation .
Two areas in particular must come in for criticism .
Firstly , the matter of transparency and openness .
Sweden is usually seen as setting an example in this area , but instead it has taken a passive approach - and that is a particularly serious matter when our citizens ' freedom of communication is at stake .
Allow me to mention in this respect the directive on data retention , the telecoms package and the secret ACTA agreement .
There have been demands for the Presidency to act to make the documents available , as has been possible since the 2001 amendment to the Regulation on transparency - which states that the public shall have access to all the documents relating to ongoing international negotiations .
Why has the Swedish Presidency not acted on this ?
The second area is climate change and , in my opinion , the way that poor countries are being betrayed by our use of aid funds to mitigate the worst of the damage for which the rich world has been , and still is , responsible .
This despite the fact that the climate convention , the Bali Plan and the Kyoto Protocol all state that funding to finance climate measures must be new funding .
Once again , it is the most vulnerable who are having to foot the bill for the actions of the rich countries .
It is those who do not have clean water , those threatened by malaria , those suffering from HIV and , above all , the poorest women and children of the world who are now having to pay the price .
This policy is a shameful way to treat the poorer parts of the world .
( DE ) Mr President , the Swedish Presidency is now coming to an end - with no great disasters , but , in my opinion , without any outstanding successes , either .
In any case , the ambitious goal of getting the economic crisis under control could not be achieved .
We have pumped billions into a system from which only a few benefit , whereas the public has to bear the risks and the costs .
It is unacceptable for European taxpayers ' hard-earned money to end up in the bonus pots of bank managers .
If we are already holding a climate summit , then , in my opinion , we also need , at long last , a truer reflection of costs and some honesty in the debate about nuclear reactors .
If we are looking for climate protection solutions , we also need to put a stop to the deception surrounding emissions certificates .
In the case of the SWIFT negotiations , the Swedish Presidency has , in my opinion , allowed itself to be dictated to somewhat by the US with regard to the disclosure of bank data .
As a result of this and of the Stockholm Programme , citizens are becoming ever easier to manipulate and ever more transparent .
With Sweden , Turkey is also losing an advocate for its accession .
In my view , it is time to stop the accession negotiations and offer Turkey a privileged partnership .
( DE ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to say thank you .
Despite many problems , the Swedish Council Presidency has done a splendid job .
Sweden is a medium-sized country in the European Union and we should view that as a positive thing in all respects .
I would like to thank you and your entire government , Mr Reinfeldt .
With the climate , the financial market crisis , the Treaty of Lisbon and the new Commission , you have had really difficult tasks and issues to deal with .
I would like to single out two issues .
The first is the financial market crisis .
The fact that , together with the Commission , Sweden remained firm with regard to the consolidation efforts of individual Member States is extremely positive .
The fact that you did not say ' we will now release Greece from its responsibilities within the euro area ' is something that I can only wholeheartedly support .
The second area is climate policy .
We have listened to the criticism from the Communists and the Greens .
They do not have any actual responsibility anywhere in Europe .
We can pursue climate policy in the style of China or the US by making grand proclamations but not achieving any results .
Europe has achieved results .
I reject the claim that Greenpeace is the yardstick for European climate policy .
We must remain realistic !
Here , too , the Swedish Presidency surprisingly achieved very good results during its term , together with the Commission .
I would like to express my sincere thanks for this , too .
With regard to the subject of the Treaty of Lisbon : Mr Schulz is not here at the moment .
He said that the Commission is influenced by it being made up of deputy leaders of European parties .
I am only surprised that the chair of a political group wants to make an issue of the political commitment of individual members of the Commission .
What is the point of that ?
I can only reject that argument .
Finally , I would like to encourage you - as I did when you took office - to finally join the euro .
Can I say ' Sweden ante portas ' , Mr Reinfeldt ?
Mr President , in all fairness , I believe the Swedish Presidency can be satisfied with its achievements , and I think that Sweden can be proud of the performance of the Swedish Presidency .
However , as always with the short-term presidencies , when they are good , they leave us with a bitter feeling of a somehow unaccomplished job .
Therefore , I believe the most important question now is : how and what could we further build on the achievements of the Swedish Presidency ?
The first thing is the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
A treaty is never enough for solving a problem .
Political will is always needed in order to enhance it properly but , in this case , I think that we need even more than will .
We need courage and imagination - imagination to fill the gaps or to clarify the ambiguities of the treaty .
Therefore , I hope that , starting with the experience it has accumulated , the Swedish Presidency will still remain involved in supporting the building of the new institution which the Lisbon Treaty has created , namely the permanent - or long-term - President of the European Council and the office of High Representative with the External Action Service .
One of the priorities of the Swedish Presidency was , of course , the management of the economic and financial crisis .
This was very important .
Against this background , I think two phenomena which are quite threatening have been observed : firstly , the temptation of national protectionism and national egoism , and , secondly , the economic and social disparities between our Member States and the lack of economic , social and territorial cohesion within the European Union .
Should we call into question the wisdom of enlargement ?
Certainly not .
These disparities were already there before , and interdependence is valid not only within the Union but globally .
Therefore , these disparities were able to undermine or to put in jeopardy the stability of the whole continent and the Union .
Therefore , I think that enlargement made it possible for the new Member States to cope with these disparities better inside the Union , for the profit of all Members of the Union .
But the conclusion is as follows , and I will end here .
I believe that the next step is to pursue bolder and more substantial policies of territorial , economic and social cohesion in Europe - and not fewer policies of this kind - together with bold reforms , financial and economic reforms which would allow us not to repeat the crisis , and , certainly , with policies for post-crisis rehabilitation .
In this context , the last statement of the Commission concerning economic support for eastern countries , as well as the readiness expressed by Mr Barroso to debate the 2020 Strategy , should be commended .
( FR ) Mr President , I , too , would like to express my gratitude to the Swedish Presidency-in-Office of the European Council , but there remains one problem .
On Thursday , the European Council took the decision to grant EUR 7.2 billion to finance developing countries ' partial adaptation to climate change , which is all to the good .
From my point of view , this amount should be in addition to the development aid that the European Union has pledged to increase to 0.7 % of gross national income by 2015 .
Why ?
Let us suppose that the EUR 7.2 billion comes from the package that has already been allocated as official development aid ; this sum will not be enough to finance the Millennium Development Goals .
It would be a case of robbing Peter to pay Paul .
We await clarification from the European Council and the Commission on this matter .
Any ambiguity surrounding the complementary nature of the amount announced by the European Council of 10 and 11 December would undermine the European Union 's credibility at the Copenhagen conference , which we have no hesitation in describing as crucial to the future of mankind .
( Applause )
Mr President , I represent the European Free Alliance part of my group which includes the independence parties of Wales , Flanders , Catalonia and Scotland .
We seek independent status so that our nations can contribute to European Council meetings and to world events such as the Copenhagen conference on climate change .
The government and the parliament of Scotland have adopted the world 's most ambitious climate change act , with emission reduction targets of 42 % by 2020 and 80 % by 2050 .
These are targets which we mean to achieve , and yet the UK Government refused a reasonable request for a Scottish minister to be part of the official proceedings in Copenhagen .
Such behaviour only underlines the fact that it is only with independence - the normal status of independence - that Scotland can properly contribute to the international community , and I hope that the European Council will very soon be discussing internal enlargement of the European Union , with Scotland leading the way .
( DE ) Mr President , we need a revolution in democracy .
That fact that I admire so many Swedish traditions made me all the more disappointed by the overall balance sheet of their activities .
Unfortunately , it was not a presidency of the people , but rather a presidency of the Council and also a large-scale investor presidency in the style of Mrs Wallström rather than that of Mrs Malmström .
Mrs Malmström , I remember you well from the time you were an MEP here .
During this presidency , you have been a rather different person .
I very much hope that when you return , you will pick up where you left off when you were here , namely being inspired by the parliamentary system .
Why did you adopt SWIFT at such a late stage ?
Why do we now have a kind of executive board at EU level - this being one of the objectives of the Swedes , of all people , with their transparency ?
Please use your future to return to your roots .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the last two and a half hours of this debate , quite a great deal has been said about Copenhagen and the Copenhagen negotiations .
I must say that , in this respect , the Swedish Presidency has not been entirely successful as there is no common position being presented in Copenhagen for the European Union .
This is not necessarily the Swedish Presidency 's fault , but rather the European Commission 's .
What is going on and why is there no common position ?
There is no common position on at least two issues .
One of these issues is whether carbon dioxide quotas can be transferred after 2012 and whether they can then be sold as well .
The European Commission criticises this position in an incomprehensible , short-sighted and narrow-minded manner .
Hungary , Poland , Romania and other former socialist countries have fulfilled their Kyoto commitments .
In fact , not only have they met them , but they have even overfulfilled them .
We are entitled to the right to sell excess quotas .
However , the Commission still wants to take this from us .
In other words , they want to punish contractual compliance , which Hungary has also shown .
Others have failed to keep their commitments , even increasing their harmful emissions , but no one wants to punish them .
After this , how can we expect the signatories to comply with a new agreement , that is , if there will be a sequel to Kyoto in Copenhagen ?
I urge the European Commission , and if he were here , I would urge and emphatically call on President Barroso to change the narrow-minded attitude he has shown so far and stand for a position which complies with the current Kyoto Protocol in force .
I would also like to draw your attention to a fact that we should not forget , namely , that without the new Member States , the EU15 would not have been able to meet their 8 % emission reduction commitment .
In fact , if this had been the case , the European Union would have a much poorer and weaker negotiating position in Copenhagen .
( FR ) Presidents , Minister , the Swedish Presidency has had what may be described as some historic moments : the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the appointments of the first President of the European Council and of the High Representative , but also the climate change conference and the appointment of a new Commission , as well as - please allow me this brief reference - the telecoms package .
These events have created hope .
All things considered , however , there remain one or two mixed results .
Firstly , our Parliament , being committed to the introduction of European supervision of the financial markets , welcomed the proposals made by Mr de Larosière 's group of wise men as a crucial step .
However , the conclusions of the ECOFIN Council of 2 December are well below this realistic level of ambition .
I wish to mention at this point that Parliament will be sure to restore some balance to the proposals that have been referred to it , in order to make the financial markets more robust .
The same applies to the financial commitments pledged to the countries of the South to help them combat climate change .
Even though , in Copenhagen , poor countries require real commitments concerning long-term financing , the Council has only managed to pledge EUR 7.2 billion over three years .
This is a first step , true , but it falls far short of the requirements , all the more so since part of it comes from a restructuring exercise .
Lastly , in the financial field , we welcome the will to impose rules and to act forcefully with regard to both supervision and taxation .
I note in particular , in the Council conclusions , the reference to a global financial transaction levy .
This is something for which we socialists have been hoping and praying for more than 10 years .
There is still work to be done .
Seeking out new financial resources to promote employment , solidarity within and outside Europe , and the financing of the fight against climate change , is a major challenge .
As it will soon be Christmas , I invite the Council to give us a decision on own resources in the years to come .
( SV ) Mr President , it is rather odd to hear some of the whiners - including some of my fellow Swedes - criticising the Swedish Presidency .
With what is Carl Schlyter comparing this Presidency ?
With the Czech Republic , or some other great presidency ?
Neither should anyone expect to get good marks from Mr Borghezio .
In fact , getting poor marks from Mr Borghezio is a good result .
A lot has been done .
The Treaty of Lisbon has come into force .
The two highest posts in the EU have been filled .
A number of important proposals have been laboriously pushed through : the Stockholm Programme , future financial supervision and especially the telecoms package .
The climate summit in Copenhagen could also move in the right direction if we in the European Parliament want it to .
On the minus side , I would mention the failure to implement patient mobility .
It represents continued legal uncertainty and unnecessary suffering as people wait for treatment .
Overall , however , all credit to Prime Minister Reinfeldt , to Mrs Malmström , the Minister for European Union Affairs , and to all the other members of the Presidency team .
You all deserve a Happy New Year !
( NL ) Mr President .
Mr Reinfeldt , there is one serious blemish on your Presidency , and that is the decisions taken regarding SWIFT .
The Treaty of Lisbon entered into force on 1 December , and on 30 November , you and your fellow Heads of State or Government rushed through an arrangement giving our bank details to the United States .
If this is an indication of the future development of the Stockholm Programme - a programme intended to guarantee our civil rights , security and freedom - then my impression is that its implementation will really tip the scales and put freedom and civil rights under threat .
This is a blemish on your Presidency .
I also think it besmirches the launch of the Treaty of Lisbon , which gives the European Parliament more rights , and I should like your assurance that , in future , you will show more respect for civil rights , citizens and Parliament .
( HU ) Mr President , we would like to assess the results of the Swedish Presidency retrospectively from a 10-20 year perspective .
The most important event that will be mentioned is the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force .
This Treaty creates the legal framework for a super state , with the lives of 500 million people being controlled from a central point and the nation states withering away .
The path leading us to this was antidemocratic .
Three referendums rejected this concept until the imposed second Irish referendum and the acquisition of Václav Klaus 's signature created the opportunity for it to happen .
The majority of Europe 's population rejected this concept , and they want to hold on to the nation state .
This is why I am confident that history will portray this period as a frustrated attempt to create an empire .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , in debates about the Council Presidency , we often talk as if the Presidency was the European Union .
The Council Presidency is not the EU ; it is an important manager of a European institution .
I would therefore ask everyone to be a bit fairer and calmer .
The Council Presidency has done a good job over the last six months .
It has helped to open a new chapter in the history of European Union success .
However , none of us wants a Europe of governments .
We are working towards a Europe of the citizens and towards greater cooperation between the institutions and the various parts of the European Union .
Each one of us is a part of the European Union .
The institutional debate has been closed , the new posts have been filled and , on a few important points , the Council has moved into a position that will enable us to continue to work .
Let us look to the future .
Someone said that we have a major problem because the Treaty of Lisbon has not yet been taken into account in the working methods of the Council .
The Council has more opportunities to influence the European Parliament and the committees of the European Parliament than the European Parliament has to influence the working groups and the Council meetings .
In this respect , too , we demand the equal treatment of the two institutions , as we have equal status as legislators .
Yes , it was a mistake - we can argue about the content - to push SWIFT through in advance of the change in Parliament 's power of codecision one day later .
The decision on financial market supervision has still not been finalised .
We need to make improvements , we need executive power , we need more European supervision where cross-border institutions are concerned and we need to achieve better coordination between the Member States , the Commission and the European Central Bank in the Basel Committee , because otherwise , a parallel structure will be created .
( ES ) Mr President , I want to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on its work , particularly with respect to the area of freedom , security and justice .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon represents a qualitative step and requires the next presidencies - Spanish , Belgian and Hungarian - to continue the difference made by the Swedish Presidency with the Stockholm Programme in drafting the action plan .
In the context of the cooperation that is required under the Treaty of Lisbon between the European Commission , Council and Parliament and the national Parliaments of the Member States ( Article 17 of the Treaty on European Union and Article 295 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union ) , I would like to draw attention to the importance of three points that have been emphasised by the Swedish Presidency .
The first is related to the ambiguity surrounding the coordinator on anti-terrorism and illicit trafficking in persons and the extent to which this official is dependent on the Commission and , conversely , subject to control by the European Parliament .
The second is the external dimension of fundamental rights , which will now be a cross-cutting dimension of European politics .
While there is a Commissioner dedicated to fundamental rights and justice , the European Union also has an External Action Service which must commit to human rights and to strong involvement in the defence of fundamental rights .
The third relates to the Schengen area for the free movement of persons .
We believe that the fact that importance has been attached to evaluating and monitoring the European Pact on Immigration and Asylum and to the external border control policy ( asylum , immigration and prevention of organised crime ) will lead to success in creating this area of free circulation of persons and human rights , thus completing the internal market and realising our European project .
( SV ) Mr President , building bridges is never easy .
It is particularly difficult when we need to get 27 Member States and 500 million people across those bridges , making the transition from the old EU to a more open , more transparent and more democratic EU under the new Treaty of Lisbon , with the European Parliament now having a much greater influence .
This autumn , we have had both a climate crisis and a jobs crisis to contend with .
Despite this , the Swedish Presidency has succeeded in putting in place a number of pieces of incredibly important legislation on energy efficiency .
I am particularly pleased that the EU has now introduced energy labelling of domestic appliances .
Other examples of legislation that has now been introduced include energy efficiency requirements for buildings and environmental labelling of vehicle tyres .
Finally , I would like to thank the government for its effective , coherent Presidency .
I would particularly like to express my respect for EU Ambassador Ulrika Barklund Larsson , who was taken from us so suddenly this autumn .
She did a fantastic job and we greatly miss her .
All that remains now is to conclude the climate conference in Copenhagen - the last and most important task , with the greatest long-term impact .
Good luck !

( IT ) Mr President , Mr Reinfeldt , ladies and gentlemen , there are a number of points in the conclusions arising out of the latest European Council on which we should be able to agree and which we could describe as encouraging for the immediate future .
Firstly , immigration : the need to make access to European Union territory more efficient in terms of guaranteeing the safety of its citizens was highlighted .
To do this , we need an integration policy .
In other words , we need to strike the right balance between the needs of the Member States and the human drama , the productive potential of migrants .
Reference was then made to a Europe of responsibilities and solidarity where immigration and asylum are concerned .
In this sense , I am encouraged by the way the Council stressed the urgent need to combat illegal immigration , starting with the border Member States , particularly in the south .
This means sharing resources and problems .
Unfortunately this aspect is all too often overshadowed by selfishness and a lack of courage .
The second aspect that I consider to be a priority , at this time of economic crisis , when we still cannot see the light at the end of the tunnel , is the relaunch of the Lisbon Strategy .
We must be able to get back to competing with the emerging powers on a financial and commercial level as quickly as possible : only a state-of-the-art research and information system will allow us to take this step , which is so vital for us and , above all , for new generations .
I am pleased to note that the new method invoked by the Council aims to strengthen the link between national measures and European Union measures and to strengthen national ownership through more active involvement of management and labour and of the regional and local authorities , which can be summed up in one word : subsidiarity .
I still feel that we must do more in this direction : the family , people and intermediate groups must be at the centre of Europe 's economic recovery .
Only people , in fact , only men and women possess the original dynamism that can reactivate the many sectors of our social lives , now bowed down by the pessimism that all too often comes from the institutions .

( ET ) Mr President , first I would like to praise the chair for the approval of the Baltic Sea Strategy , which is certainly very important for my home country . I would , however , like to speak a bit longer on three points regarding the subject of finance .
First , I would like to express thanks for the efforts made on the regulation of the trans-European financial system , and also to call on the European Parliament , for its part , to give maximum support to this .
Second , in order to control the financial crisis , the European Union and its Member States have implemented a large number of exceptional measures , which is very positive .
It is already possible to see stabilisation in the economy .
At the same time , I agree with the Council that the situation is not yet secure enough for us to give up the support measures .
The consequence of the crisis , for me , is definitely the fact that banks are necessary and the services they provide are necessary .
It is not necessary , therefore , to go too far in punishing them , but banking activities should be based on what is happening in the real economy , not on an inter-bank virtual market , which was the main reason for the recent crisis .
At the same time , we need to consider the payment of bankers ' bonuses , an issue which has become a particularly important topic in Estonia .
Third , in relation to this , I support the appeals to the International Monetary Fund to consider instituting a charge on global financial transactions - the Tobin tax - in order to give back money to society in the boom times .
I support the necessity of renewing economic and social agreements between financial institutions and the society they serve , and to increase the benefits to society in good times and protect it from dangers .
( PT ) Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating the Swedish Presidency , particularly Prime Minister Reinfeldt , on behalf of both the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the Portuguese delegation within the PPE Group .
Our verdict on the Swedish Presidency is that it has been an almost total success , basically in four fundamental areas .
Firstly , in the institutional area , the Swedish Presidency 's contribution to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , to the highly successful election of the President of the Commission and to everything associated with ratification was extremely professional and at the level that we expect for best practice in the European Union .
Of course , for a country like Portugal , which played a decisive role in the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon , the Swedish Presidency 's contribution was invaluable .
My second point is the climate agenda , where , of course , the Commission 's efforts have also been extremely important In my view and that of many of my colleagues in the PPE , the climate change area is where the European Union has been most successful .
It is at the very forefront of the global fight , and that is due to the efforts of both the Swedish Presidency and , in particular , the Commission Presidency .
We consider these results to be very positive as well .
My third point is financial regulation .
Especially with this latest Council , there has been a step forwards that we regard as decisive and which may have a great impact on our emergence from the crisis .
I would therefore also like to pass on our congratulations for having achieved an agreement in that area .
Lastly , I would like to mention an area that is very important to me personally : the Stockholm Programme and , therefore , the area of freedom , security and justice .
I followed both the Tampere process and subsequently , in particular , the Hague process .
I regard the Stockholm Programme as absolutely essential and would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency and Prime Minister Reinfeldt on it .
( EL ) Mr President , the results of the Swedish Presidency are truly positive .
They coincide with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , which marks the end of the intergovernmentalism which has caused us problems for so many years and the exercising of a more integrated and cohesive policy .
The Swedish Presidency is also characterised by the creation of the Stockholm Programme and the decisions taken during the financial crisis , which are truly important , pivotal points in further developments in this endeavour .
At the same time , the election of the President of the European Commission and the appointments made , all of which are hugely important to developments in the endeavour we are making via the Lisbon Treaty , are especially important and interesting to the European Parliament and are positive and essential elements .
The European Parliament is taking on a new role as a legislative body alongside the European Council .
This marks a new development in which we must all make greater and more cohesive efforts .
( ES ) Mr President , I congratulate the Swedish Presidency on its commendable leadership over the last six months .
Regarding the Stockholm Programme , I would highlight the fact that it is trying to give impetus to longed-for common immigration policy . However , certain essential issues have been relegated to secondary status .
Within the European Union in 2008 , there were 515 terrorist attacks in 11 Member States .
Combating terrorism and protection of victims must therefore be included among the priorities of our political agenda , and must constitute a separate , specific category of the Stockholm Programme .
Secondly , eight million irregular immigrants live within the area of freedom , security and justice .
In that regard , we must strengthen policies for development and cooperation with countries of origin and transit .
The European Union must promote the conclusion of repatriation and readmission agreements with countries such as Morocco , Algeria and Libya .
The future action plan of the Stockholm Programme , to be presented in mid-June 2010 , must consider these aspects .

( PL ) I , too , would like to add my voice to the expressions of thanks which are being made to the Swedish Presidency , and to Mr Reinfeldt personally for his efficiency , and also for the excellent way in which he has achieved the priorities of the presidency .
Of course , what is important for European Union citizens is , in particular , action intended to reduce the effects of the economic and financial crisis .
This is related to support for the business sector , in order to restore jobs and create conditions for small and medium-sized enterprises to develop , as well as to eliminate the causes of the crisis , particularly in financial markets , so that they will not be repeated in the future .
It seems to me that European supervision in this area is insufficient , and that here we must also influence , as a democratically elected institution , the ethical standards followed by those who supervise banks and financial institutions .
Concerning the Copenhagen Summit , I fully endorse the position stated by Mr Barroso .
Here , there is , indeed , a need for partnership on the part of other important economic players for the effects of the summit to be truly attainable .
( RO ) I was the rapporteur for the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive , which I negotiated on second reading with the Swedish Presidency of the European Union Council .
This is an extremely important report for the future of the European Union and the battle against climate change .
It is also significant for the Copenhagen conference , but especially for the 2.7 million jobs which may be created in this sector by 2020 .
With regard to comitology , in accordance with the Treaty of Lisbon , negotiations have started on an institutional agreement on powers and procedures delegated by the Commission .
Bearing in mind that the Treaty of Lisbon creates a new basis both for climate change and a common energy policy , I hope , and we also expect it from the European Commission , President Barroso , that you will present to us a programme of work for the next five years , so that the commissioners we listen to can respond to these challenges as well .
As a final point , I would like to mention the lifting of the barriers to free movement of labour in the case of workers from the new Member States , which should be a final action by the Swedish Presidency .

I must apologise to Mr Balčytis and Mr Luhan : I cannot comply with their request because we already have numerous other speakers and we do not have enough time to let everyone speak .
They will have to save it for another time .
I apologise once again .
( SL ) I should like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency for leading the European Union fairly and responsibly at a time , as you said , of institutional change and of economic and financial crisis .
However , you may have missed the opportunity during this period to promote a broader European discourse on a socio-economic model different to the one which led us into this crisis .
Sweden knows much more about this than some other countries .
You have also experienced the bitter realisation of the limitations of the European Union when it comes to unity of action , especially at the time we were electing the EU 's leadership .
You have set a few new standards in the field of foreign policy , in the Middle East , for example , and I congratulate you on that achievement .
Thank you also for the attention you have paid to the enlargement of the European Union and for resolving , together with the Commission , some unfinished issues which stood in the way of this process .
A job well done !



( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Reinfeldt , I would like to know your view , Mr Reinfeldt , on the conclusions of the Troika , since the Heads of State or Government decided to create this troika concept in order to give a sense of continuity to the Presidency .
Furthermore , since you are concluding the Troika between the French Republic , the Czech Republic and the Kingdom of Sweden , what is your view on this instrument and what conclusion do you draw from it ?
( PL ) Mr President , We meet here in Parliament every six months to summarise the achievements of another country as it ends its leadership of the European Union .
The Swedish Presidency will go down in history because its term saw the pushing through of the Euro-constitution , for which some had been agitating for nearly 10 years , and which in its current form is known as the Treaty of Lisbon .
This was done against the will of many nations .
The results of referendums in France , the Netherlands and Ireland were ostentatiously brushed aside .
The principle of a democracy deficit was introduced , which allows control from above , ostensibly to improve EU administrative mechanisms .
The first changes related to the selection of people for new positions in the Union have , for the time being , brought in organisational chaos and caused general amusement in Europe and around the world .
The Swedish Presidency is , in fact , leaving the European Union in a state of uncertainty and chaos .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency for the vision of a citizen-centred Europe laid down in the Stockholm Programme .
We can never underline enough the historic importance of finally having a vision that meets our citizens ' concerns for security and , at the same time , for respecting individual rights .
Finally , we can move forward to a Europe for the citizen , by the citizen .
I also would like to welcome the Asylum Support Office , which is an important and concrete step towards meeting the concerns of countries that want to fight illegal immigration while , at the same time , providing for a more humane migration policy .
The Stockholm Programme will remain with us for five years , and I hope we can move forward to implementation .
I thank the Swedish Presidency .
Your footprint will remain with us for five years .
( HU ) The Swedish Presidency has done an excellent job , and I would like to congratulate the prime minister for this .
The final completion of the Treaty of Lisbon 's ratification resolved the regrettable and disgraceful mini-crisis involving the Czech President Klaus .
This situation resulted from the political mistake made during the enlargement process where the European Union did not declare earlier that the 13 discriminatory Beneš Decrees were morally untenable .
The second major event is that the EU managed to establish a united position for the climate change negotiations .
The US and China have still not realised this fact , but the European Union clearly understands that the future belongs to whoever now leads the way in green economic development .
Let us not forget that the only reason the EU was able to achieve its targets was that the new Member States had reduced their emissions significantly .
Finally , the third major event was that accession negotiations got under way with Serbia , and Serbia , Macedonia and Montenegro were granted visa-free travel .
I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency for creating an excellent opportunity for the Spanish-Belgian-Hungarian Trio Presidency .


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Reinfeldt , first of all , I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on the six months of relentless and very ambitious work it has done , notably by securing , alongside the Heads of State or Government and within the scope of the G20 , a common and ambitious position on financial regulation matters .
When it comes to the Copenhagen conference , too , we see that the European Union has an ambitious , very elevated , very proactive and common position .
I would like therefore to endorse its positions and its decisions .
Europe has been a driving force behind the proposal , negotiation and conclusion of major agreements concerning this financial crisis , which affects the whole of Europe .
The European Council also gave its verdict , last week , on the new financial supervisory architecture , and negotiations with the European Parliament have been opened since , from now on , the responsibility for monitoring the implementation of the decisions taken in Pittsburgh will also be shared by the European Parliament .
The financial crisis has revealed the weak points in our financial supervision system .
The idea was to ensure better coordination , but also to renew and strengthen the powers of European authorities ; these are urgent requirements .
I hope - and I am addressing the Commission here - that we remain vigilant and maintain this level of ambition when implementing our decisions .
Mr President , this morning I want to express my extreme disappointment , on behalf of the Northern Ireland fishing industry , that yet another cut has been imposed upon the industry .
Last night 's announcement from the Council that there will be a 9 % cut in nephrops in Area 7A is a bitter blow to the fishing industry in Northern Ireland .
It is a fragile industry because of the cod recovery programme and because of the cuts in the days at sea .
It is an industry that has had to rely on nephrops .
This 9 % cut will be devastating , and it is particularly galling since the science this year should have allowed the Commission to have a roll-over .
I think that the priority for the Spanish in the next term must be the reform of the common fisheries policy and for decisions like this to be taken at regional level by local , accountable people , and not Brussels bureaucrats .
( PL ) During the Swedish Presidency , a great deal of good has happened in the Union , in what has been , of course , a difficult period of crisis and expectations concerning acceptance of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I do not , however , share the opinion that we have a different Union or a new Union .
I think we have , at most , a renewed Union .
In fact , the general provisions of the treaty must be supplemented , not only with detailed content , but also with specific practical solutions .
It is important to clarify the division of competences between key posts , and how we establish relations between EU institutions , including the new role of the European Parliament
My fears are aroused by possible restrictions on the function of the rotating presidency held by successive Member States .
This leadership role is something Member States prepare for and discharge with great determination .
If , alongside the permanent President of the European Council , we do not also have the leader of the country which currently has the leadership giving reports here , the Union will be incomplete and will lose some of its diversity .
The countries which lead must still creatively inspire new action , and the permanent President of the European Council will have to ensure coordination , continuity and cohesion of the Union 's work .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , coming to the end of this debate , we are also coming to the end of the last presidency on the rotating principle , as has been mentioned .
Soon , José Manuel Barroso and I will leave for Copenhagen , so just a comment on financial resources , because I think that will be at the heart of the discussions we will now have with the developing countries .
We were able to put a figure on the table - EUR 2.4 billion annually - between 2010 and 2012 .
The importance for us was to say that this is directed to these years , earmarked for 2010 to 2012 , and it will also be available for support when it comes to climate protection .
The discussion on how to meet the Millennium Development Goals is an important discussion .
I want to point out that the Member States have agreed that we should commit ourselves to disbursing collectively 0.56 % of EU GNI by 2010 , that is , already next year , and coming up to the UN percentage level of 0.7 in 2015 when it comes to official development assistance .
This is very much in the hands of the Member States .
To point out the obvious , very many of the Member States are below these figures today .
Sweden is in a very exclusive club , almost alone at 1 % of GNI when it comes to development assistance .
This should also be remembered when we discuss these levels : that there are differences between the countries .
We made it voluntary for the Member States to give the resources that they were able to give .
I am very happy to report back that all 27 Member States made contributions to these fast-start resources .
In some cases , they were very small contributions , but the European voice is heard in the sense that everyone actually contributed .
Thank you again also for the cooperation we have had with Parliament .
It is the fourth time during the Swedish Presidency that I , as Prime Minister , have addressed this Parliament .
That does not even come close to Cecilia Malmström 's number of engagements with Parliament , because she has been here 25 times to speak to you .
In all , the Presidency has addressed Parliament in plenary on 43 occasions during our term in office and we have been in committee on 44 different occasions .
That is also important when it comes to the discussions on transparency and good cooperation between the institutions .
We knew of the importance of having a good link with the European Parliament .
We prepared ourselves to be present , to be here , to be able to answer questions , and we thank you for that very good cooperation .
Prime Minister , in two weeks ' time , your presidency of the European Union will come to an end .
Thank you for your activity and for your energy .
It has not been an easy presidency ; we know that .
As we heard from our Members , and the many points of view expressed , it has been a successful presidency .
I wish to thank you personally and , indeed , the entire Swedish Government .
For the first time in history , we experienced , over the last few weeks , new relations as a result of the Lisbon Treaty .
Thank you very much .
We will remember your presidency .
President of the Commission . - Mr President , I would just like to answer some of the concrete questions from the Members of Parliament who are still here .
For instance , Mr Severin spoke about economic , social and territorial cohesion , and I want to underline the point he made .
In fact , in the first exchange of views which we had in the European Council on the future European Union 2020 Strategy , it was agreed - see point 18 of the conclusions - that every effort should be made to ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion as well as gender equality .
I think it is important to have this from the beginning of the discussion of the European Union 2020 Strategy .
Of course , the emphasis is on competitiveness and the need to respond to the global challenges which we are now facing , but we should do that in conjunction with promoting economic , social and territorial cohesion in the European Union .
This is going to be very important , not only for the definition of this strategy , but also for the next financial perspectives .
Another concrete point regarding the European supervisory authorities was raised , namely by Mr Karas and also by Ms Dati .
Let me be clear on this matter .
We very much welcome the fact that the European Council was able to reach a unanimous agreement .
Frankly , some time ago , it would have been inconceivable to have all the Member States agreeing on a text on financial supervision at European level .
Having said this , while I respect the delicate nature of some of the issues addressed by our proposals , I believe the Commission 's text has been diluted a bit too much .
The Commission , in its proposal , had foreseen a simple and workable fiscal safeguard clause , precisely because this is a very sensitive matter .
Anyway , I regret the removal of the proposed powers of the authorities to address decisions directly to individual financial institutions in two out of the three situations where the Commission had proposed it .
I regret the fact that the issue of emergency situations has been politicised by giving the Council the responsibility of declaring that an emergency exists , and I also regret that the potential scope of direct supervision by the European supervisory authorities has been limited to credit-rating agencies only .
I hope the European Parliament will reinforce and rebalance the regulations in these areas in the next negotiating phase .
Coming to the issue of Copenhagen , and let me be clear about this : it was very important that the European Council confirmed the previous commitments saying that we are ready to move to a 30 % reduction by 2020 , compared to 1990 levels , provided that other developed countries commit themselves to comparable emission reductions and that developing countries contribute adequately according to their responsibilities and respected capabilities .
We will continue to assess mitigation plans from other countries and take this decision at the appropriate time in Copenhagen .
In fact , during the European Council , I had mentioned the possibility of having some modulation in our offer , namely the possibility of constructing some pathways beyond 2020 .
This discussion is not just about 2020 ; it is for after 2020 .
So we should have some flexibility on the pathways that we can define after 2020 .
It is in this spirit that we go to Copenhagen not only to achieve the most ambitious agreement but also to have a real global agreement .
President Barroso , thank you once again .
I would like to thank Prime Minister Reinfeldt , Minister Malmström , a former Member of the European Parliament , and the whole of the Swedish Government for their very active cooperation with the European Parliament .
That concludes the debate .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on constructively and effectively implementing the goals of its programme .
Sweden put considerable effort into ensuring the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 December this year , and this means that the European Union will become more democratic , more efficient and more transparent .
I am sure that the treaty will improve continuity and will strengthen the EU 's role in the international arena .
The EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region was endorsed during the Swedish Presidency .
I am delighted that financial support has been earmarked for the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region .
As a Lithuanian , I know all too well the challenges that the Baltic Sea region faces today .
One of these is how best to resolve the urgent and serious problem of protecting the Baltic Sea environment .
Another is how to transform the Baltic Sea region into a more powerful engine for economic growth and development .
We can already find preliminary answers to these questions today in the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region adopted during the Swedish Presidency .
It is the first of several European macro-regional development plans , through which we hope to improve the region 's environment and strengthen its competitiveness .
The strategy of the Stockholm Programme is one of the most important priorities achieved by Sweden .
This five-year programme will create conditions to further develop an area of freedom , security and justice .
The six months of the Swedish Presidency under Prime Minister Reinfeldt have been a great success and marked by excellence .
The Swedish Presidency played a crucial role in the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
It thus ended almost a decade of debate and institutional stalemate , opening the door to new opportunities for the European Union .
The fight against climate change is a topic that has always been at the top of its agenda .
The EU is a leader in this field , as shown by its ambitious proposal to cut emissions by 80 % and 95 % by 2050 .
It also reached agreement on providing EUR 7.2 billion in funds for developing countries for the next three years .
The Swedish Presidency has faced the economic crisis and financial turmoil with sound , realistic measures .
Faced with the worst financial crisis since the 1930s , the EU swiftly adopted special support measures .
The work of ' preventing ' further crises has also been carried out through a new financial supervisory structure .
The Swedish Presidency has helped to address the crisis and has made Europe stronger , allowing it to continue to forge a path of peace , success and modernity .
It is a fact that it was during the Swedish Presidency that significant institutional changes were made , particularly the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , after that whole process of pressurising and blackmailing the Irish people into changing their vote in the second referendum they had to hold .
However , even for someone who really wants an increasingly neoliberal , militaristic and federalist form of European integration , it is unacceptable that he had not a word to say about the terrible social situation that the European Union is experiencing , which can clearly be seen in the rise of over 5 million unemployed in just one year , so that there are now over 23 million people out of work .
It was quite symptomatic , however , that the spotlight was put on the start of the debate on the EU 's strategy for 2020 , quite forgetting the evaluation of the so-called Lisbon Strategy , which was approved 10 years ago and promised an oasis in the EU .
That was doubtless so as not to have to mention the causes of the greatest economic and social crisis in recent decades , fed by liberalisation and labour flexibility , which has created precarious and poorly paid work and increased unemployment .
Mr President , assessment of the Swedish Presidency yields a very positive result .
Of course , its greatest success was bringing the ratification process for the Treaty of Lisbon to completion .
As a member of the Committee on Legal Affairs , I also consider a success the compromise reached in the Council on EU patents and the integrated system of patent jurisdiction .
Debate on a common patent for the entire Union has been going on for a long time .
It is high time to establish specific rules on this , because the lack of uniform regulations constitutes a barrier to the development of European businesses , and makes it difficult for them to compete , for example , with American firms .
Many times in the past , we have seen how difficult it is to reconcile the interests of all Member States in the matter of the EU patent , and so I am all the more grateful to the Swedish Presidency for the compromise , for the moment , only at the political level , which has been achieved .
The Treaty of Lisbon gives the Union legal grounds to establish intellectual property law , and provides that suitable standards will be adopted under the Ordinary legislative procedure .
Therefore , during the forthcoming Spanish Presidency , there will be a very interesting debate in Parliament concerning the compromise worked out in December this year .
in writing . - The green light has been given to the Lisbon Treaty , which has created all necessary circumstances for institutional reforms .
The Swedish Presidency 's role was to pave the way for the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty 's provisions .
It coped with this challenge .
The next Presidency 's task is to ensure that the new structures function effectively .
In this context , every effort should be made to ensure economic , social and territorial cohesion and gender equality .
I find it important to emphasise that with the treaty , the Charter of Fundamental Rights will be binding , so human rights ( including gender equality ) and anti-discrimination issues will have a better chance to be upheld via the law .
Another success was the drawing-up and approval of the Stockholm Programme , targeting core issues , which can be regarded as a pragmatic action plan for a more secure and more open Europe , based on common values , principles and actions .
I would like to underline that although gender equality was not a priority , the Swedish Presidency also played a role in increasing the number of women Commissioners and in the appointment of a female High Representative .
The Treaty of Lisbon has strengthened Parliament 's role in the European decision-making process and , by extension , the legitimacy of this institution in the eyes of Europe 's citizens .
Consequently , I congratulate the Swedish Presidency for the outstanding efforts made to bring about the new treaty 's entry into force .
I equally welcome the developments in the areas of justice and internal affairs .
The Stockholm Programme , which was drafted during recent months and voted for at the European Council on 10-11 December , outlines the new reference framework in this area for the 2010-2014 period .
I am pleased to note that consideration was given to Parliament 's recommendations by the Council .
I am referring , in particular , to the extension of the Schengen area to all EU countries , which now becomes a priority for the European Union 's internal policy , following the amendments we tabled .
I wish to congratulate the Swedish Presidency for the six months of ambitious work it has carried out in the difficult climate of the economic and financial crisis , the preparations for the Copenhagen Summit and the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Thanks to the Treaty of Lisbon , we finally have the clear institutional framework for tackling all the challenges facing the modern world .
The new treaty enables the EU to firmly assume a pioneering role in the battle against climate change , as well as the status of a global player , not only in relation to the United States and the Russian Federation , but in relation to the emerging countries as well .
In addition , the new permanent President of the Council and High Representative will ensure continuity in the EU 's foreign policy activities , which marks progress in consolidating the EU 's role on the world stage .
As a result of all these institutional changes , the EU will be more efficient and have available a wider range of methods for resolving the major problems facing the international community , such as combating terrorism , adapting to climate change , ensuring energy security and combating the effects of the economic and financial crisis .
I am sure that the Spanish Presidency will be able to meet expectations and successfully continue the actions and activities initiated by the Swedish Presidency .
I should like to congratulate the Swedish Presidency on its work , particularly in those areas that come under the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
The challenges were huge : there was the transition from the legal system of the Treaty of Nice to that provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon and also the drafting of the next multiannual programme , which will define the priorities to be given to the area of freedom , security and justice for the next five years .
I wish to commend this Stockholm Programme , which will boost the ambitious political efforts to enhance this area by 2014 .
However , considerable progress remains to be made , and this mainly in the area of asylum .
I welcome the creation of the European Asylum Support Office , since it is vital to approximate not only the laws but also the practices of the Member States .
Nevertheless , the other proposals in the asylum package will have to be adopted as quickly as possible so as to prevent a third phase of the European Common Asylum System from having to be developed .
With the major institutional changes introduced by the Treaty of Lisbon , we can now look forward to the imminent adoption of more ambitious and higher quality legislative instruments under the forthcoming presidencies .
The Swedish Presidency has signified progress through three major actions : - the election of the EU President and the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy after the Treaty of Lisbon came into force ; - the adoption of the ' Stockholm Multiannual Programme for the 2010-2014 period ' ; - the preparation and coordination of the COP 15 negotiations on climate change in Copenhagen .
I welcome the Council 's decision on the EU and its Member States being prepared to make a contribution with rapid initial funding of EUR 2.4 billion a year for the 2010-2012 period in order to support developing countries in adapting to the effects of climate change .
However , I call on the Commission to devise a suitable mechanism for distributing the financial burden between Member States according to each one 's economic power .
The 2010 Strategy marks out the direction of the Union 's operations and its main priorities for the next 10 years .
As we come to the end of the Lisbon Strategy , it is important , while continuing with current socio-economic priorities , to find effective means for evening out the effects of the economic crisis .
In connection with the consultations which are currently under way on the future strategy , I would like to draw attention to two aspects : improvement of the education system in Europe and equality of the sexes in the labour market .
The education system in Europe must change .
Building a modern , knowledge-based economy is not possible without young , well-educated workers .
We should ensure greater financial support for current EU programmes ( Erasmus , Erasmus Mundus , Leonardo da Vinci ) and establish new initiatives which will help young people to learn and to gain experience abroad , and will also provide the financial and administrative possibilities necessary to use this support at work in their own country .
The Union , in making a priority of the citizens ' needs , should adopt a programme which , in every area of its operation , promotes equality of the sexes , and particularly in the fight against unemployment .
When planning the new strategy , we should place special emphasis on raising the proportion of women in employment , for research carried out by Eurostat shows that the crisis has affected working women more than men , among other reasons , because they work in jobs which are much less secure .
Discrimination in the labour market remains a serious problem , and the new strategy must face up to it .
Despite the difficulties resulting from the delayed entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the Swedish Presidency achieved some notable successes .
They include the energy efficiency package and the telecoms package , the creation of a prudential financial supervisory body , agreement on the 2010 budget , particularly as regards financing the economic recovery plan , the Baltic Sea strategy and alignment for this week 's Copenhagen climate conference .
The Spanish Presidency to begin in 2010 will guide the transition from Nice to Lisbon and will continue the strategy of promoting employment by stimulating and promoting European economies , as well as addressing other major challenges such as financial regulation and climate change .
Because of its geographical and historical proximity , Portugal and especially the outermost regions such as Madeira , which are looking forward to seeing how the Spanish Presidency performs , must try to make the most of the opportunities that will surely be generated .
The pioneering EU-Morocco Summit , for example , will be an ideal forum for promoting the Euro-African Atlantic Cooperation Area , which will include Madeira , the Azores , the Canaries and neighbouring countries , especially Morocco .
I shall put all my efforts into it and will monitor it closely .
Mr President , the decisions made by the summit signal an escalation in the anti-grassroots policy of the European Union and the bourgeois governments and harsh measures against the working class and grassroots sections of society in order to strengthen the profitability and position of European monopolies , both within the framework of the single internal market and in international imperialist competition .
The EU strategy for 2020 , a deeper version of the Lisbon Strategy , sets as priorities faster capitalist restructurings and the demolition of the workers ' remaining wage , labour and social rights .
The cornerstone of the EU exit strategy from the capitalist crisis is to impose sweeping changes in social security systems , to increase the retirement age and to drastically cut wages , pensions and social benefits .
Deficits and public debt and the procedures for supervising the economies of various Member States , including Greece , are being mobilised in order to ideologically terrorise the workers .
This anti-grassroots EU policy also bears the hallmark of the PASOK and New Democracy parties , which continue to support the choices of capital , while shifting the consequences of the crisis on to the workers ' shoulders .
The Greek Communist Party calls on the working class to organise its counterattack , to condemn the parties of the European one-way street and to participate en masse in the unemployment rally on 17 December being organised by the class forces of the All Workers Militant Front .
1 .
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund : Sweden - Volvo ; Austria - Styria ; Netherlands - Heijmans (
( DE ) Mr President , while we were voting on Amendment 8 , the small screen - at least over here - and the screen on the left were still displaying 7d .
I just wanted to make sure that the votes have been recorded correctly .
2 .
Draft amending budget No 10 / 2009 of the European Union for the financial year 2009 , Section III - Commission (
3 .
Verification of credentials (
4 .
Prospects for the Doha Development Agenda following the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference ( vote )

( FR ) Mr President , I just wanted to say that , if I understand our fellow Member Mr Papastamkos 's amendment correctly , it is about recalling the commitment made in Hong Kong by all the WTO members to abolish export subsidies .
Therefore , contrary to a mistake made on our voting papers , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament does indeed endorse this amendment .
5 .
Restrictive measures affecting the rights of individuals following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty ( vote )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( CS ) I voted against the Böge report on releasing resources from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund because , particularly in the case of the Austrian request , it involves a highly unsystematic approach which is reflected in an unprecedented high level of support per person .
If there must be time limited individual support aimed at assisting workers affected by redundancies as a result of globalisation , such support must relate to real individual needs and the real economic context .
However , this is not happening and , on the contrary , the procedure for determining this support has been haphazard and arbitrary .
In my opinion it is therefore necessary to set out firm criteria .
Using the funds in this way is no solution to the problem but is actually a waste of taxpayers ' money .
Mr President , the reason that I think many of us are interested in trade is really the idea of how we help those in the very poorest countries to get out of poverty .
We know that one of the best ways to help them out of poverty is to help the entrepreneurs in poorer countries .
Entrepreneurs in many poorer countries are crying out for help and open markets and it is important that we support them .
But we also have to look within our own borders to see how we are setting up barriers to facilitating trade with poorer countries .
In many cases , poorer countries see the trade rules as skewed against them and they look at things like the common agricultural policy , cotton subsidies , sanitary and phytosanitary standards , and the tariffs on higher value imports to the EU .
It is important that we show that the trading system is truly open and that we help the poorest countries as much as possible to eradicate poverty .
Mr President , if we are to alleviate poverty in the world , we have to increase global trade .
If we go down the path of protectionism because of the world 's current financial crisis , the only thing we will do is delay bringing millions of people out of poverty , and millions of people will die .
If we do not grasp this challenge right now and look forward beyond this crisis , we will leave behind a legacy of such awful proportions that a billion people will find themselves unable to live .
We have a food crisis , we have climate change , we have global warming , we have floods , earthquakes and all sorts of catastrophes which call for our help , and the only way we can uplift everyone is to actually increase global trade , and I am very grateful that the new Trade Commissioner-designate is listening to me .

( FR ) Mr President , concerning this resolution on the World Trade Organisation , and contrary to the opinion voiced by the previous speaker , I believe that it is not international trade that will ensure that fewer than one billion human beings die or suffer from malnutrition , but subsistence farming . It will ensure this long before international trade does .
I have already had an opportunity to speak on this issue during the debate , and for no other reason than because the amendment concerning public services and the need for governments to be able to control public services relating to fundamental problems such as water and energy has been rejected , I have voted against this resolution .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - We are not laissez-faire capitalists and we do believe in state help for workers who have lost their jobs through no fault of their own .
We would want that help to be provided by sovereign states to their own workers .
We are not , of course , even in favour of EU membership .
However , the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund exists and has had money allocated to it .
This fund is an unwelcome substitute for help by Member States .
If it were to be proposed that British workers should be helped from this fund , I would obviously support it .
Therefore , I must reluctantly support Swedish , Dutch and Austrian workers being supported from it .
If there should be a No vote , the money would not be handed back to the taxpayer .
It would be retained by the EU and then perhaps spent on a much less deserving cause .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was set up to grant additional assistance to workers affected by the consequences of major changes in the structure of international trade .
Portugal , Germany , Spain , the Netherlands , Sweden , Ireland and Austria have already applied to it , which shows that this problem affects Member States in different geographical areas and with different economic models and trajectories .
Such situations , which are happening at an alarming rate , require decision makers to think carefully about the European economic and social model as well as its sustainability and its future .
They also mean that it is absolutely crucial to promote ways of creating quality new jobs .
For these to succeed , we must provide support , remove burdens and cut out unjustifiable red tape for those who are still willing to risk starting new businesses and joining innovative projects , despite the difficulties .
No matter how much assistance is granted to workers , it will be worthless if companies keep closing down one after the other and if we cannot reverse the investment drain in Europe .
The cases in question , which I endorse , concern Sweden , Austria and the Netherlands , and they have won broad support in the parliamentary committees concerned , both for tabling the motion for a resolution and for issuing an opinion .
Although we maintain our critical position regarding the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , since we believe it would have been more important to adopt measures to prevent unemployment in the first place , we voted in favour of the mobilisation of this fund to provide further assistance for workers affected by the consequences of company restructuring or the liberalisation of international trade .

This case concerns the mobilisation of approximately EUR 16 million for Sweden , Austria and the Netherlands in order to provide assistance for workers made redundant in the car making and construction industries .
This is the fifth time the fund has been mobilised in 2009 , making an overall amount of EUR 53 million that has been used out of the EUR 500 million planned .
It is quite symptomatic that little more than 10 % of the planned amount has been used during a period of severe social crisis , and that in itself at least demonstrates the need for a review of the regulations governing the fund .
I voted in favour of the Böge report on mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Its aim is to protect jobs and to make it easier for workers who have been made redundant following changes in the structure of international trade and the global financial and economic crisis to re-enter the labour market .
Three years on from its creation in 2006 , and in the current context of global economic and financial crisis , it was crucial to ease the conditions governing use of this European fund .
Sweden , Austria and the Netherlands are today the target of these more effective and rapid measures , and I look forward to all the EU Member States having greater access to this finance .
Linked as it is to the financial framework for 2007-2013 , the maximum annual amount of the Fund may not exceed EUR 500 million , but it is crucial that these resources are implemented in full , which is not the case today .
The European Union must use all the resources at its disposal to deal with the consequences of the economic crisis .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting in favour of the report on the provision of EUR 15.9 million in assistance to Austria , Sweden and the Netherlands .
As a consequence of the global economic crisis , a total of 744 workers have had to be made redundant in the automotive supply industry in Styria alone .
The application rightly submitted by Austria for assistance totalling EUR 5 705 365 from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund has now been approved by the EU .
That is absolutely justified , as Austria has been hit particularly hard by the slump in exports .
For example , exports of road vehicles and cars have fallen by 51.3 % and 59.4 % , respectively .
As a result of the close interconnection between the companies in the automotive industry and the low-level of diversification of many suppliers , the crisis is being felt throughout the automotive industry .
Swedish , Austrian and Dutch workers are being sacrificed to globalisation .
We reiterate our strong opposition to the philosophy underpinning this fund , which makes European workers mere ' adjustment variables ' enabling the smooth running of a form of neoliberal globalisation that is never called into question .
The interests of giants such as the US company Ford , the current owner of Volvo Cars , which cleared a profit of almost USD 1 billion in the third quarter of 2009 , or Aviva , Axa and BlackRock , the main shareholders of Heijmans NV , today supplant the general interest of European citizens .
The fund is contributing to this despoilment .
The European Union is an area of solidarity .
That spirit is the context for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The fund provides essential support to help the unemployed and victims of the relocations that occur in a globalised context .
That is even more the case when we realise that an increasing number of companies is relocating , taking advantage of the reduced labour costs found in various countries , particularly China and India , often at the price of social , labour and environmental dumping .
Once again , the consequences of globalisation are having to be cushioned through the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund ( EGF ) .
This time , unfortunately , Styria has also been hard hit .
A total of 744 people from nine different companies have lost their jobs over the last few months , and that is why the Province of Styria has asked the EU for assistance .
As with previous applications , everything has been examined very thoroughly and I am pleased that the people of Styria meet all of the requirements .
Especially during the current financial and economic crisis , we are being very clearly reminded once again of the negative effects of globalisation .
With that in mind , it is even more incomprehensible that Parliament has today adopted a resolution promoting more liberalisation and the breaking down of trade barriers , and hence more globalisation .
Until a change of thinking occurs in the EU , we can only work to reduce the damage caused by globalisation in the countries concerned .
Therefore , I have voted without reservations in favour of releasing aid from the fund .
I endorsed mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , because the situation in labour markets today demands that we act on behalf of workers .
Previous crises were characterised by the fact that they affected specific regions , and were concentrated in one place .
At such times , all those who lost their jobs or faced financial problems were able to go abroad to find work or could have several jobs .
Today , in relation to the global character of the financial crisis , such options are not available .
The current situation in the financial markets requires that we support many millions of people who have lost their jobs over the past year .
I am not , of course , talking only about help in looking for work , but also about using the elasticity of the labour market , helping workers to gain new qualifications and organising appropriate training , for example , in the use of computers or giving careers advice .
Most of the money in the EGF should be designated for promoting entrepreneurship and giving assistance with self-employment because , when people have lost their job , setting up a business and generating an income on their own account represents an opportunity to maintain financial stability and to develop .
I think that programmes like the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund are very much needed , because they respond to a specific situation and help directly those who have suffered most from the effects of the crisis .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his excellent work .
The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is a tool that is now being increasingly used by the European Parliament due to the difficult stage of economic convergence our continent is experiencing .
This shows that , in the face of the crisis , the European Parliament has been able to adopt political measures to benefit the citizens we represent through a synergy of wide-ranging political objectives .
For this reason , I voted in favour of this Fund in the certainty that it will constitute a fundamental tool of professional and hence social integration for workers who have lost their jobs .
Sweden has applied for assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in respect of redundancies within the automotive sector in Sweden .
We are convinced that free trade and the market economy benefit economic development and we are therefore , in principle , opposed to financial assistance for countries or regions .
However , this economic crisis has been deeper than any crisis that Europe has experienced since the 1930s and has hit car manufacturers in Sweden , and Volvo Cars in particular , especially hard .
The redundancies made by Volvo Cars are considered by the Commission to have a ' significant negative effect on the local and regional economy ' in western Sweden . Volvo Cars is a very important employer in western Sweden .
If the European Parliament does not take action , workers at Volvo Cars and its suppliers will be badly affected .
The risk of social marginalisation and permanent exclusion is very great , which is something that , as Liberals , we cannot accept .
We strongly sympathise with all those affected by unemployment and would very much like to see training made available for them .
Sweden is a net contributor to the EU and it is therefore important that employees in firms operating in Sweden also receive assistance from the EU if they are affected by the economic crisis .
I abstained from the vote on further mobilisation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
The vote concerns , among other things , two payments of almost EUR 24 million in total to the car industry in Sweden and Austria .
Another request concerns a construction company in the Netherlands .
The car industry is the main beneficiary of this fund , even though it is constantly closing factories , relocating its production , laying off a substantial amount of its workforce and placing its subcontractors in a vulnerable position .
In addition , it has received other types of financial aid from the Member States within the context of economic recovery plans , as well as other forms of support granted specifically in connection with the policies to combat climate change .
These funds , which are intended to be used to train people who have been made redundant - a necessary measure if they are to find a new job - are not being granted in return for a commitment by the European car industry not to lay off any more of its workers .
There is no question of my supporting a policy such as this , since it actually endorses relocations .
This amending budget clearly reflects the contradictions in the European Union 's budgets .
On one hand , its global values are low in comparison with the needs of the economic and social cohesion policies .
On the other hand , the funds have not been spent , because the countries that were most in need of that money found it difficult to budget for the required cofinancing .
Yet they rejected the proposals we tabled for reducing the cofinancing requirements , especially at a time of crisis .
Such contradictions and irrationalities of Community policy only favour the richest and most developed countries and end up exacerbating social inequalities and regional disparities .
That is why we voted against it .
The report itself justifies our position when it stresses that ' there are different reasons for the apparent slow-down in payments compared to the expected rhythm depending on the Member State concerned .
Firstly , the current economic situation has , in some cases , caused difficulties for the provision of national cofinancing .
Secondly , the fact that Rural Development implementation in 2009 shows a less dynamic profile than the relevant year of the previous programming period is explained by the late approval of certain programmes as well as , in the case of Romania and Bulgaria , a lack of sufficient previous experience in the implementation of Rural Development programmes . '
I voted against the motion , because overall , it promotes the liberalisation of markets and a trade system which is solely to the detriment of poor and developing countries and shows no real concern for the environmental needs of the planet .
I consider that the liberalisation of trade and its catastrophic results , which have contributed to the current financial , economic , climate and food crisis , and to job losses , poverty and deindustrialisation , should be rejected .
I also voted against the motion because it does not safeguard full respect for the rights of governments to protect their ability to regulate and provide fundamental services , especially in the field of public goods and services such as health , education , culture , communications , transport , water and energy .
Unfortunately , amendments tabled by the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left were rejected .
We shall fight for genuine reform of the international trade system orientated towards the introduction of rules for fair trade which comply with international rules in the field of social justice , respect for the environment , food sovereignty and security , sustainable agriculture , viable growth and cultural diversity .
I voted against the joint motion for a resolution on the prospects for the Doha Development Agenda following the Seventh WTO Ministerial Conference .
I did so from a general perspective because it clearly lacks vision in terms of promoting development and respect for developing countries , but more specifically because , while it is vital to successfully conclude the Doha Round , this cannot be done at any price .
International trade must take account of Europe 's longstanding tradition of cooperating with the poorest countries .
Moreover , on the subject of agriculture and the liberalisation of services , I do not support the approach recommended by this resolution , all the more so since not all of the amendments that were designed to balance the text have been accepted .
For example , agreeing to step up the negotiations in the services sector ( in order to achieve a greater degree of liberalisation ) is out of the question .
Lastly , I regret that the resolution has endorsed the strengthening of bilateral free trade agreements .
This type of agreement is often far more unfavourable to developing countries .
Having to face the EU on their own , they have a far weaker negotiating position and tend to be backed into a corner .
In my view , the Doha Round is fundamentally important for international trade and may greatly help to reduce poverty in developing countries and to share out the benefits of globalisation more fairly .
It is therefore important that the Doha Development Agenda take account of that effect and make a real contribution to meeting the Millennium Goals .
It is vital for WTO members to continue to avoid adopting protectionist measures , which could have an extremely onerous impact on the world economy .
I am convinced that not adopting protectionist measures has led to a better , albeit slow , recovery from the economic crisis we are currently experiencing .
It is therefore crucial for WTO members to fight protectionism in their bilateral and multilateral relations in future agreements .
I am in favour of the European Union playing a leading role in the current WTO negotiations , so as to conclude the Doha Round while bearing in mind the new global challenges , such as climate change , security and food sovereignty .
I hope that the outcome will result in new market opportunities and a strengthening of the rules on multilateral trade , so as to place trade at the service of sustainable development .
The WTO could manage globalisation better .
I recognise , however , that in the context of the current economic crisis , the rules and commitments adopted within the WTO have largely prevented its members from turning to restrictive trade measures and have led them to adopt economic recovery measures .
WTO members must remain committed to actively fighting protectionism .
I hope greater cooperation will be achieved between the WTO and other international organisations and bodies , such as the UN Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) , the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , the United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) , the United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development ( UNCTAD ) .
I therefore voted in favour .
This resolution stresses Parliament 's neoliberal positions on the Doha Round , which began in 2001 , albeit with an occasional reference to social issues and the Millennium Development Goals .
Its main thrust , however , is the emphasis on total liberalisation of the world market .
It refuses to accept that it is time to change priorities in international trade and to reject free trade on the grounds of the negative contribution it has made to the financial , economic , food and social crisis that people are now experiencing , with growing unemployment and poverty .
Free trade only serves the interests of the richest countries and the main economic and financial groups .
By rejecting our proposed amendments , they said no to a sea change in the negotiations , which would have prioritised development and social advancement , the creation of jobs with rights , and the fight against hunger and poverty .
It is deplorable that they did not consider it a top priority to abolish tax havens , promote food sovereignty and security , support quality public services and respect governments ' right to preserve their economies and public services , particularly in the areas of health , education , water , culture , communications and energy .
No , global free trade is not a solution to the current crisis .
On the contrary , it is one of its main causes .
The Doha Round negotiations have faltered from the start and have been at a standstill for a year because of a fundamental problem , namely , the system has reached its tolerable limits for everyone - be they developed , emerging or least developed , which is the international jargon for those countries that are poverty stricken and forced to integrate into an ultra-competitive global market that swallows them up .
In Europe , we live according to the paradox perpetuated by the pseudo-elites who govern us and who want us all to be rich and poor at the same time : poor , because we have to be underpaid to compete in the trade war that pits us against countries with low levels of pay , and rich , so that we can consume the cheap and often low-quality imports that are flooding our markets .
It was some decades ago that a French winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics came up with the obvious solution : free trade is possible and desirable only between countries or entities that have the same level of development .
That way , it is mutually beneficial to the partners involved .
For all the rest , trade must be regulated , whether the prophets of ultra-liberalism like it or not .
I hope that the Doha Development Round will lead to our establishing fair and equitable trade relations .
That is why I have endorsed the amendments by my political group , which are aimed at improving this resolution in order to strengthen the demands relating to development ; to request that public services not be called into question in the negotiations on services ; to request , in relation to industrial tariffs , that the need to take account of each country 's development level and not to suddenly open these sectors up to competition be recognised ; and , lastly , that special and differential treatment for certain types of production in the agricultural sector be preserved .
The various imbalances in the system of international trade unfairly help to accentuate the asymmetries between the continents .
In this respect , anything that helps correct the current imbalances is of benefit to everyone and certainly contributes to creating a multilateral system based on fairer and more equitable rules .
That will give us a fair trading system of service to everyone .
That is the spirit of the Doha Development Programme .
After 30 years of free market fundamentalism , the global economy is facing the worst crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s .
The neoliberal agenda of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) , involving deregulation , liberalisation and privatisation of services , has brought further poverty for the majority of the world 's population , both in developing and industrialised countries .
My group has always rejected trade liberalisation and its devastating effects , which are contributing to the current financial , economic , climatic and food crisis .
For these reasons , I have voted against the Parliament resolution on the WTO ministerial conference and my Group has proposed that a new mandate should be demanded for WTO negotiations .
Such a mandate must be adapted to the current state of the world .
It must aim at achieving real reform of the international trade system and ensuring the adoption of fair trade regulations that respect international agreements and national regulations in the areas of social justice , the environment , food sovereignty and sustainable agriculture .
The joint motion for a resolution from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , the European Conservatives and Reformists and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe on the Doha Development Agenda and the WTO continues the trend of global liberalisation in all economic areas .
There is no doubt that breaking down barriers to trade and increasing trade in some areas brings greater prosperity .
We have also seen that free trade , in particular , between similarly developed countries , is also beneficial .
However , if the trading partners are too different in terms of their stage of development , there are , in many cases , negative effects for both parties .
The complete opening up of the markets of the developing countries to exports from industrialised countries has sometimes resulted in the destruction of the local economic structure , an increased level of poverty for the people and , as a consequence , more people wanting to migrate to Western countries .
On the other hand , Europe has been inundated with cheap goods from the Far East , the manufacture of which has , in many cases , involved the exploitation of workers .
Domestic production has been relocated or shut down , which has resulted in unemployment in Europe .
From this point of view , therefore , certain barriers to trade , for example , to maintain food sovereignty in Europe , make perfect sense .
It should not be forgotten that the liberalisation of services on the financial markets played a huge part in the current financial and economic crisis .
Nevertheless , the motion for a resolution speaks in favour of continuing the process of liberalisation and of giving the WTO a greater role as part of a new global order policy and , for this reason , I voted against it .
I have today voted against the resolution on the Doha Development Agenda because I am opposed to any kind of liberalisation of public services .
I am thinking in particular of the liberalisation of the water supply , health services and services in the energy sector .
For the cohesion of society , it is essential that all citizens have access to public services .
These services must be provided to a high quality , with respect for the principle of universality and , above all , they must be affordable .
In this regard , the national authorities should have a great deal of discretionary power and broad opportunities to shape their services .
In this era of globalisation , an effective system for regulating trade is more relevant than ever .
This is the role of the World Trade Organisation , which was created in 1995 to replace GATT .
As is emphasised in the joint motion for a resolution tabled by the right of Parliament , which I voted for this lunchtime , the WTO has an essential role to play in ensuring that globalisation is managed better and that its benefits are distributed more evenly .
Clearly , those who are in favour of protectionism , of turning in on ourselves , are picking the wrong target when they make the WTO the deadly weapon of uncontrolled liberalisation .
It was the current Director-General of this United Nations body , Pascal Lamy , who indicated the path to follow in 1999 : that , conversely , of controlled globalisation .
In order to follow this path , the European Parliament proposes some practical solutions : completely tax-free and quota-free access to the market for the least developed countries , a successful outcome to the Doha Round for developing countries , demands in terms of environmental and social standards , and a Commission-controlled mandate for agricultural matters .
In proposing these solutions , we are also pointing out that the European Union must give priority to its political objectives , and not just focus on trade objectives .
It is with pleasure that I welcome the resolution about the WTO , because it is an exceptionally important problem at the present time .
The crisis is global in nature , and getting out of it as quickly as possible is in the interests of all of us .
I think one way of effectively limiting the crisis is to expand world trade .
Restricting the reform of economies to a regional or national level is easier , but in the long run , it is not a good way to fight the crisis , which is global in extent , and fighting it requires common instruments used on a world scale .
Therefore , we should do everything to speed up negotiations within the framework of the World Trade Organisation because these negotiations are liberalising trade .
At the same time , we must adopt sound principles of competitiveness .
In these principles , product quality standards and conditions of production are especially important , including in the context of fighting climate change and reducing CO2 emissions .
Highly sensitive goods , such as agricultural and food products , require an exceptionally sound approach .
In the future , we should think about whether , along with liberalisation of trade in agricultural goods within the framework of the WTO on a world level , we should not also introduce standardisation of some elements of agricultural policy at world level .
The specific nature of the agricultural sector should be taken into account - its dependence on climatic conditions , questions of quality related to food security , conditions of production and the problem of safeguarding the world 's food supply .
In the WTO negotiations , we need to show greater understanding of others and more goodwill .
I voted against the motion , because it is predicated entirely on the doctrine and policy of the ' war against terror ' , which is still being used to justify restrictions on rights and freedoms and to legalise military intervention and actions introduced under the Lisbon Treaty .
Also , the European Parliament has ultimately been excluded from colegislation , examination and control of measures relating to individual rights and anti-terrorist policies , thereby weakening its role on crucial issues .
Finally , I would emphasise that , apart from anything else , unfortunately an amendment was passed distorting the role of NGOs , converting them into information providers and a vehicle of the various ' anti-terrorist ' security services , instead of helpers in the societies in which they are active .
Public access to documents is an essential factor in ensuring that there is democratic control of the institutions and that they operate effectively , thus increasing citizens ' trust .
In the framework of the Stockholm Programme , the Council reaffirmed the importance of transparency and invited the Commission to examine the best way to ensure transparency in the decision-making process , document access and good governance , in view of the new opportunities offered by the Treaty of Lisbon .
I am in no doubt that the legal basis for the regulation applicable to document access needs changing , as does the legal context in which it should operate , particularly with regard to the relation between the Union 's institutions and the citizens .
Improvements are also needed in substantive terms , as , for example , in something I regard as fundamental , which is Parliament 's ability to exercise its right to democratic control through access to sensitive documents .
Transparency , whether in relation to the public or in interinstitutional terms , is a fundamental principle of the EU .
The actions and decisions taken by all the EU 's institutions , bodies , services and agencies must be guided by the fullest possible compliance with the principle of openness .
The issue under consideration concerns the Treaty of Lisbon , in particular , how to reconcile its Articles 75 and 215 with regard to Parliament 's competence in the procedure for adopting restrictive measures against certain persons and entities .
Whereas Article 215 seems to exclude Parliament from the decision-making process , Article 75 lays down the ordinary legislative procedure and hence this House 's participation in defining and adopting measures to prevent terrorism and associated activities .
Since the rationale behind the restrictive measures provided for in Article 215 is often precisely the fight against terrorism , it is important to determine whether this is an exception to Article 75 and , if so , whether it is acceptable for Parliament to be systematically excluded from the procedure to adopt them .
I believe it is clear that the legislator intended to entrust adoption of such measures exclusively to the Council . That move may be based on grounds of swiftness and unity in decision making .
Nonetheless , in any non-urgent situation , I believe there would be an advantage in consulting Parliament when such measures are to be adopted .
The fight against terrorism is once again being used as an excuse to provide for restrictive measures and sanctions against governments of third states , natural or legal persons , groups or non-state entities .
That is unacceptable , because the report itself acknowledges that in practice , it is difficult to distinguish between types of threats , even though it makes some attempts to do so .
We realise that another framework of compliance with international law is needed .
We do not accept the policy of double standards in relation to governments of third states , natural or legal persons , groups or non-state entities , assessed according to the interests of the United States or the major European powers .
There is no lack of examples .
To mention just a few , we have the cases of the illegal occupation of Western Sahara , Aminatou Haidar and other Sahrawis detained in Morocco , and Turkey 's actions against the Kurds and against Cyprus .
We therefore voted against this report , even though we agree with some paragraphs in it , particularly where it asks for clarification from the Commission .
This Parliament 's resolution constantly wavers between the need to take certain measures against terrorist organisations and states that support them , such as freezing their assets or imposing diplomatic and economic sanctions , and so on , and respect for the rights of individuals and organisations to defend themselves against such accusations and sanctions .
Clearly , this Parliament has chosen to prioritise the rights of suspects over the defence of the nations .
If , however , democracies cannot , in fact , combat terrorism by denying their own values , then they cannot allow themselves to give the impression of being lax or weak , either .
I fear that this is exactly the impression that this resolution is giving .
That is why , the institutional aspects aside , we voted against .
I voted in favour of this resolution because it is important for we MEPs to exercise our parliamentary control over decisions to impose sanctions against persons associated with al-Qaeda and the Taliban , as well as persons who threaten the rule of law in Zimbabwe and Somalia .
The chosen legal basis is unacceptable ; we ask to be consulted under the ordinary legislative procedure and to be kept informed of developments in the work of the UN Sanctions Committee .
Lastly , on this matter , I regret the highly administrative approach that the Council is maintaining even though we are talking here about measures relating to individual rights .
in writing . - The ECR Group are the strongest supporters of measures against terrorists in the EU and especially believe that national governments within the European Union must work together to tackle the constant threat from terrorism .
The ECR Group have nevertheless decided to abstain on this resolution for two specific reasons : First , we oppose any legislation moving us towards a common European foreign and security policy but secondly , we instead want to see improved and strengthened coordination and cooperation between the EU and national governments , and are very disappointed that this resolution did not sufficiently reflect that .
The common sense behind the questions that have been asked goes beyond a mere evaluation of doctrine and the consistency between declared intentions and their interpretation .
There is also a practical consequence , which arises from the old saying that he who can do the greater can certainly do the lesser , and it concerns the following : what sense is there for a body that has competence in criminal matters and in preventing and combating terrorist attacks , through being involved in a codecision process , to be subsequently excluded a priori when other measures are at stake which , by affecting citizens ' rights , may even be important in this context as well ?
It is fundamentally important that the way the Treaty of Lisbon is interpreted in legislation corresponds in reality to the stated strengthening of Parliament 's powers and competences .
At the very least , in some cases , as was raised in the question , it should be possible to have a dual legal basis when the rights of citizens are at stake and anti-terrorism policies are threatened .
In other cases , such as Zimbabwe and Somalia , optional consultation should be envisaged , as in fact is enshrined in the Stuttgart Declaration on the European Union , which was also mentioned in the question .
In recent years , more and more liberties have been curtailed in the name of combating terror .
With the SWIFT Agreement and the Stockholm Programme , in particular , the ' transparent person ' is becoming ever more a reality .
Of course , in a time of modern technology , globalisation and a borderless EU , it is important for the authorities to work together and also to prepare themselves accordingly .
However , the state must not sink to the level of the terrorists .
We only have to think of the questionable role of the EU and individual Member States in connection with CIA overflights and secret US prisons .
The monitoring of legality is an important counterweight to ensure that an accused is afforded the minimum rights according to the requirements of a modern democracy .
The report in question is not clear enough in terms of its approach and also says too little about past failures and data protection issues . I have therefore abstained from the vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Award of the Sakharov Prize ( formal sitting )
Dear honoured guests , dear colleagues , dear friends , there are days when I am particularly proud to sit in the chair of the European Parliament as President .
Today is such a day .
Today we are honouring the winners of the 2009 Sakharov Prize , the prize for freedom of thought .
It is an enormous honour to recall that the Conference of Presidents decided to award the prize to Oleg Orlov , Sergei Kovalev and Lyudmila Alexeyeva , on behalf of Memorial and all other human rights defenders in Russia .
I am proud that this decision was taken unanimously .
( Loud and sustained applause )
With this prize we , Members of the European Parliament , honour those still among us who fight for human rights , but we also honour those who lost their lives in this very struggle .
Natalia Estemirova should have been among us today , as should Anna Politkovskaya .
Their killers have yet to be brought to justice .
( Applause )
We in Europe know what the price of freedom is ; what the price of freedom of thought is .
On 16 December , exactly 28 years ago , strikers were killed in the Wujek coal mine by the Polish communist police because they fought for solidarity ; that is , for basic human rights , for dignity .
Twenty years ago , on 16 December in Romania , a revolution started which claimed the lives of over 1 000 people because they fought for their freedom .
This happened in countries which are now members of the European Union ; countries which today are together with us .
We in the European Parliament will never forget the past .
It is our duty to safeguard those values which are so dear to all of us .
In Europe , we enjoy our daily human right of freedom of thought because of their highest sacrifice .
on behalf of Memorial , winner of the 2009 Sakharov Prize . - ( translated from the original Russian ) Ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Memorial organisation , let me thank the European Parliament for this high accolade - the Sakharov Prize .
Memorial views this award as being not only for our organisation : the prize is being awarded to the entire human rights community in Russia and , more broadly , to an appreciable section of Russian society .
For 40 years now , first in the Soviet Union and then in Russia , human rights defenders have been standing up for ' European ' - that is to say , universal - values .
This struggle has always been tragic and has , in recent years , claimed the lives of the best and the most fearless .
I am sure that , in awarding the Sakharov Prize to Memorial , the European Parliament had them in mind , first and foremost - our dead friends and comrades-in-arms .
This prize belongs by right to them .
And the first name I should cite is that of Natalya Estemirova , a fellow member of Memorial , murdered this summer in Chechnya .
I cannot go on without mentioning other names , too : the lawyer , Stanislav Markelov , and journalists , Anna Politkovskaya and Anastasia Baburova , murdered in Moscow ; ethnologist , Nikolai Girenko , shot in St Petersburg ; Farid Babayev , murdered in Dagestan ; and many others - sadly , this list could go on for a long time .
I would ask you to rise to honour the memory of these people .
( The House rose and observed a moment 's silence )
These people died so that Russia could become a genuinely European country , where public and political life is based on the primacy of the life and freedom of each single individual .
That means they also died for Europe , since a Europe without Russia is incomplete .
I hope everyone understands that , when I speak of ' European values ' and ' European political culture ' , I do not ascribe to such terms any geographical content or any ' Eurocentrism ' , because a political culture based on freedom and the rights of the individual embodies a universal system of values that is equally fitting for Europe and for Africa , for Russia and for China .
Today 's event is symbolic and interconnected : the award itself , the day on which it is being presented , those making the award and those receiving it .
Andrei Sakharov , who died 20 years ago , was a distinguished champion of human rights as well as a distinguished thinker .
He advanced two major propositions .
The first was that only by overcoming political disunity and enmity does humanity have the chance to survive and develop , and the opportunity to cope with the global challenges of the age and to secure world peace and progress on our planet .
The second proposition was that the only reliable support for our efforts to overcome the political disunity of the modern world is human rights and , first and foremost , intellectual freedom .
The European Union , whose Parliament instituted this prize while Sakharov was still alive , is , perhaps , today the closest model to that future united humanity dreamt of by Andrei Dmitrievich Sakharov .
In recent times , Russia and Europe have been increasingly set in opposition to one another .
In Russia , it has become fashionable to talk about ' Russia 's special path ' , about ' Russia 's special spirituality ' and even about ' special national values ' .
And in the Euro-Atlantic world , one often hears opinions of Russia as an ' odd man out ' among countries , one whose political development is determined by its history and specific characteristics , and similar speculative constructs .
What is there to say in this regard ?
Russia , just like any other country , has its own path towards ordering life on the basis of universal human foundations .
No nation in the world organises its life according to ideas and designs entirely borrowed from outside , but Russia 's connection with Europe is far from being determined only by who borrows and from whom .
The question can be put another way : has Russia brought something to the pan-European and universal civilisation taking shape before our eyes ?
And here I would like to recall Russia 's unique contribution to the spiritual and political progress of Europe and humanity : the key role played by the Soviet human rights movement in forming modern political culture .
Sakharov rethought the role of human rights and intellectual freedom in the modern world as far back as 1968 .
His ideas were transferred to the practical level by the human rights organisations created by Soviet dissidents - first and foremost , the Moscow Helsinki Group , represented here today by Lyudmila Alexeyeva .
These organisations were the first to declare publicly that fine-sounding declarations about international protection of human rights could not just remain declarations .
We succeeded in mobilising world public opinion and the Western political elite was forced to move away from its traditional pragmatism .
Naturally , this development also gave rise to a multitude of new problems that are still not fully resolved - an example being the doctrine of humanitarian intervention .
Nevertheless , over the last 30 years a considerable amount has been achieved , although much more still lies ahead to be done .
Russian human rights defenders of the 1970s were at the origins of this process and , if only for that reason , Russia cannot be struck from the list of European countries .
In Russia , in the last third of the 20th century , as nowhere else , the human rights movement became synonymous with citizenship and Russian human rights thinking was able to develop as far as Sakharov 's global generalisations and take on the quality of a new political philosophy .
This is linked to the unique nature of Russia 's tragic history in the 20th century , to the need to comprehend and overcome the bloody and dirty past .
If the Second World War was the impetus for the post-war political modernisation of Western Europe , having become the logical conclusion of the relatively short period of domination by the Nazi regime in Germany , then for the USSR and Russia , the need for reconstruction was dictated by the experience of 70 years of domination by the Communist regime , the culmination of which was Stalin 's terrorist dictatorship .
The two key components of resurgent Russian citizenship were legal consciousness and historical memory .
The human rights movement positioned itself , from the outset , first and foremost as a movement for overcoming Stalinism in the public , political and cultural life of the country .
In one of this movement 's first public texts - a leaflet distributed by the organisers of the historic meeting of 5 December 1965 in defence of the law - it was said in this regard , with the utmost simplicity and brevity : ' The bloody past calls us to vigilance in the present ' .
In essence , this special connection between two components of civil consciousness - legal thinking and historical memory - is inherited in its entirety by Russia 's modern human rights community , and perhaps also by Russian civil society as a whole .
I believe that the paramount importance that Sakharov attached to Memorial in the final years and months of his life is linked to the fact that he understood clearly this specific aspect .
In the activity of Memorial , these two basic components of Russian public awareness have merged into one whole .
It is my view that now also , on the 20th anniversary of Sakharov 's death , the Members of the European Parliament , in choosing the recipient of the Prize , also felt and understood this specific aspect .
We all remember the resolution on European conscience and totalitarianism , adopted by the European Parliament in April .
This resolution , like the OSCE resolution that followed in July , on divided Europe reunited , demonstrates that a united Europe understands the sense and thrust of our work .
Memorial thanks you for this understanding .
The absurdity of the present-day political situation in Russia is illustrated clearly by the fact that our own Parliament - the Parliament of the country that suffered most and longest of all from Stalinism and Communist dictatorship - instead of warmly supporting these resolutions , immediately declared them ' anti-Russian ' !
This shows that , even today , Stalinism is not , for Russia , simply a historical episode of the 20th century .
We let slip a few years of confused and incomplete political freedom .
The main feature of Communist totalitarianism - the attitude to people as an expendable resource - was not eliminated .
The aims of state policy are determined , as before , regardless of the opinion and interests of the country 's citizens .
The establishment of a regime of ' imitation democracy ' in today 's Russia is connected precisely with this .
All of the institutions of modern democracy are resolutely imitated : a multi-party system , parliamentary elections , separation of powers , an independent judicial system , independent television broadcasting , and so on .
But such an imitation , going by the name of ' socialist democracy ' , also existed under Stalin .
Today , mass terror is not needed for imitation : there are enough stereotypes of public consciousness and behaviour preserved from the Stalinist era .
On the other hand , terror is also used when necessary .
Over the last 10 years , more than 3 000 people in the Chechen Republic have ' disappeared ' - that is to say , been abducted , tortured , summarily executed and buried no one knows where .
At first , these crimes were perpetrated by representatives of the federal authorities , but they then handed this ' work ' , so to speak , over to local security structures .
How many Russian security officials are punished for these crimes ?
A mere handful .
Who ensured they were called to account and judged ?
First and foremost , the human rights defender , Natalya Estemirova , the journalist , Anna Politkovskaya , the lawyer , Stanislav Markelov .
Where are they all ?
Murdered .
We see that the violence routinely taking place in Chechnya is extending beyond its borders and threatening to spread to the whole country .
Yet we see that , even in such circumstances , people are found who are prepared to oppose a return to the past .
And this is a basis for hope .
We all understand that nobody can return Russia to the path of freedom and democracy but Russia itself , its people and its civil society .
What is more , the situation in our country is not as straightforward as it might appear to the superficial observer .
We have many allies in society - both in the struggle for human rights and in the struggle with Stalinism .
What can we expect here from European politicians and from European public opinion ?
Andrei Dmitrievich Sakharov formulated these expectations more than 20 years ago : ' My country needs support and pressure ' .
A united Europe has opportunities for such a firm and , at the same time , friendly policy based on support and pressure , but is far from making full use of them .
I would like to mention just two examples .
The first is the work of the European Court of Human Rights with respect to complaints by Russian citizens .
The very possibility that victims may appeal to Strasbourg compels Russian courts to work in a qualitative and independent way .
The main thing is that enforcement of the judgments of the European Court should remove the causes leading to violation of human rights .
In recent years , more than 100 judgments have been delivered in Strasbourg in ' Chechen ' cases , concerning serious crimes by representatives of the state against citizens .
Yet what happens ?
Nothing .
Russia duly pays the victims the compensation ordered by the European Court , as some sort of ' impunity tax ' , refusing to investigate the crimes and punish those guilty .
Moreover , not only are all the generals mentioned by name in the Strasbourg judgments not brought before the courts , but they are put forward for promotion .
So what if the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe is called upon to monitor enforcement of the Court 's judgments ?
In Strasbourg they shrug : ' What can we do ? ' - and remain silent .
The second , more general , example concerns relations between Russia and the European Union in the area of human rights .
Today they virtually boil down to the fact that the European Union holds consultations with Russia on this subject once every six months .
How is this opportunity used ?
Officials , not of the highest rank , talk for a few hours behind closed doors - Europe asks about Chechnya , Russia answers with a question about Estonia or Latvia , and they go their separate ways for another six months .
Both Russian and international non-governmental organisations hold fringe events and hearings , and present reports .
In meetings with human rights defenders , the representatives of Brussels sigh sadly : ' What can we do ? ' - and remain silent .
So what should Europe do in relation to Russia ?
From our point of view , the answer is simple : it should act towards Russia just as it does towards any other European country that has taken on certain obligations and has a responsibility to meet them .
Alas , today , Europe increasingly rarely formulates its recommendations to Russia in the area of democracy and human rights , sometimes even preferring not to mention them at all .
It is not important why this is the case - whether it is a sense of the futility of efforts or pragmatic considerations linked to oil and gas .
It is Europe 's duty not to remain silent but , again and again , to repeat and remind , and insist respectfully and firmly that Russia meet its obligations .
( Applause )
Of course , not only are there no guarantees , but there are also no particular hopes that these calls will achieve their objectives .
However , failure to remind will certainly be understood by the Russian authorities as indulgence .
Taking sensitive issues off the agenda unequivocally harms Russia , but it also harms Europe just as much , since it places in doubt the commitment of the European institutions to European values .
The prize you are awarding today is awarded ' For Freedom of Thought ' .
One would think , how can thought not be free , who can limit its freedom and how ?
There is a means - it is the fear that becomes part of a person 's personality and makes that person think and even feel as required .
People are not only afraid ; they find an outlet in ' loving Big Brother ' , as described by George Orwell .
So it was when Russia had Stalin , and so it was when Germany had Hitler .
This is now being repeated in Chechnya , under Ramzan Kadyrov .
Such fear can spread throughout Russia .
Yet what can stand up to fear ?
However paradoxical it may be , purely and solely freedom of thought .
This quality , possessed by Sakharov to an unusual degree , made him impervious to fear .
And watching him also freed others from fear .
Freedom of thought is the basis of all other freedoms .
That is why it is so appropriate for the Sakharov Prize to be awarded ' For Freedom of Thought ' .
We are proud to receive it today .
( The House accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 and resumed at 15.00 )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
New EU action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the new EU action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Madam President , the problems facing Afghanistan and Pakistan are naturally a concern of the whole world .
Violent extremism is spreading beyond the region .
Drugs that are grown and produced in Afghanistan find their way onto the streets of Europe .
One of the driving forces behind our commitment is the need to prevent Afghanistan and Pakistan becoming safe havens for terrorist activity and organised crime .
At the same time , of course , we want to help create better countries for the people of Afghanistan and Pakistan to live in .
A lot of attention is focused on Afghanistan .
Many of our countries have troops and significant numbers of civil personnel in the country .
Turning around the situation in Afghanistan represents a major challenge .
Pakistan , too , faces serious challenges .
There will be no solution to the conflict in Afghanistan if we do not also get to grips with the situation in Pakistan , and vice versa .
An overall initiative is required .
We all need to do more and to do better .
In June , the Council asked the Council Secretariat and the Commission to put forward specific recommendations and political priorities to strengthen and enhance our commitment in the region .
The result was the EU action plan for strengthening the EU 's involvement in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
This was adopted in October .
I believe that this action plan is a good tool .
The basic strategy is already in place .
The action plan will allow us to adapt the instruments currently being used to meet our political priorities .
The plan is based on our current commitment and lays down a number of priorities .
These are the areas in which we believe EU measures can be most effective .
In so doing , we are strengthening our commitment and presenting a united response to the challenges faced by Afghanistan and Pakistan .
It also sends out a message to the region that we are prepared to stay the course .
The regional perspective is important , which is why the action plan places great emphasis on regional cooperation in particular .
Afghanistan is entering a decisive period .
There is no need to discuss the election process further .
That is behind us .
It left much to be desired and we hope that it will not be repeated .
I believe that is also the opinion of the Afghan people .
The EU is prepared to support the work that remains to be done , based - among other things - on the recommendations made by the EU 's election observers .
We hope that a new government will soon be in place .
This represents an opportunity to agree on a new agenda and a new concord between the Afghan Government and the international community .
President Karzai made a welcome promise of a new start in his inaugural address .
We hope that the conference to be held in London shortly will create some momentum .
The EU expects a strong commitment and leadership from President Karzai and his government .
Five years with no change is not an option .
The focus must now be on ensuring that the Afghan state gradually takes on more responsibility , with the international community adopting a supporting role .
By this I do not mean withdrawal .
Next year , there will be significantly greater numbers of international personnel in Afghanistan .
The US is sending an additional 30 000 personnel to supplement the 68 000 already in the country .
Other NATO countries and allies have promised an extra 7 000 personnel at least , in addition to the 38 000 already there .
This military commitment must be matched by civil initiatives .
There can be no lasting military withdrawal from Afghanistan unless a civil framework for stability is in place .
Effective state institutions , better forms of government , access to basic welfare , the rule of law and a functioning civil state are at least as important as hard security .
Nobody would question this .
Security , good governance and development must go hand in hand .
We are making a long-term commitment to Afghanistan .
However , the Afghan people must ensure that it is their own government , not international organisations , that bring about an improvement in living standards .
That is the only way for the population to regain trust in their leaders .
The international community is there .
We will need to do more and to do better .
We need to support the process that is under way - the Afghanisation process that is so essential for the country .
That is the core of our action plan .
We are strengthening efforts by the EU to improve Afghan capabilities and we are cooperating with the government to promote effective state institutions that can be held responsible , at both local and regional level .
We place great importance on the principle of the rule of law , good governance , the fight against corruption and on improving the human rights situation .
Agriculture and rural development are a further priority area for Europe .
It is very important that the standard of living is increased for the great majority of Afghans who live in rural areas .
We are also prepared to support an Afghan-led rehabilitation process for former militants .
Those who have taken part in conflict in the past must be offered alternatives .
Support for the electoral system will naturally also be high on the agenda .
I would also like to say a few words about Pakistan .
Pakistan is a country that has been through major changes in recent years .
The 2008 elections re-established democracy and civilian rule .
The transition to democracy has been impressive .
However , democracy is currently in a fragile and unstable state .
At the same time , the Pakistani Taliban has become a real threat to peace and stability in the country .
Scarcely a week passes without media reports of further suicide attacks .
In the past week , more than 400 people have been killed in attacks carried out by militant groups .
The EU wants to help support Pakistan 's civil institutions .
It is particularly important to follow up the recommendations made by Michael Gahler , our 2008 election observer .
These provide a basic framework for future democracy , electoral reform and institution building .
The Pakistani Government knows that this must be done .
It must indicate to us the areas in which it wishes to cooperate .
The EU will develop the strategic partnership with Pakistan that resulted from the successful special summit in June 2009 .
We want to strengthen democracy and achieve stability .
That is why we are working on the civil state , the fight against terrorism and trade .
Naturally , a functioning government that accepts responsibility for its people and demonstrates the leadership required to take the country forward is a central element of this .
In partnership with the government of Pakistan , the EU will support the strengthening of the country 's democratic institutions and structures .
This will also be brought about through economic development and trade .
We welcome the fact that Pakistan is taking greater responsibility for its own security .
We expect the country to take the same approach in respect of all forms of terrorism , including militants that use Pakistani territory to launch attacks inside Afghanistan .
The government 's efforts against the Pakistani Taliban represent a positive move .
At the same time , civilians must be protected and international law complied with .
The government should also be attentive to the need for humanitarian aid and reconstruction in the areas affected .
We need to take further steps in our operations in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
The EU is already making a substantial commitment to the challenges of the region and this will continue .
Much has been achieved in both countries - both by the efforts of Afghanistan and Pakistan , and by the international community .
Strategies and documents will not in themselves improve the situation .
It is now time to put them into action , together with our partners in Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Vice-President designate of the Commission . - Let me start with Afghanistan .
We are at an important point in our relations here .
Our future support must help build a government that is responsive to the needs and the concerns of the Afghan people .
As the situation is volatile , we need to both work with , and to influence , the situation on the ground .
That is what the international conferences , which begin with a conference in London next month , are all about .
We are ready to put in more resources .
The Commission is raising its development assistance by one third to EUR 200 million .
We need these extra resources to repeat the successes , like the extension of the primary health care system to 80 % of Afghans - including far better treatment for women and girls - and recent success in turning provinces poppy free .
Our Member States have also committed to help get our police training programme up to strength .
But that is all just the start .
We need to deliver this as part of a coherent EU contribution within a coordinated international response .
This response must have the Afghans working with the UN at the centre of it .
The action plan agreed by the Council in October gives us the opportunity to do this .
Together with the US efforts and NATO security operations , it sends a strong message to the region and international community about our commitment .
It also , of course , dovetails the priorities set out by President Karzai , particularly in the fields of improved governance and anti-corruption .
The plan confirms that we will continue to place key sectors such as the rule of law and agriculture at the centre of our engagement .
We are already assisting the government to improve the skills of administrators in Kabul .
We will now start to roll these skills out across the provinces to help the Afghan people manage their own affairs and ensure the government provides - and is seen to provide - services to them .
The plan sends a message that we will support the integration of insurgents who are ready to respond to President Karzai 's call to work with his government .
The European Electoral Observation Mission also presents its report in Kabul today and I would like to pay tribute to Mr Berman and his team for a job well done in extremely difficult circumstances .
We will ensure follow up , since it is clear the credibility of the government and the political system rests upon a major overhaul of the electoral system .
Finally on Afghanistan , but perhaps most importantly , we are streamlining our structures on the ground .
Member States will align policies with the resources to back them , and I hope to merge the EU Special Representative and the Head of the EU Delegation into a single post as soon as possible .
That will help us to build a coherent approach that can serve as a model for elsewhere .
Turning to Pakistan , our overriding concern and interest is that Pakistan should be a stable democracy free from terror and able to join with its neighbours in defence against common threats .
The action plan underlines this and builds on existing commitments made at the June EU-Pakistan Summit , including humanitarian aid , reconstruction support , assistance to the police and judiciary and strengthening democratic institutions and civil society to improve human rights , as well as agreements on trade and socio-economic development .
We will continue to support the implementation of the recommendations of the 2008 election observation mission .
The action plan is backed up by a substantial financial resource of just under EUR 500 million from the Commission until 2013 , plus a EUR 100 million renewable energy loan from the European Investment Bank , as well as commitments to deepen our trade and political relations .
The action plan also specifies intensified dialogue on all these issues and there should be a second summit next year within the Spanish Presidency .
The action plan also makes clear that the European Union will use its expertise in regional integration to help Afghanistan , Pakistan and their neighbours to kick-start economic relations , particularly with India .
There will be no overnight solution to current tensions but we must make a start to overcoming distrust .
The potential gains from this kind of regional cooperation in terms of trade and investment would dwarf anything we can do as the European Union .
In conclusion , implementation of the plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan is central to our future engagement in these countries .
It is a joint endeavour between Member States and the EU institutions and it is the first of its kind , which , if successful , can help shape the international civilian response to crises that have so far largely been defined in military terms .
The action plan amounts to a major commitment not only to Afghanistan and Pakistan , but to south and central Asia as a whole .
But we need more than ideas to deliver : we need the right people and the right skills , and they need security in order to work .
There must be stronger political engagement by the host governments , and stronger coherence among donors , including internally among Member States .
South Asia faces extremism every day , whether on the battlefield in Helmand or on the streets of Peshawar , Lahore and Rawalpindi .
We will not tackle this through military action alone but by helping build a secure and safe environment free from the tensions and inequalities that feed extremism .
Europe has much to offer from our own experience .
The action plan provides us with the opportunity to use this experience to help others , and I hope Parliament will support it .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Madam President , the goal in Afghanistan was to fight the Taliban , who offered a safe haven to al-Qaeda .
Afghanistan is no longer a safe haven but the Taliban insurgency has not been defeated because it was proven that victory cannot be achieved by military means alone and that over-reliance on military power by killing insurgents was counterproductive .
The shift in strategy is for the protection of the population , building the Afghan security capacity , facilitating good governance at central , and particularly local , level , and promoting development .
In this context , encouragement is needed for an Afghan-led reconciliation process for those layers of Taliban who got on the wrong side due to special circumstances .
The EU Action Plan addresses all these challenges , and the EU can play an important role in non-military areas .
However , I would have expected much more emphasis on the issue of narcotics - you mentioned it , Minister - and tougher words of warning on corruption and bad governance .
As for Pakistan : ' yes ' to the action plan .
Both cases are interconnected , and success on either depends on success on both .
Pakistan should be in a position to adequately fight the influx of insurgents from Afghanistan .
Finally , diplomacy is needed to avoid the eternal mistrust between India and Pakistan becoming an impediment to overall success .
Madam President , Minister , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , with this debate , the European Parliament is seeking to contribute to the discussion on the role of Europe within a region that is crucial to the safety and stability of the entire planet .
The new military strategy announced by President Obama , and even more clearly set out in the subsequent statement made by the foreign ministers of ISAF countries , has linked the sending of new troops to the primary aim of protecting the population and strengthening the capabilities of the security forces and the Afghan institutions .
This welcome sea change takes into account the pointlessness , I would even go so far as to say the counterproductiveness , of a conventional type of military effort , focusing entirely on repressing Taliban guerrilla action .
However , in order to ensure that this new course is productive and sparks a transition towards a safe , prosperous , stable and therefore self-sufficient Afghanistan , it is very clear that the military dimension of the intervention by the international community must be accompanied by growing commitment on the civil and political front .
On the one hand , we must promote economic development and strengthen the institutions , governance and the rule of law and , on the other , we must facilitate the process of internal reconciliation and help to stabilise the situation in Pakistan .
This is where the European Union 's place and role lies .

Europe has been considerably committed in the region for some time : EUR 1 billion per year in Afghanistan , EUR 300 million in Pakistan , the EUPOL mission , which is doing an invaluable job despite its staffing problems , the international observation mission and also , naturally , the commitment of individual States to the ISAF mission .
Europe 's ability to make a substantial difference in the region nevertheless seems to be decidedly low considering the amount of human and financial resources committed .
For this reason , we need to strengthen our undertaking , in other words , Europe 's leadership , and make it more consistent and effective from the viewpoint of civil strategy and political undertaking .
From this point of view , the action plan constitutes an important step forward , and the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament supports it and demands its firm implementation .
At the same time , we wonder whether the objectives stated in the plan also require the identification of ad hoc measures and call for thought to be given to extending the aims and reinforcing the tools of the ESDP EUPOL mission .
The European Parliament is ready to offer its support to the action of the European Union on all these fronts .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , we are here to deal with the EU plan of action for Afghanistan and Pakistan .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs of this Parliament has given me the opportunity to be the rapporteur on a new strategy for Afghanistan .
We need a new strategy - or maybe we just need any strategy at all - on the civilian side because , until now , the EU intervention in that country has not had enough coherence and seems to have had a very limited impact .
I am afraid , Mrs Ashton , that I cannot share your initial statement on Afghanistan because it is too generic , too bureaucratic , too unfocused - like the current action plan .
I believe Parliament must contribute to making this strategy stronger and more coherent .
I am putting together all the necessary bits of information .
First of all , I have to say that it is turning out to be very difficult to get even the most basic data on how much was spent by the EU in Afghanistan after the 2001 occupation , where the EU aid arrived and how much of it can be accounted for .
We know that almost EUR 1 billion is spent every year there , which is a big sum .
The Afghan GDP is just EUR 6.9 billion .
Our civilian aid therefore amounts to more than 20 percent of the yearly Afghan GDP , a figure that has the potential to reverse the destiny of the country if properly used .
Secondly , my attempt to draw a new strategy for Afghanistan will start with an effort to identify what has been , and what should be , the EU interest in the area .
I will focus part of my report on the elimination of the opium poppy through the alternative development strategy .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I think there are certain things to be welcomed in the action plan but , as colleagues have correctly pointed out , there are a number of questions there that have not been answered .
I think that , when we are looking at this , we are always looking at it from the point of view of the problem that we have and sometimes tend to underestimate the daily reality for people in both Afghanistan and Pakistan of the many deaths , the targeted killings of the Hazara population , for example , in parts of Pakistan , the attacks on girls ' schools , on the police and so many others .
The Afghan police were described to us recently as basically cannon fodder for the Taliban .
I think many of us are still wondering , really , what it was that we ever thought we would achieve by going in .
In terms of the international response , I welcome hearing the Commissioner talking about kick-starting cooperation and particularly mentioning India .
The regional approach is important , and I look forward to hearing how we are going to deal with other areas of real tension , such as Kashmir , which the Afghan Ambassador told us the other day really provides a problem for everything that people try to do in the region .
We also need , in Pakistan particularly , to be looking at what effective support we are offering in terms of the many thousands of displaced people , and learn from our lack of engagement with those who were displaced to the borders of Pakistan and Afghanistan in the past that a vacuum will be filled .
Therefore , we really need to be paying attention to education and meeting the needs of the population who are also looking after those displaced people .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , we cannot afford to let the NATO-ISAF military mission in Afghanistan fail .
With sufficient political will , the right military equipment and more troop numbers on the ground from all the Member States , NATO can defeat the Taliban and , of course , this must be coupled to a hearts-and-minds campaign as well .
But next door , Pakistan is potentially a catastrophe in the making - a nuclear arms state plagued by Islamist radicalisation , corruption and feeble leadership , which , nevertheless , we have to help for strategic reasons .
But , for instance , elements of the Pakistani ISA have long been suspected of granting tacit support to the Afghan Taliban and are only now reluctantly realising the domestic dangers of such an approach .
The threat posed by Pakistan , particularly by harbouring terrorists , to India over Kashmir also poses a grave threat to the whole region .
If Pakistan is to continue to receive military aid from EU countries for counter-insurgency operations against terrorist jihadis , and also EU economic assistance , it must give cast-iron guarantees that such aid will not be diverted to strengthening its conventional forces on the Indian border .
Finally , the instability of Pakistan and Afghanistan contrasts greatly with the stability and moderation of our democratic ally and partner , India , which deserves the EU 's full backing .
Madam President , Madam Vice-President designate , my group has never supported the strategy of the previous President of the United States , Mr Bush , in relation to Afghanistan .
We never supported it and time has proved us right .
Afghanistan currently has a corrupt , illegitimate government , there are innocent victims and the situation of women has not changed at all .
It would therefore have been logical to change strategies , and we regret that President Obama has opted for a military solution , and intends to deploy an additional 30 000 troops .
I believe that the European Union should not follow this line of action , because there is a real risk of creating a new Vietnam in the 21st century in Afghanistan .
In Afghanistan , history has demonstrated that there can be no military solution .
Cooperation must be increased and all efforts to find a diplomatic solution must be intensified .
In the conflict zone itself and in geostrategic terms , we must opt for respect for international law through internal solutions in Afghanistan .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Madam President , I had the pleasure a few weeks ago of meeting some of the UK returning forces from Afghanistan and I heard the same story over and over again that they were ill-equipped .
Yet the UK pays GBP 45 million a day into this corrupt institution .
Some of that money could be better spent in arming our forces in Afghanistan , forces that actually train the Afghan police force , etc .
It is quite right , as some of you have said ; this is an important area in the world and an important area that we may need to make progress in .
My problem is with the lack of experience of our High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Cathy pass-the-bucket Ashton , with more than a few roubles in it , no doubt .
We need someone more experienced .
She has not had any Foreign Office experience ; she has not been a foreign secretary and I do not think she even had a part-time job in a travel agents ' .
Come on !
This is a delicate job ; a job that needs to change things for the better and she is simply not experienced enough .
Madam President , at first sight , the Council 's conclusions about Afghanistan appear to be a welcome contrast to the belligerent attitude of the United States and the United Kingdom .
When looked at more closely , it is actually a mixture of naivety and complicity in their methods .
The Council is thoroughly naive in trying to plant the delicate flower of Western democracy in the inhospitable soil of Afghan tribalism .
The vertical divisions in society and the domination of tribal loyalties over personal judgment would make that impossible .
It wants to remove corruption but simply does not understand that the bureaucratic model of objective judgment and financial and resource decisions would not stand a chance of being respected .
This is not because Afghans are endemically dishonest but because Afghan tribal society sees looking after one 's own family and tribe as a self-evident virtue .
The Council would like to counter the production of opium poppies .
However , removing the Taliban from government was not the best way of reducing that production .
The Taliban government reduced it by 90 % but , since the invasion of Afghanistan , Afghanistan is again the world 's leading opium producer .
The report says ' Insecurity in Afghanistan cannot be addressed by military means alone ' .
That can only mean that military action has a legitimate part to play .
In my view , it does not .
We have had three failed wars against Afghanistan in the 19th and early 20th centuries ; we really ought to have learnt our lesson .
The Taliban oppresses women , has contempt for democracy and is killing British soldiers : it is a thoroughly unpleasant organisation .
But we could stop it from killing British and allied soldiers tomorrow by removing our troops .
It is a murderous , pointless war that simply cannot be won .
( ES ) Madam President , the international community , and not just the United States , has a problem in Afghanistan .
President Obama has taken three months to establish a global strategy in response to General McChrystal 's alarming report .
It is well known that that new strategy involves short-term reinforcement of military presence , withdrawal in 2011 , progressive transferral of aspects of security to the Afghan forces , better coordination between civilian and military efforts and concentration on large cities .
Now , Mrs Ashton , the great challenge is to articulate and identify a European response , mainly at the London Conference .
In your statement , you referred to two key words .
You said that our response must be coordinated with other international bodies and we support coordination with the United Nations .
You also said that our response must be coherent .
I have two comments in this respect , Mrs Ashton .
In 2005 , I had the privilege to lead a Parliament electoral observation mission and I had the opportunity to meet the head of the International Security Assistance Force ( ISAF ) , Lieutenant-General Graziano , whose tour of duty in the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon ( UNIFIL ) is coming to an end .
The 44 countries in ISAF today ( 28 of them NATO countries ) constitute a heterogeneous force that is not providing an effective response in the current fight against insurgents .
The second vital aspect , Mrs Ashton , is that a war cannot be won - and there is currently a war in progress in Afghanistan - without having the civilian population on our side , on the side of the international coalition .
I believe , Mrs Ashton , that one of the European Union 's main objectives should be to concentrate our efforts , which involve EUR 1 billion of the European Union 's money , on ensuring that the civilian population is on our side .

Madam President , let me start today by remembering Lance Corporal Adam Drane , 23 , of the Royal Anglian Regiment , from Bury St Edmunds in my constituency , who died in Helmand province on 7 December , the 100th member of the British armed forces to be killed this year .
Our thoughts should be with Adam 's family and all those families , European , Afghan and Pakistani , who have suffered such loss .
In the face of such sacrifice , we in this House have our own duty to ensure that we do all we can to promote peace and prosperity for Afghanistan .
If we are to take seriously the new Lisbon changes and a proper common EU foreign policy , there is no more urgent place to prove ourselves than in the sands of Afghanistan , first to ensure proper alignment of individual Member States ' activities behind this new strategy and , second , to welcome High Representative Ashton 's commitment today to have a formidable new double-hatted representative in place in Afghanistan very early in the New Year .
This is both a litmus test of more efficient EU working under the treaty and a marker of our future resolve for Afghanistan .
Finally , allied to this , Member States must ensure that EUPOL recruits the 400 officers promised ; this is absolutely necessary to ensure Afghanistan 's own law-enforcement services can do their job properly .
( FR ) Madam President , I should like to make it clear straight away that I totally disapprove of the remarks that Mrs Sinclaire has just made against Mrs Ashton .
Madam President , one in four children does not reach the age of five in Afghanistan , a country marked by social and health deficits , to which democratic and , above all , security deficits can be added .
The likelihood of a confrontation with Pakistan provides an incentive for the Taliban to mobilise and highlights the need to address Afghanistan 's problems from a regional perspective .
We should add to that the fact that the inability to overcome the situation by military means alone predestines the European Union , with its extensive range of tools , to play a special role .
NATO , which is primarily responsible for the military aspect , is reaching its limits in the face of the Afghan challenge .
The European Union 's humanitarian action , its cooperation and development instruments and its more highly effective diplomacy are certainly not a guarantee of success , but deprived of this support , NATO 's action is doomed to failure .
A new combination of all these elements will - it must be hoped - result in a more promising outlook for Afghan citizens .
Although the European Union 's responsibility in the current situation is great , that of Afghanistan , which is still too corrupt , divided and disorganised , is overwhelming .
Let us not forget that the partnership offered to Afghanistan can only succeed if a sufficient number of citizens support the reconstruction of their country .
Although this is a huge task , it is not a reason to sit back and leave countries prey to all manner of fundamentalists .
( FR ) Madam President , yes , we will have to emerge from the Afghan trap into which we fell because of the policy pursued by George Bush .
However , the question is not when , but how , we pull out of Afghanistan .
If the countless mistakes made by the international community are not called into question , we are in danger of completely losing the confidence and support of the Afghan population , for the benefit of the Taliban .
The militarisation of humanitarian aid and development aid must stop because it is creating confusion in people 's minds and discrediting the NGOs .
We must rely more heavily on the emerging civil society and on the Afghan reformists .
Why is Europe in Afghanistan ?
Because the United States said so , or to deliver that country from obscurantism and violence ?
We need to strengthen the most effective Afghan structures , to prioritise investment in public services - education , health and transport - and to support good governance of local powers , since the culture of these countries requires us to reflect on the relevance of the nation state .
Europe should , for instance , support Habiba Sarabi , the governor of Bamiyan Province . Her appointment is a first in the history of this country where , you will recall , we went in 2001 to help the female population .
Madam President , to read the EU action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan , you would imagine that the whole situation depended on what the EU does .
I believe the European Union could make a useful , practical contribution , but this needs to be set in the context of the wider , international effort and it should be focused on some specific activities where EU involvement might add real value .
It is too serious for EU posturing .
In a document of over a dozen pages , I found only four brief references to the United States and , more significantly perhaps , only one to NATO , and it is after all the NATO ISAF mission which is central to the success of all endeavours .
Without security and stability , it is not possible to ensure good governance or any meaningful programme of reconstruction and development .
On the civil side , European countries and the EU itself have pumped EUR 8 billion into Afghanistan since 2001 , but this huge sum seems to have made little difference ; do we have any idea how much of it has gone astray ?

There needs to be a comprehensive international plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan , but I have yet to see where the EU contribution fits into this wider , international commitment .
( DE ) Madam President , today , after eight years , we all essentially know that the previous Afghanistan strategy based on military force has failed .
The imbalance between military operations , on the one hand , and the insufficient resources for civil purposes , on the other , is directly preventing any improvement in the living conditions in Afghanistan .
Thus , the most important message from the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left is that we need a radical change of strategy .
We need a radical change of strategy away from the military and , above all , towards a more people-centred strategy .
Forty percent of Afghans are unemployed and more than half of them live in utter poverty without any health care or adequate education .
The focus must be placed on the social issue , and that is what I expect from the Council , the Commission and all the actors involved here .
This , of course , includes increasing good governance , strengthening agriculture and integrating former Taliban fighters .
However , I say this to you most sincerely : if we only go half way to doing this and once again rely on military force , we will squander our chances .
Time is running out !
( FR ) Madam President , I believe that we must try to come up with some simple ideas with regard to these very complicated matters .
My first question is simple : Why did we go to Afghanistan ?
We went to Afghanistan with one objective : to dismantle the al-Qaeda training camps , the support base of international terrorism , which were threatening us and threatening stability in the region .
Today , those camps no longer exist .
My second observation is that , unfortunately , whether we like it or not , troops from the West deployed in Afghanistan are increasingly being regarded as occupation forces and no longer as friendly forces .
This is a major , everyday problem that we must bear in mind .
I invite those who tell you otherwise to go and see what is going on in that country .
The third point is that the security situation has significantly deteriorated .
In 2004 , it was possible to walk around Kabul .
Today , Kabul is a huge entrenched camp .
Therefore , in failing to learn lessons from an operational failure on the ground and , ultimately , in applying only old methods , we are heading for a repeat of such failures .
What are the consequences of all this ?
I believe , in fact , that it must be recognised that we have dismantled al-Qaeda - that is a genuine finding - and that we must pull out .
Can we pull out straight away , today ?
No , because if we pulled out , it would undoubtedly cause chaos , and would perhaps lead to the return of those camps that we are combating .
Our withdrawal must therefore come with some conditions attached .
Firstly , as everyone says , we must hand over the keys to the Afghans themselves ; we must ensure that the conflict is an Afghan conflict .
Secondly , a dialogue must be established with all the insurgents , and note that I did not say ' with the Taliban ' , because the word ' Taliban ' is very restrictive .
Thirdly , a social level must be accepted that is not perfect .
Let us not think that our European criteria are criteria that should be adapted to Afghanistan .
We must accept that .
Madam President , it is always more difficult to conclude a military operation than it is to start it , and in order to be able to conclude it , we must keep in mind the initial objective , which was to ensure that the al-Qaeda camps were dismantled .
This has been done today .
( PT ) The Council says that the situation in Afghanistan and Pakistan has a direct impact on Europe .
That , in fact , is the principal message that we have to be able to put across honestly and courageously to Europe 's citizens .
In that respect , I welcome the EU 's new action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan , which includes investing in a huge programme of capacity building at all levels in the Afghan administration .
Effectively implementing this action plan , as a means of unifying European efforts in Afghanistan , is the only way to contribute to the state building that is necessary to put an end to the war and to underdevelopment .
Europe cannot abandon the Afghans , and it is not there because the Americans have so decided .
The international military and civilian presence will continue to be needed there for many years to come .
To conclude , I strongly condemn the French Government 's decision to forcibly repatriate Afghans who have fled the war in their country .
( DE ) Madam President , if there is one thing that we really do not need in the bitter reality being experienced in Afghanistan , it is pretentious speeches .
I am looking in your direction , Baroness Ashton , when I say that .
You talked about the Member States being committed to the police training mission EUPOL .
Is that really the case ?
If so , how can it be that we still do not even have the 400 police officers in place ?
That is a mixture of disingenuousness and absurdity .
Are we being honest in what we say ?
As far back as two years ago it was stated in the European Security Review that the low number of police instructors calls into question the reality of Europe 's commitment .
Why are we not financing the trained police officers to prevent them from joining the warlords or the Taliban ?
It would not cost much and it would be very efficient .
I have the impression , Baroness Ashton , that Europe is full of high-sounding talk , but it is shameful how small and inadequate its actions are .
( DE ) Madam President , the heading chosen here of a ' new action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan ' is an appropriate one .
However , what has been presented here seems to me to be more like two separate action plans presented one after the other .
I essentially support what has been said about both countries .
In Afghanistan , I hope that we have learnt from the mistakes of the past and that we will adapt our policies and structures accordingly .
As regards Pakistan , I am pleased that the new policy is seen as a follow-up to my election observation report .
In the countries in which we have carried out election observation missions , I believe that it is only right that we incorporate the recommendations into our specific policies towards those countries .
In the response to this debate from the Council and the Commission , I would like the joint strategy for these two countries to be explained more clearly , as we have to acknowledge , for example , that we have a thousand kilometre border in this region that cannot be controlled properly on either side , while the policies that we pursue on one side of this border will have direct effects on the other side .
Therefore , what structures do we actually want to set up ?
How do we want to establish the dialogue between the Afghan and the Pakistani Governments ?
How can we ensure that our policies are accepted by the local people there ?
These are questions to which we still need answers , and I hope that we will get them .
Madam President , the plan of action on Afghanistan and Pakistan adopted last October is , in itself , a good document .
Its aim is to create the conditions for returning responsibility from the international community , including the EU , to the Afghan state , with the former in a support role .
The same is envisaged by the US in the security sector .
It is hoped that the additional 30 000 US troops will create a situation in which responsibility could be handed over to the Afghan forces by 2011 when the US withdrawal will commence .
Even if both the EU and the US have similar aims , namely creating the conditions for the Afghan state to take responsibility for its own affairs , the timeframe for achieving those aims is inevitably different .
Adequate security will have to be achieved by 2011 , while state building will inevitably take longer .
The question , then , is : supposing adequate security is either not achieved by 2011 or deteriorates again after the US pull-out , will the EU , already involved in state building , be ready to take over the task of providing security too ?
I think not - and then we have a problem .
( ES ) Madam President , I am delighted that the Swedish Presidency has strengthened the European Union 's commitment to stability and development in Afghanistan through the action plan .
I would , of course , like to know more about funding for this plan as far as Afghanistan is concerned .
Another very important moment for Afghanistan will be the London Conference in January .
At that conference , we will hear about the specific pledges made by the European Union and its Member States .
We should also hear from the new Afghan Government about the many commitments it must make in areas such as combating corruption and drug trafficking .
I am rather alarmed at reports in today 's press of the speech given yesterday by President Karzai on the corruption issue .
Ladies and gentlemen , President Obama 's decision to increase his military contingent by 30 000 troops is very recent .
In short , Afghanistan is at a crucial stage and the United States and Europe must work in a very coordinated manner .
What is at stake in Afghanistan is not only the prosperity and freedom of Afghans , but also the stability of the region , including such an important country as Pakistan .
Our own security is also at stake , given the continuing threat posed by al-Qaeda , as has already been said .
The credibility of NATO and of what we call the West also depends to a large extent on the results in Afghanistan .
We cannot fail .
In order to succeed , though , as has also been said , we need the support of our own citizens .
This support is conditional on transparency and clarity .
We must explain that our compatriots in Afghanistan are in serious danger , but we must also stress the importance of the mission there and that failure cannot be an option .
As I have said , many important factors are at stake .
( DE ) Madam President , an Afghan friend once said to me that it is a good thing that the West invaded Afghanistan , but remember that , in Afghan history , anyone who stayed longer than a year became an occupier , even if they previously went there as liberators .
That was in 2001 .
We are now in 2009 and exactly that has happened .
The Taliban governs de facto 80 % of the country and the US military leadership as well as the European defence ministers are saying that this war cannot be won by military means .
What , then , is the goal ?
A country that we do not have under control cannot be turned into a democracy and whatever else from the centre if that country has never had a centralised form of government .
In other words , would it not make sense to concentrate on al-Qaeda and terrorism and then get out of there ?
These questions need to be answered .
We also need answers to the questions that were , quite rightly , raised by Mr Van Orden in connection with the integration of this action plan with the general strategic goal , the London Conference , President Obama 's Afghanistan plan and so on .
Are these things consistent with each other ?
It is therefore very right and necessary to have a combined approach to Afghanistan and Pakistan here , and also to include what was ultimately said in connection with India .
Most importantly , we need to keep an eye on internal developments .
When foreign military pressure leaves a country having trained soldiers and police officers who have no goal of their own , I have never known these soldiers and police officers to then leave behind the ideology of the civil war , which does indeed have a goal .
It always wins !
History shows this , too , and therefore I am deeply concerned that what we are doing here may lack continuity .
We really should consider what sort of plan would enable us to get our troops out in a reasonable manner and , at the same time , to put an end to terrorism .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the security situation in Afghanistan recently became much worse due to the lack of full control on the ground .
Vast areas of the country are governed by tribal rule and no longer , therefore , by national law .
The sense of insecurity has also spread to the main cities , despite the ongoing commitment and monitoring action of the ISAF forces .
Since the fight against terrorism is closely connected to activities carried out on the ground , it is clear that the United States , allied countries and NATO cannot withdraw .
Our continued presence and the achievement of success in Afghanistan depend greatly on a political and military approach that is shared at international level and aimed at a regional approach on the ground within both Afghanistan and Pakistan .
In this sense , the new European Union action plan represents a significant step in the strengthening of security and in the delicate process of capacity building where democratic institutions , human rights and socio-economic development within the region are concerned .
( PL ) Madam President , I think the European Union action plan is going in the right direction , because our assistance must concern two areas .
The first is an improvement in security .
The second is an improvement in the conditions under which people live .
It can be said that progress in the first area - concerning security - will have a beneficial effect on the conditions under which people live , while progress in the second area - concerning an improvement in the conditions under which people live - will foster an improvement in security .
I think , however , that we should continually ask about the effectiveness of our assistance .
In my opinion , it could be much more effective if we could count on support from the states which surround Central Asia .
I would especially like to encourage the European Union , Mrs Ashton and Mrs Malmström to make contact with Russia and Tajikistan , because these are countries which could be very helpful , especially concerning logistics and the transportation of supplies for the population .
Madam President , today , terrorist bombings are a daily occurrence in both Afghanistan and Pakistan .
Schools , shopping centres , town centres and even military headquarters are under attack .
The Pakistani military is successfully pushing back infiltrators into Pakistan from Afghanistan , but I have to ask myself : from where are these terrorists continuing to get their weapons ?
It is far too simplistic to argue that it is a Pakistani internal issue in itself .
It is much more complex than that .
Minister Malmström , quite rightly , raised the issue of regional cooperation .
Through our new foreign affairs role , High Representative , will we be speaking to Pakistan 's neighbours to encourage them to do all that they can to help Pakistan through this difficult time ?
It is also quite right that , whilst mutual mistrust exists between Pakistan and India - and I am a great proponent of bringing these two countries together - there is very little progress that we will make .
As long as the core issue of Kashmir is not dealt with , I am afraid that we will not make a huge amount of progress .
( SL ) In my opinion , the action plan for Afghanistan will only make sense if it underlines our European policy , that is , the European approach to Afghanistan .
We are already deeply involved there and we cannot just go along with the decisions of our major allies , surprising us as they do with some of their strategic decisions .
What I think is important about this action plan is that it clearly gives priority to civilian initiatives .
We should bury the ideas of a military victory once and for all .
We cannot win in a territory whose population considers all of us who are there to help as occupiers and the Taliban as so-called freedom fighters .
I should like to join those of you who have stressed the need for a regional solution and the need for greater involvement of the countries in the region which border Afghanistan .
They have the greater confidence of the people .
( FR ) Madam President , much has been said about the action plan on Afghanistan .
Speaking for myself , I regret that the presentations given to us today did not place slightly more emphasis on the link between the EUPOL mission and the NATO mission in Afghanistan .
This is a mission that we must carry out .
The quantitative and qualitative problems that it is encountering are mainly due to the link with NATO and , in order to be effective , we must solve them as quickly as possible .
I would have liked more to have been said about this .
My question concerns Pakistan , the chronic instability of which is , as we all know , a factor in the crisis for the entire region and for Afghanistan , too .
I see , in the action plan , that cooperation with Pakistan is envisaged in the areas of counter-terrorism and security .
In that country there is , as we know , a significant ideological and sometimes structural and organisational connection between radical Islamic movements that operate in Kashmir and at the Afghan border .
I wanted to be sure that the methods , the nature and the timeframe of the assistance that we envisage are gauged properly , in order to prevent this connection from having extremely adverse and harmful effects .
( RO ) For well over eight years , our countries have been wasting human lives , energy and huge financial resources in a country ravaged by war where two empires , the British and Soviet empires , had already been bogged down .
Unfortunately , the political and military reinforcement of the Taliban 's influence , the poverty devastating this country , the status of women , the opium trade and widespread corruption are all facts of life which highlight the failure of the operations currently being conducted in Afghanistan .
I believe that the European Union 's strategy must counter the growing prospect of chaos and violence through strengthening the military presence and making it more effective , as well as through stepping up the efforts for reconstruction , development and democratisation in Afghanistan .
Increased development assistance in Afghanistan basically means an investment in our own security .
This is why we must make every endeavour to keep this failed state afloat and guarantee its citizens a minimum level of physical and material security .
( PL ) Mr President , the situation in Afghanistan is , today , the most important problem facing international institutions and , now that the Treaty of Lisbon has come into force , the European Union in particular .
This challenge cannot be met without three elements in our strategy : firstly , the success of a very ambitious , two-year military mission , which must end in defeat of al-Qaeda and reception of part of the Taliban leadership to the government side .
Secondly , stability in Pakistan and the entire region , including India - this is a second , key challenge - and thirdly , the need to build civil society .
Thirty years of war is a huge problem .
It is an uneducated society - over 90 % of the people cannot read .
In relation to this , a huge amount of social assistance is needed in order to build a state of law , good governance and social care .
I want to say that , today , the number of children attending school in Afghanistan has risen from 700 000 to 7 000 000 , and in relation to this , one of the key matters facing Mrs Ashton is , in particular , the need for effective financial aid to build civil society in Afghanistan .
( DE ) Mr President , perhaps you would allow me , as a member of the Iran Delegation , to just make one brief comment .
A while ago , the European Parliament in Brussels held a debate with the Iranian ambassador in Brussels .
When asked why the number of death sentences in Iran had quadrupled since the Iranian President took office , he put it down to the increase in the drugs trade in the border region between Iran and Afghanistan .
I wanted to mention this statement to you in order that , alongside corruption , this problem might also be given adequate consideration in the action plan .
Mr President , the Council is genuinely grateful for the huge commitment shown by the European Parliament on this issue .
I will answer some of your questions .
Mr Kasoulides : the action plan takes the regional perspective as its starting point .
It is absolutely central .
Enormous emphasis is placed on good governance , combating corruption and the principles of the rule of law , and this is the work that is guiding the EU .
In these areas , Afghanistan and Pakistan will need our support for a very , very long time to come .
Mr Kasoulides is right in saying that we have not given sufficient attention to the drugs issue .
We support the efforts being made , for example , the UNIDOC cooperation and technical assistance .
This must continue .
Most important of all , of course , is to support the work that the Afghan government is doing to create greater prosperity and good social governance .
To Mr Arlacchi , I would say that we agree that the efforts made to date have not been sufficiently coordinated .
That is a problem for the EU , and that is why it is so important for us to have this plan now .
The Swedish Presidency has also struggled hard during the autumn to obtain the type of information that you ask about - who is doing what , and how much - and to get an overall view of what is happening .
We now have a better picture and we are very much looking forward to your report , which can help us as we move forward with this work , as well as to cooperating with you and the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I would say to Mr Danjean that EUPOL is a very important element in our cooperation and the most important element for the Afghan Government as regards civil police work .
It has emerged that there is very strong leadership in place .
The qualities of EUPOL are recognised by all parties - the Afghans , the US and other parties .
We have increased the workforce by 280 international personnel .
We regret that the Member States have not been able to provide the 400 personnel that we require , and we are currently calling for further contributions because we want the Member States to be involved .
As things stand at present , EUPOL is consolidating its activities into six strategic areas where we believe value can be added : police intelligence , investigating crime , the command structure in the police , links between police and prosecutors , combating corruption and also human rights and equality .
These are the Afghan priorities .
NATO is now to become involved in police training through its training mission and naturally , we need to intensify our cooperation in this area .
Finally , I would like to say that the action plan is incredibly important in enabling the EU to use its resources in a better , more coordinated way .
We must now focus on implementing all these good ideas .
We can do this through the regional perspective , through the responsibility taken by the governments of Afghanistan and Pakistan themselves and by focusing on our political priorities , the rule of law , democracy and human rights .
The EU is one partner .
A very important partner , but there are other partners in the region , too , and naturally , we must cooperate with them .
We are looking forward to the London conference at which we hope President Karzai will present his plans , and we are looking forward to increasing our support after that .
The EU 's support is long-term and enduring , and it must be sustainable .
That is the signal we must send out .
This is going to take time .
We have to be realistic .
We have an enormous amount of work ahead of us .
That is why we need the EU to be committed .
We need to send out a signal that we are in it for the long haul - not least for the sake of the women and children , as many Members have mentioned .
Vice-President designate of the Commission . - Mr President , I will just pick up , if I may , a few key points which were raised by honourable Members .
Agreeing with the Presidency on the issues of narcotics , what we have sought to do is develop a comprehensive response which really brings together the rural development aspects of it with social issues and , of course , the rule of law .
It is very important to tackle it from all of the different perspectives .
I agree with what honourable Members were saying about the importance of civilian issues .
We have actually made significant progress ; a number of Members were concerned about that .
Just one example : in 2002 , we had health care take-up support of around 7 % of the population ; it is now at 85 % in 2009 .
I can give other examples ; that is just one where I think we can absolutely show what we are doing and how effective it has been on the ground .
I agree , too , with what was said by Members such as Mrs Lambert about education being absolutely core to what we do in terms of support for children and also of course in terms of training for employment with adults .
The funds : I am pleased to say that actually , these are very well-run funds .
They are managed through the UN or through the World Bank and I think honourable Members receive a state of play report .
The last one I have here is dated July 2009 .
For those who have not seen it , we can make sure you receive copies .
It demonstrates in very clear terms exactly where the money is going , exactly what it is being spent on and what we hope to achieve by that .
But I do agree that we need to be more efficient .
There is always room for that .
One of the challenges of my role is to bring together what is happening on the ground , to make it more coherent and make it work more effectively .
A number of colleagues have mentioned the need to make sure we fulfil the commitments on EUPOL .
It was mentioned that we have to work collaboratively with NATO ; I have already had one meeting with the Secretary-General of NATO and I was at the meeting with General McChrystal and Richard Holbrook and with Secretary of State Clinton , to talk about Afghanistan .
We are already building up to the London Conference in our dialogue with those important and key partners on the ground .
Of course , what has been said about the regional aspects is extremely important .
We do want as part of the action plan to pull together that regional cooperation .
There is work going on : very practical work to develop that , particularly rail links and trade cooperation and so on .
But I agree absolutely : there is more that we should be doing on that .
The London Conference on 28 January is the next significant milestone and will raise issues of security , governance , and social , economic and regional development - very important issues .
Issues that I have identified are education , health , economic development , trade , justice and human rights , all of them issues on which I can say that I have a great deal of experience .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The new EU action plan for Afghanistan and Pakistan is designed to implement the EU 's strategic ambition to play an even more active imperialist role in Afghanistan and Pakistan and the area as a whole .
In Pakistan , it is promoting a free trade agreement which will allow greater penetration of the euro-unifying monopolies in southern Asia .
In Afghanistan , it is seeking to stabilise its presence even further , both independently , with the EUPOL policing mission in Afghanistan , and within NATO , with the development of the European Gendarmerie Force .
Imperialist infighting for a share of the spoils is hotting up , despite the strategy of cooperation with the USA and NATO .
The EU is endeavouring , with a package of money worth EUR 1 billion a year and various ' development programmes ' , to strengthen the position of European capital in plundering the occupied country and acquiring a springboard for the exploitation of the peoples and wealth in the area as a whole .
At the same time , the ' democracy export ' policy is trying to expand support for democracy to the imperialist occupying structure .
The peoples cannot choose the ' better imperialist ' .
They must step up their fight against the plans of all the imperialists , in order to shake off the yoke of occupation in Afghanistan and the area as a whole .
The problems affecting Afghanistan and Pakistan are not confined only to these countries .
They actually affect us all .
The mission launched in Afghanistan must be brought to a conclusion .
With this in mind , Romania is openly considering the possibility of increasing its involvement in this country , including reinforcements for training the army and providing medical and institutional support .
Romania currently has 1 020 soldiers stationed in Afghanistan whose involvement in guaranteeing peace and stability is unanimously appreciated by our allies .
We need to be involved not only on the military front , but also in strengthening the Afghan state 's institutions , providing governance at local and regional level , combating corruption and drug trafficking , training police officers and providing technical assistance for agricultural development .
In this regard , I would like to mention the announcement made by Catherine Ashton about increasing the funds which the European Commission is allocating for development in Afghanistan .
The European Union 's actions in Afghanistan and Pakistan must be coordinated .
The situations in both countries are closely linked and success in one depends on the other .
The European Union must continue its partnership with Pakistan and help this country in its battle against extremism and terrorism , as well as with regard to commercial relations and promoting human rights .
Sufficient international presence must be ensured to help establish basic conditions of peace and security in order to enable the capacity of the country 's government to be strengthened , the rule of law to be reinforced , corruption to be combated and human rights respected .
When I speak of government , I am also referring to the subnational level , the level nearer to citizens , and to governance in the broad sense , including all stakeholders in Afghanistan .
The country 's development and the development of agriculture , infrastructure and the commercial fabric urgently require a climate of peace and stability and , above all , the protection of citizens by combating impunity and the legal insecurity that directly affects them .
Nonetheless , the daily , urgent problems faced by the citizens must not be overlooked .
These problems are not limited to security and relate to food , health and education .
Afghanistan will survive , and it will do so thanks to the strength and efforts of the Afghan people themselves .
We must , however , lend them a hand and , in particular , we must not take it away before time , when they need it the most .
If there is a striking example anywhere in the world of the inability of the EU to adopt an independent position on a problem created by the United States , then it is the current unhappy situation in Afghanistan : a shattered infrastructure , several generations with minimal chances of obtaining an education , mediaeval conditions in terms of gender equality and the global standard for absolute corruption .
It is a situation which , together with production of more than 70 % of the world 's opium output and increased activity from terrorist groups , shows the complete impotence of the occupying power .
The well-known examples of injustice , even against elected representatives , together with the unlawful practices of the US administration , have created an unstable environment .
The constant references to the lack of respect for human dignity under Soviet occupation are a futile attempt to cover up the current chaos and anarchy .
With more than two million refugees in Pakistan and a porous border between the states , there are excellent preconditions for the penetration of armed groups into the southern and eastern parts of the country .
The Pashtun tribes have long lived on both sides of the border and it is difficult in the current chaos to find out who comes from where .
The EP resolution of 2008 describes this situation accurately but it must be said that the optimistic assertions are out of place .
In the current situation , a strengthening of the military presence and further transfers of financial resources and teams of experts is completely nonsensical .
The situation has deteriorated markedly over the past year and the optimistic assertions of the European Commission are not based on the current reality in Afghanistan .
It is imperative we take action to improve the situation in Afghanistan .
In particular , important measures are : training of police officers , military personnel , people employed in the justice system and teachers , as well as combating the production of and trade in drugs .
This will enable stabilisation of the social system in Afghanistan .
Undoubtedly , it is also necessary to increase the military and police contingent and redouble efforts in the areas bordering Pakistan , to prevent the flow of arms and drugs between the two countries .
It is already worth thinking about the direction in which the Afghan economy should develop in the future , so that the people will be able to give up growing poppies and trading opium .
In a word , military and police action should be accompanied by civil measures : support in establishing the structures of an Afghan state and development aid .
Belarus ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on Belarus .
Mr President , honourable Members , the EU 's relationship with Belarus is not without its complications .
I would like to begin this debate by explaining why the Council took its decision in November concerning the EU 's relations with Belarus .
I know that this issue is one that is of great interest to many Members .
When we discussed this , we focused on two important aspects .
On the one hand , the EU wanted to send a clear signal that we are not happy with the lack of positive progress in recent months .
On the other , we wanted to establish the subsequent steps within the framework of our dialogue with Belarus , with the aim of encouraging Minsk to take action in a number of areas .
I feel that the result was a well-balanced decision that takes these aspects into account .
It has three main elements .
Firstly , we are extending our sanctions while , at the same time , suspending the travel restrictions for almost all the individuals concerned .
The exceptions are four people directly linked to the political disappearances and the chair of Belarus 's Central Electoral Commission .
Secondly , we are open to the possibility of visa facilitation and readmission agreements between the EU and Belarus .
Thirdly , there is the prospect of a partnership and cooperation agreement between the EU and Belarus .
Naturally , this would require positive developments as regards democracy , human rights and the principles of the rule of law .
The Commission has been asked to carry out some preparatory work based on these action plans , which were developed within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy .
In our discussions , we took into account the fact that the situation in Belarus is better than it was 18 months ago , despite the fact that there have been some backward steps .
The expulsion of a student from university after taking part in an Eastern Partnership forum is a very serious example of this .
The transition from an authoritarian society to democracy - as many Members of this House know extremely well - is a gradual process .
It will take time for Belarus and there will be many obstacles along the way .
Our full support is therefore required .
The global financial crisis is actually providing opportunities for influence .
Belarus 's economy is on its knees and Russia is no longer prepared to underwrite the country .
In the energy sector , the low gas prices are just a memory .
Can we then exploit this situation to encourage Belarus to change track ?
There is no other way than through dialogue .
We must help to strengthen the cautious movement towards greater openness .
We have to consider how effective our sanctions policy is .
Last year 's decision to suspend visa restrictions after Minsk had released the final prisoners in August 2008 helped bring about some progress in our dialogue .
The use of sanctions is an important way for the European Union to exert pressure .
At the same time , the Commission has taken a number of steps aimed at cooperation with Belarus and the country is part of the Eastern Partnership .
Our support for Belarus within the International Monetary Fund has also been a positive step .
We have set out the conditions , and now we must proceed reasonably and prudently .
The decision to extend the suspension of the visa prohibition list sent a signal that we are serious about rewarding positive steps that are taken .
If things continue to develop in this direction , we can go a step further .
At the moment , discussions are focusing on two possible alternatives .
One is the development of a formal agreement and the other is the possibility of visa facilitation and readmission agreements .
The position taken by the Council has laid the foundation for more specific consideration of these issues .
A partnership and cooperation agreement could result in us formalising the relationship between the EU and Belarus in a new way .
It is a way of combining conditionality with our various means of exerting pressure within the framework of a legally binding agreement .
A partnership and cooperation agreement would also allow Belarus to participate fully in the bilateral element of the Eastern Partnership .
Where visa facilitation is concerned , the intention is that this will be aimed at ordinary people , the general public , rather than at the political elite .
It would represent an important opportunity to encourage contacts between civil society and the citizens of Belarus and the EU .
It could become a crucial factor in opening up and influencing Belarusian culture .
It is entirely in line with the aims of the Eastern Partnership .
Visa facilitation is linked with readmission .
This should not be a great problem , since Belarus has demonstrated its ability to cooperate on matters related to border controls .
Belarus is in an important location on the eastern border of the EU .
Consequently , we have an interest in seeing Belarus modernise , develop and move towards becoming a democratic , free country .
The importance of having democratic neighbouring countries is a cornerstone of our security strategy .
We must work to instil our values - such as democracy , a market economy and respect for human rights - in Belarus .
There is a clear parallel here with how we develop partnerships with a number of countries to both the east and the south .
I would like to end by emphasising that naturally , we must continue to set clear conditions in our relations with Belarus .
The country must continue to move forward .
President Lukashenko 's repressive policies must be replaced by greater democracy and greater tolerance .
The principles of the rule of law must be respected .
This is the message that we are sending in all the bilateral contacts that take place between the Member States and Belarus .
Dialogue is essential if our demands are to bring results .
That is why we on the Council have also welcomed the increased contacts aimed at strengthening a transition to democracy .
We will continue to develop our support for the democracy movement and civil society which are working for reform and European integration in Belarus .
We are very grateful for the significant support and commitment demonstrated by the European Parliament in this work .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , dear colleagues , Council President , honourable Members , it is a pleasure to discuss with you today our very important but also our very challenging relationship with Belarus .
I think it is important because Belarus lies at a crossroads on our continent ; and it is challenging because Belarus ' own choices for its own future , and for its relationship with the EU , remain unclear .
It still remains to be seen what they will be , so we will have to go on working with them .
Over the last two years , the European Union has sought gradually to engage with Belarus and to encourage further reforms , to build on the , I have to say , modest measures taken so far .
I am convinced that the most productive approach to Belarus will be one based on pragmatism .
Our engagement with that country needs to reflect positive steps by Belarus itself , but we also have to show at least some flexibility .
We have signalled clearly that we would like to see Belarus take its place as a fully fledged participant in the European neighbourhood policy , and that the bilateral track of the Eastern Partnership can be opened to Belarus if it shows through sustained action its wish to make irreversible steps towards democratic reform .
In the meantime , we have shown our goodwill in a number of important ways .
A number of EU high-level visits to Belarus this year helped strengthen political exchanges .
We launched a dialogue on human rights issues in June 2009 .
The Commission is engaged in a growing number of technical dialogues with Belarus on issues of mutual interest .
Last month , for instance , the External Relations Council decided to extend existing restrictive measures , notably the visa ban and the assets freeze , till October 2010 , given the lack of significant progress on human rights and fundamental freedoms .
However , to encourage democratic progress , the Council also extended the suspension of the restrictive measures .
And the Council also took two further decisions to encourage Belarus to stay on the path of reforms .
I very much welcome that the Commission can now start working on the visa facilitation issue , and on a shadow ENP action plan , the ' joint interim plan ' .
These steps provide an incentive for moves towards democracy in Belarus , which I am confident will be well understood , on the one hand , by the government , but , on the other hand , particularly by the people .
The joint interim plan will be developed with both the authorities and civil society in Belarus , and I hope it will open the door to deeper dialogue with Belarus , including on delicate political issues .
My services are preparing recommendations with a view to negotiating directives on visa facilitation and readmission agreements .
Visa facilitation is a priority for the Belarusian people , and I would like to see more Belarusians visiting the European Union , travelling freely , studying and doing business .
But naturally , the final decision on the negotiation directives will lie with the Council .
In addition , the Commission is prepared to increase the allocations of financial assistance to Belarus for the period of 2010-2013 .
We have proposed a package of macro-financial assistance worth EUR 200 million , for which we are seeking the approval of Parliament .
The Commission is supporting the idea of the EIB including Belarus in the Bank 's new mandate .
I really hope this will go further .
However , if Belarus wishes to come closer to the EU , it is clear it must show this through its actions .
There must be an end to political prisoners and politically motivated prosecutions .
Reform of the electoral legislation in line with OSCE / ODIHR recommendations is sorely needed .
The liberty of the press , freedom of speech and of assembly should be permitted and become the norm .
The European Union also encourages Belarus to abolish or declare a moratorium on the death penalty .
We call for improved conditions for NGOs , civil society and human rights activists .
All these steps could play their part in accelerating the development of a closer partnership between Belarus and the European Union .
In conclusion , therefore , our offer to Belarus is clear .
The European Union is ready to work closely with Minsk and support its political and economic development .
But we would welcome significant positive steps from the Belarus leadership which would allow us to develop our relationship in the same way as we do with other eastern partners if they play their part .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , why has my political group insisted on having the resolution after the debate ?
Not only to express our support for the decision taken by the Council - because this is a wise decision and a proper decision and I agree with both your arguments - but the main reason is the increase in repression that has happened in Belarus quite recently .
The resolution will refer to all those cases and , if any are abandoned during the drafting of the resolution , you may be sure they will be proposed as an amendment , either by the EPP in written form or by me in oral form tomorrow .
There is another issue which has been revealed by the media only today , namely a new draft law prepared by Alexander Lukashenko designed to totally control the Internet , as in China or even in North Korea .
I think that we should also refer to that .
Why are these issues happening in Belarus ?
My private opinion is that it is partly due to the unconsidered - let me say , unwise - visits by Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi , who met Alexander Lukashenko and praised him as a democratically elected leader but did not find time to meet with the opposition , and also , a little earlier , by the President of Lithuania , who has invited Lukashenko to Lithuania , in an ill-considered way , I would say .
Finally , let me refer to this morning 's speech by Sergei Kovalev who said , citing Sakharov , that the Western world should offer and demand .
This is the issue .
We should offer deep cooperation with Belarus , but we should also demand from the Belarus authorities real progress in the area of human rights , democracy and freedom .
Minister , Commissioner , I cannot but agree with the assessment that Belarus is a difficult partner for the European Union .
However , we cannot support the approach which the Commission and Council have been adopting in relation to this country during the last year .
This approach , based on a gradual opening of the door to Belarus , linked to appropriate decisions made by the authorities in Belarus , does not seem to us to be the best way for this country to gradually turn into or , at least , come as close as possible to our idea of a democratic country .
We would like to see slightly more substance in the measures which the European Commission and Council are adopting , as well as slightly more focus on the actual citizens of Belarus , because this is the way to get the citizens themselves to rally behind the cause which we are trying to promote there in dialogue with the Belarusian authorities , namely , democratisation , openness and the holding of free and democratic elections .
In present-day Europe , it is inconceivable that this process cannot happen in a European country .
The problems we have with regard to the Eastern Partnership are linked to this issue as well .
You are aware that the European Parliament does not support official relations with the Belarusian Parliament because we consider that MPs in Belarus are not elected in fair and democratic elections , which means that this parliament cannot be our official partner .
Also connected with this is the imminent establishment of an Eastern Partnership Parliamentary Assembly , which is facing certain problems .
However , our approach will be to try , along with the Commission and Council , to pursue a common strategy so that we are ready at parliamentary level as well to implement appropriate measures for Belarus , if the Belarusians , on their side , implement their measures and fulfil the demands which we are making of them .
In this regard , I urge the European Parliament , the European Commission and Council to join forces in their efforts in order to avoid independent actions , such as those of Prime Minister Berlusconi , which harm the general cause and give further encouragement to Lukashenko .
This must be avoided .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to put forward one more proposal , because relations are really frozen between the Parliament and the authorities , but we do have relations with the opposition .
My proposal is that I will propose to organise a conference , in Latvia or somewhere else , at which there would be participants from the authorities and from the opposition .
The themes of the conference would be , firstly : energy , security , economy , transit problems , which , in Belarus , are very significant , as also for the EU ; secondly : visa questions , neighbourhood questions regarding citizens ; thirdly : the problems with the democratic situation , party problems and human rights ; and fourthly : the real view from the Belarus side - how they see the Eastern Partnership in the near future .
At the end of the day , I believe that this is one of the ways in which we could bring about a thaw in the frozen situation that we really do have .
It has to be a two-way street , because with a one-way street , we will not succeed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , about two weeks ago , the Italian Prime Minister became the first Western Head of Government for many years to visit Belarus .
He praised the work and policies of President Lukashenko and acknowledged the high election turn-out as being an expression of the high level of admiration and love of the people for their president .
Unfortunately , he forgot to visit the opposition , which would otherwise be customary .
The response was not to acknowledge the fact that steps had been taken towards liberalisation in Belarus ; instead , the line taken towards the opposition became less tolerant .
It resulted in repression and there was jostling , brawling and the like .
This is also why we have tabled this resolution today , in order to make it clear which powers and which civil society approaches we support and to clarify the fact that we will only be able to talk about a partnership - something that is , of course , as yet on ice - once we are also able to fully continue the human rights dialogue with Belarus .
This means freedom of speech , freedom of expression , the freedom of the opposition to work , the allowance of opposition parties and so on .
We believe that this is important and that it must define our partnership in the future .
We hope that the European Union will find a common line here and that the future High Representative will also put a lot of effort into promoting it .
Mr President , Belarus , a Central European country , is the historical cradle of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania .
The Duchy defended the values of Western civilisation in its north-eastern periphery .
Therefore , it is good that the Council 's conclusions of 17 November this year provide for new opportunities for dialogue , as well as greater cooperation between the European Union and Belarus .
However , we must move from words and gestures to something concrete .
Let us begin with people-to-people relations .
These must be strengthened by including Belarus in processes at European and regional levels .
I call on the Commission to speedily prepare recommendations on directives for the simplification of visa regimes , and on the complete abolition of the visa regime within the 50km border zone .
People in the centre of Europe must have rights and opportunities to move freely to both sides .
I have read through the draft resolutions on the issue in question carefully and I have listened with interest to the discussion .
It seems to me that most of the drafts submitted attempt to make a positive change to the hitherto cool relations between the EU and Belarus .
I regard the Eastern Partnership project as a good opportunity to bring about a significant improvement in our relations .
I would like to emphasise firstly that in the economic sphere , a pragmatic approach predominates but it cannot be merely a one-sided process .
The EU must also open up to Belarusian goods and services .
Secondly , it is essential , in my opinion , to release rapidly the financial resources for Belarus within the framework of the Eastern Partnership .
Thirdly , dialogue could be assisted through a relaxation of the EU 's visa policy .
Fourthly , we should give more support to the environmental component of our cooperation .
We all know that Belarus suffered from the Chernobyl disaster and our assistance will be more than welcome .
Although I understand the historical and political circumstances of Belarus , I firmly believe that the time has also come for Belarus to join the ranks of those countries that have outlawed the death penalty .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in response to the previous speaker , I wish to reiterate the right of any Head of State or Government to visit governments within or outside Europe , provided that this is consistent with the wishes of the Council .
I therefore find this preventive censure of the Italian Prime Minister very annoying .
However , to return to the matter in hand , in signing up to the Eastern Partnership , Belarus has demonstrated its will to throw in its lot with Europe on the road to economic development and reform .
The Commission has recognised certain progress made in Belarus , such as the release of political prisoners , reform of the electoral code and the possibility for certain opposition newspapers to circulate , albeit under government control .
This does not mean full-blown democracy but is certainly a departure from the past .
The European Union is therefore faced with the choice of encouraging reform through dialogue within the Eastern Partnership and within Euronest and , at the same time , maintaining a policy of vigilance over the results achieved and steps taken .
I therefore agree that Mr Vigenin should be given the task of reaching agreement with Minsk over a satisfactory representation in the Euronest Assembly that is not limited only to civil society but includes members of the Belarus Parliament .
This would enable us to engage in a dialogue with the political decision makers on subjects including human rights and to establish a channel of communication with the government to support the process of reform .
They would then have no excuse for failing to respond or providing unsatisfactory answers .
( SK ) Belarus deserves more attention , both from the EU and the European Parliament .
I definitely approve of our offer of a helping hand as long as the response of the other side is specifically measurable and adequate .
We must , however , be principled in our demands .
The beneficiaries will then be democracy , good relations between the EU and Belarus and definitely the citizens of that country .
I therefore welcome the invitation to Belarus to join the Euronest joint parliamentary assembly on the clear condition of a 5 + 5 format for delegates , which is strongly supported by the European Parliament .
On the other hand , the gross breach of principle in relation to official visits of EU member representatives is regrettable .
One such principle which is required on an official visit to Belarus is a meeting with the opposition .
It is precisely this principle that was flagrantly breached through the absence of such a meeting in the recent visit by the leader of an influential Member State of the EU .
Behaviour of this sort deals a blow to our efforts , damages the good name of the European Union and its institutions and definitely does not help to strengthen democracy in Belarus .
( LT ) For six years in the European Parliament , I have maintained and continue to maintain that the European Union will do most good for the citizens of Belarus and the EU , especially those living in neighbouring countries , not by implementing sanctions or restrictions , but by opening the doors as wide as possible to cooperation among people , in particular the young , and to closer contacts in business , culture , science and other areas .
It is very good that for a second year , Brussels is pragmatically striving for change by moving closer to Belarus and its people .
Yes , that policy has yet to yield all the positive results expected , but to return to the past would really be wrong .
Therefore , I support the actions of the Council and the Commission , in particular , the prospect of an action plan for Belarus .
When the new EU countries joined the Schengen Agreement two years ago , the remains of the Berlin wall , metaphorically speaking , shifted to the East .
Whereas before , residents of Lithuania , Latvia , Poland and Belarus , often related , were able to travel to each other without any taxes , now Belarusians must pay almost half their monthly salary for a Schengen visa .
Such bureaucratic and financial walls must be torn down as soon as possible .
On the other hand , Minsk 's actions to delay the agreement with Lithuania and other states on facilitated passage for border inhabitants casts doubt over the authorities ' goodwill .
According to surveys , in Belarus around 30 % of residents are in favour of better relations with the European Union .
Meanwhile 28 % of residents would like better relations with Russia .
This is not a contradiction .
The European Union really does not aim to tear Belarus from Russia or to make them enemies .
It is not the West that needs reforms , but the Belarusians themselves .
Well , dynamic economic modernisation and participation in the Eastern Partnership policy may help to carry out that task .
( PL ) Mr President , while listening to our debate , I have the impression we are saying too little about our main objective , which is free elections in Belarus .
We should always give attention to this .
As MEPs returned in democratic elections in our countries , we cannot ignore this main objective .
I am convinced that both in the opposition and government camps , many people are waiting for us to talk about free elections .
They , too , are waiting for this signal .
I know this from my own experience .
They deserve a clear and plain answer .
We are fighting for Belarus to have free elections , and for Belarus to be a free partner in Europe .
Yesterday , we were able to obtain a declaration from Mrs Ferrero-Waldner on the Sarkozy Plan , for which I thank her .
Today , I have another idea .
I would like Mrs Ferrero-Waldner to make a clear declaration that until free elections are held in Belarus , there will not be any political contacts with the country in areas for which she is responsible , except for the opposition , which will not be excluded in this way .
Please say this publicly .
We will be much obliged to you for this .
It will be a Christmas present for us .
( NL ) Mr President , at the start of this year , on Wednesday 14 January to be precise , I also had the honour of taking part in a debate in this House on Belarus , at which Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner was also present .
At the end of the parliamentary year , it is natural to look at whether there have been any significant changes in EU-Belarus relations ; and , to my mind , 2009 has been characterised by the status quo between Minsk and Brussels .
What conclusions should the European institutions draw from this ?
First of all , the danger remains of President Lukashenko 's regime in Belarus simply continuing to vacillate between Moscow and Brussels , or between feigned integration with Russia and feigned rapprochement with the European Union .
On the one hand , there is Europe 's economic affectivity ; on the other , the desire of the Belarusian political elite to consolidate its power .
The latest changes in position at the top political level in Minsk point to a harder line .
The European Union should use a balanced strategy to seize the opportunity to bring about a gradual change in mentality at population and elite level , an opportunity arising from the dialogue and cooperation structures now established , combined with the global economic crisis , that also impels the Lukashenko Government to act .
In short , all European institutions need to contact all Belarusian target groups to this end , including the state authorities , the opposition forces , civil society , and even the civilian population .
Naturally , the European Parliament will also seek substantive contact with the Belarusian Parliament .
( PL ) The experiment with a thaw in relations between the Union and Belarus continues to yield ambiguous results .
Political pressure from the European Union is , therefore , an essential condition for maintenance of the very weakly outlined direction of change in Minsk .
Opening channels of communication with the authorities must go hand-in-hand with rejection of the undemocratic parliament in Minsk .
We must also take scrupulous care that free Belarusians do not feel rejected , and so the thoughtless omission of meetings with representatives of the opposition is extremely irresponsible .
Minsk must realise that our policy has one objective - democracy in Belarus .
Political changes will be possible only when we ensure that Belarusians have access to independent information .
A project which , today , demands our support is , in particular , the television station Belsat , which has , for two years , been broadcasting the only Belarusian-language channel giving access to uncensored information about the situation in the country , and is enjoying growing interest among Belarusians .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , I am particularly pleased that Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , as our Commissioner , has always supported democracy and the market economy and has also set new standards in this regard in Belarus .
In this connection , I would like to thank her most sincerely for her work as the Commissioner for External Relations and European Neighbourhood Policy and to wish her all the best for the future .
( PL ) Mr President , we have found ourselves in a situation which points to a kind of schizophrenia in our contacts with Belarus .
For European leaders are talking with the President and with a Belarusian Government which represents the Belarusian Parliament and political system .
This is good .
However , we do not want to speak to a parliament which was returned in elections which were badly run and were neither free nor transparent , because we have our principles .
This schizophrenia must come to an end at some point , and this should be said clearly .
The definitive moment for us to say what our policy towards Belarus is are next year 's local elections .
Either they will be held in accordance with standards which we accept and will indicate significant openness , or they will not be held in this way and we will simply have to stop thinking about openness from Belarus , because it will be obvious that Mr Lukashenko knows what he wants , while we do not really know what we want .
As for Mr Berlusconi , however , he has revealed a lot about himself , because if ideal leadership is , for him , what Lukashenko is doing , it means it is a model of leadership which impresses him , and we can only fold our arms and express regret that such a leader is to be found among the 27 leaders of the countries of the European Union .
Mr President , as a long-term Belarus watcher , it is important that the EU remains engaged with Belarus , which is a medium-sized European country and which is becoming increasingly self-isolated and turning itself into a kind of Cuba of Europe .
President Lukashenko , who is a quintessentially Homo sovieticus type , nevertheless understands fully what power politics are all about and therefore we need to have a reasonable EU-Belarus trade and political contact and relationship . I therefore do agree that the targeted sanctions need to be eventually lifted and a PCA eventually ratified .
So , after years of the EU isolating Belarus , I now agree that a pragmatic stick and carrot approach is the correct one .
We must facilitate contacts with Belarus civil society and cheaper visa arrangements , and grant Belarus observer status in the Euronest Assembly , as well as access to the programmes of the Eastern Partnership .
We have made a generous start , and I now call upon Minsk to meet us halfway by improving its human rights and democracy record .
( DE ) Mr President , the policy of the European Union towards Belarus is certainly an example of a sensible neighbourhood policy .
We ought to thank the outgoing Commissioner , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner , for her successful work in this regard .
Belarus certainly should be supported by the European Union in its reform process and also in its democratisation .
However , the European Union and the Member States of the European Union should not be so arrogant as to believe that their own democratic standards should be a model for the rest of the world .
One thing is certain in relation to Belarus : if we want our relations with Russia to flourish , we will be obliged also to respect the historical and geopolitical interests of the Kremlin somewhere .
That is probably the most sensitive issue in connection with European policy towards Belarus .
( PL ) There has been talk here of the need for youth and cultural exchange between the Union and Belarus .
I am afraid this will be very difficult .
On 3 December , Tatiana Szapućko , spokesperson for the opposition organisation Young Front , had her name struck off the list of students at the Faculty of Law of the Belarusian State University .
Why was her name removed ?
For taking part in a forum on the Eastern Partnership in Brussels .
The university authorities took the view that she had left without their consent , and for this she was thrown out of the university .
Perhaps for a woman in Belarus , this is not all that dangerous , but for men thrown out of university in Belarus , the results can be much more painful , because military service there is treated as a punishment , as a substitute for prison .
There are young soldiers , such as Franek Wieczorka , head of the youth organisation called the Belarusian Youth Front , and Ivan Szyła , also from the organisation Young Front , who are being persecuted during military service , where they are cut off from access to information , and this is treated as a punishment .
We should fight against this and should support those who are punished in this way .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr President , Commissioner , honourable Members , I think it is extremely valuable that we have such strong support among all the European institutions for the approach towards Belarus .
It is , indeed , a very difficult partner , but it is our neighbour , a country with which we share borders .
Some countries here have close and historic relations with the people there , so we must do our utmost to support the development towards democracy , human rights , the rule of law and market economy .
We are concerned about certain backlashes lately , for instance , the young student who was expelled .
The Swedish Presidency has reacted very firmly in Minsk and also issued lots of statements : it is , of course , something that we deplore and it should not happen .
We have had lots of contact with civil society during this year .
There was a conference just a few weeks ago in Brussels with civil society .
I personally met opposition representatives in Stockholm a few weeks ago and there are continuous efforts to liaise with civil society and the opposition .
They are weak but they are there and they need our support , and that support will continue .
I think Mr Godmanis ' idea on the conference theme is a very interesting one .
It certainly merits being explored to see if we can move forward .
This dual approach towards Belarus - the ' stick and carrot ' , as I think Mr Tannock called it - is hopefully the one that will succeed .
It shows that we are truly committed , we stuck out our hands .
We can show Mr Lukashenko and the Belarus regime that , if you move towards democracy , if you move towards respecting international values , there is another way for you .
There is a way towards European integration ; there is a way towards engagement with the European Union , towards visa facilitation and deepening of the Eastern Partnership .
Now it is up to them to respond .
We have given them our hand and , with the full support of all the European institutions , please , Minsk , take it , because you and the Belarus people have a lot to win .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , in conclusion , I would like to stress that I found - and I am also speaking on behalf of Benita Ferrero-Waldner , of course - our exchanges today to be very frank and extremely useful .
I wish to thank you for a constructive and forward-looking debate .
The EU is , in principle , ready to work closely with Minsk and support urgently needed political and economic reforms .
Should there be significant steps from the Belarusian leadership in terms of democratisation , the EU would be prepared to see Belarus as a full member of the Eastern Partnership .
In the meantime , the EU is , and will be , urging Belarus to take further irreversible steps towards democratic standards , without which our relationship cannot develop to its full potential .
I sincerely hope that in 2010 , we will be in a position to engage gradually and intelligently with Belarus and offer the Belarusian people a vision and tangible benefits of a close relationship with the EU .
The EU expects Belarus to take a series of accompanying measures in the area of democratic reforms , with a view to coming closer to the EU and together help expand the area of peace , stability and prosperity involving all six Eastern Partnership countries , as well as Russia , the EU 's strategic partner .
There are five measures we expect Belarus to take resolutely and irreversibly .
Firstly , to ensure there is no backtracking on political prisoners and politically motivated criminal prosecution .
Secondly , carry out a thorough reform of the electoral legislation in line with OSCE / ODIHR recommendations .
Thirdly , embark upon the liberalisation of the media environment , uphold freedom of speech and of assembly .
Fourthly , improve through regulatory and legislative measures working conditions for NGOs .
Fifthly , abolish or declare a moratorium on the death penalty .
A significant move in showing Belarus ' commitment to shared values would be the immediate introduction of a moratorium on the death penalty and its subsequent abolition as a crucial step forward on its path to Council of Europe membership .
In its November conclusions , the Council of the EU urged Belarus to introduce a moratorium on the death penalty .
Moreover , the Commission has carried out communication actions in the wake of the 10th International Day against the Death Penalty .
What could the EU do for Belarus ?
What is on offer ?
The Commission believes that the most productive approach to Belarus will be one based on pragmatism .
Progressive EU engagement with Belarus needs to reflect positive steps by Belarus itself , but we also need to show flexibility .
The November 2009 conclusions of the General Affairs and External Relations Council ( GAERC ) allow the EU to offer incentives to Belarus for steps we want to see , while remaining true to our principles .
This is what I mean by pragmatism .
Our message to Belarus is clear .
First , the EU is ready to work closely with Minsk and support its political and economic development and , should there be significant positive steps from the Belarusian leadership , we would be prepared to see Belarus as a full member of the Eastern Partnership .
This would entail the development of our relationship through the bilateral track of the EAP , the launching of a thorough political and economic dialogue , as well as enhanced sectoral cooperation .
In the meantime , Belarus was invited in May 2009 to join the multilateral dimension of the EAP .
It is participating constructively at deputy minister level in the four multilateral forums - democracy and governance , economic integration , energy security and people-to-people contacts .
Secondly , we expect Belarus to take further irreversible steps towards democratic standards , without which our relationship cannot develop to its full potential .
Thirdly , the absence of a PCA is not only a loss to Belarus ; it deprives us of a legal basis for structures like a formal human rights dialogue and addressing trade or energy transit issues .
In the Commission , we continue to believe that the ratification of the PCA will be a useful step forward , but clearly we will continue to use this as an incentive lever to encourage further moves on the Belarusian side .
Fourthly , and lastly , the Commission has started working on the implementation of the November 2009 GAERC conclusions , and will come back to the Council of EU Ministers with proposals as soon as possible .
The debate is closed .
I have received seven motions for resolution tabled in accordance with Rule 110 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Thursday , 17 December 2009 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Democratic values and respect for human rights and individual freedoms provide the bedrock on which the EU has been built .
As our basic objective is to help neighbouring countries become democratic and Belarus is one of the last countries in Europe with an authoritarian regime , I believe that we should set very clear , stringent political conditions for Belarus before any political contact is established .
Belarus has carried out some reforms , but they pale into insignificance in relation to the problems which exist , especially with regard to respect for human rights , press freedom and freedom of expression .
Support must be given to the activists campaigning for respect for human rights and individual freedoms .
I support the idea of establishing contacts with the opposition and am particularly in favour of individual contacts between citizens from the EU and Belarus .
As a result of this , the citizens from Belarus will be able to speak freely with people who share democratic values .
This would contribute to the development of civil society and facilitate a process of democratisation , which would enjoy popular support and be initiated by the people itself .
This is the only way that a healthy democracy can be created where everyone 's rights are respected .
Therefore , the use of sanctions as a means of exerting pressure needs to be combined with facilitating contacts between citizens from the EU and Belarus .
I would like to welcome Belarus 's constructive involvement in the Eastern Partnership process , as well as the fact that a human rights dialogue has been initiated between the EU and Belarus .
During the past year , positive processes have been initiated in the country with the release of political prisoners , but we see that this process has since come to a standstill .
This is due to problems with the registration of political parties and the authorisation of independent media and civil organisations .
As a result , the EU was obliged to extend the travel restriction measures .
I sincerely hope that Belarus will continue along the path of positive change it embarked on last year , thereby offering the opportunity for the EU also to be able to respond positively .
Until then I think it is also important to consider whether we can move forward in the area of visa facilitation , as human contacts can make a major contribution to more political openness and the democratisation process as well .
When debating respect for human rights in Belarus and the decision of Member States to extend sanctions against some representatives of the Belarusian regime until October 2010 , it should be said that the situation in Belarus is gradually changing .
In the outcome of the European Council of 17 November 2009 , we read that new possibilities for dialogue and increasing cooperation between the European Union and Belarus have emerged .
Wanting to encourage the authorities in Belarus to carry out reforms , the Member States agreed to a temporary lifting of sanctions on freedom of movement which had been applied to high-ranking representatives of the Belarusian authorities .
The European Commission is preparing a directive to make it easier for Belarusians to obtain EU visas and an agreement on readmission .
However , we must not forget that human rights are still being violated in Belarus , and the promising and favourable steps taken since October 2008 , such as the release of most political prisoners and the permission for distribution of two independent newspapers , are still not enough .
A flagrant example of the violation of human rights is the continued use of the death penalty : Belarus is the only European country which still uses capital punishment , and in recent months , further death sentences have been passed .
Therefore , we address the following demands to the decision makers in Belarus : that , at least , they respect human rights , including introduction of a moratorium on carrying out the death sentence , amendment of electoral law and guaranteeing freedom of speech and of the media .
Violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Mr President , the Presidency attaches great importance to discussing with the European Parliament the highly problematic situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Infringements of human rights , and particularly increased sexual and gender-related violence , are a huge problem .
It is high time for a debate on the situation in the country , particularly in view of the recent UN report .
The report from the UN group of experts emphasises that a number of armed groups active in the country are supported by a well-organised network that is partly based within the European Union .
I do not need to remind you of the EU 's long-term commitment to the Democratic Republic of Congo and the entire African Great Lakes Region .
The EU has long made efforts to bring about peace and stability in the country .
It is important that this commitment continues , both politically and in terms of development .
I am sure that the Commission will say more about this later .
This support has been manifested in various ways , including the appointment of the first EU Special Representative for the region as far back as 1994 .
Both military and civil ESDP instruments have been used .
We have had Operation Artemis in Ituri province , the temporary EUFOR deployment in the period leading up to the 2006 elections , as well as EUSEC RD Congo for reform of the defence forces and EUPOL RD Congo for reform of the police .
Bearing all this in mind , there have been both positive and negative developments .
Diplomatic relations between the Democratic Republic of Congo and Rwanda have been restored .
That is to be welcomed .
Peace agreements with most of the armed groups in the eastern part of the country were signed in 2008 and 2009 .
These now have to be implemented .
The situation is unstable in many ways .
Many armed groups in the east are in the process of being integrated into the army and some uncertainty pervades this integration work .
Military operations are continuing against other armed groups , including the FDLR and the Lord 's Resistance Army .
These groups are directly responsible for targeting civilians and for an enormous amount of human suffering .
At the same time , armed groups are re-emerging in other parts of the country .
The eastern part of the country remains an area in which international law and human rights are being infringed .
There are high levels of murder , acts of violence and sexual attacks .
These crimes are spreading throughout the country on an alarming scale , despite President Kabila 's announcement of a so-called zero tolerance policy .
The illegal exploitation of natural resources is a further major problem .
It is important that the country 's rich mineral deposits are brought under legitimate national control , both as a source of much-needed income for the state and in order to cut off economic support to illegal armed groups .
The Council is also concerned about the preparatory work and arrangements for the planned local elections .
Management problems , insufficient transparency and infringements of citizens ' and political rights represent serious obstacles to the democratisation process .
Since there are many significant problems that still provide cause for deep concern , the Council has taken a tough stance as regards the serious crimes against international law and human rights in North Kivu and South Kivu .
The Council recently condemned these acts in its conclusions and emphasised that the government of the Democratic Republic of Congo must ensure that all those responsible are brought to justice .
The EU is firmly committed to continuing to help bring about peace , stability and development for the population of the country .
In this regard , reform of the security sector is crucial to the country 's stabilisation .
All players within this sector , including the Congolese authorities , must strive to ensure that the common interest in reform of the security sector is genuinely safeguarded .
We must also encourage continued specific improvements in regional relations through firmer political and economic partnerships between the countries of the region .
I can assure you that the Council and the European Union will stand by its commitment to the Democratic Republic of Congo and is concerned about its future .
We will continue our wide-ranging commitment in the country and will continue to speak plainly wherever international law and human rights are infringed .
We are very grateful in this respect for the constructive and persistent role played by the European Parliament , and I am looking forward to hearing your views in this debate .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year or so ago , the situation in Goma , a city besieged by the CNDP troops led by Laurent Nkunda , was the primary concern of the Congolese authorities and the international community .
Every effort has been made to prevent the worst .
Promoting a political agreement , firstly between the DRC and Rwanda , and then between the Congolese Government , the CNDP and the other armed groups has made it possible , in the short term , to defuse the ticking time bomb of violence , although its potential for destabilisation today remains intact .
It remains intact because the underlying causes have been addressed superficially and on the basis of a short-term , purely political rationale .
Being faced with only poor solutions , the international community has opted for the least serious one ; that is not a criticism , just an obvious fact , an observation .
The international community and the European Union have been unable to take the decision to deploy a protection force .
The MONUC reinforcements that we have been requesting for over a year now are only just starting to arrive .
The recent report by the United Nations group of independent experts and that by the Human Rights Watch organisation provide a damning account of the current situation that cannot be ignored or passed over in silence .
It is time now to address and to deal with these underlying causes , and to come up with lasting solutions .
If this is to be done , however , it will require everyone 's cooperation - the cooperation of the Congolese and Rwandan governments in the first instance , and of MONUC , the United Nations , the rest of the international community and the European Union in the second instance .
There is no doubt that the political and diplomatic rapprochement between Rwanda and the DRC can be beneficial in terms of creating stability in the region and , if the will exists on both sides , can help establish a situation of peaceful coexistence and profitable cooperation between the two countries within a revitalised Economic Community of the Great Lakes Countries .
However , this is only the start of what remains a long and problematic journey .
The FDLR issue is at the heart of the problem , as are all the associated sets of problems that it entails and which complicate the situation : the illegal exploitation of natural resources ; the lack of protection for minorities ; the impunity in a vast stateless area where the public authorities are not only incapable of controlling the territory but include representatives who are often part of the problem .
The Rwanda-DRC agreement has meant that the CNDP and the unacceptable demands of Laurent Nkunda have been temporarily brought under control .
The agreement has simply resulted in the replacement of Laurent Nkunda by Bosco Ntaganda , who is more easily influenced and willing to reach any compromise whatsoever in exchange for immunity , which is in violation of all the international provisions on crimes against humanity and which neither Rwanda nor the DRC are entitled or able to grant him .
So far , the hasty integration of the CNDP into such an ineffective and totally chaotic army as the FARDC ; the obtaining , by Bosco Ntaganda , of increased autonomous power resulting from the implementation of a parallel chain of command within the FARDC , for which the irregular payment of the soldiers and the absence of any form of discipline or hierarchy provides fertile ground ; MONUC 's insufficiently controlled and gauged support for the military operations against the FDLR ; and the non-existent response to the demands of the Rwandophone minorities are factors that are liable to create even more serious problems than those which we faced a year ago - problems that neither Rwanda nor the DRC will be capable of managing any longer .
The situation has scarcely improved against this backdrop : the humanitarian crisis continues without any obvious signs of improvement , as do the human rights violations , the sickening trend of violence , indeed of sexual atrocities , the impunity for all manner of crimes , and the pillaging of natural resources .
One need only read the United Nations and the Human Rights Watch reports that I mentioned to understand the scale of this never-ending tragedy .
It is clear that the actions aimed at preventing the FDLR from doing harm must continue , but not at any price , not without first having done everything it takes to minimise the risks that military pressure entails for innocent civilians .
This requires better planning , the redefining of priorities and greater protection of the populations by MONUC , which is the main task stipulated in its mandate .
The conditions in which MONUC may operate must also be clear and unambiguous .
This is not about calling for MONUC to withdraw or disengage .
A hasty withdrawal by MONUC would be disastrous , as it would create an even greater vacuum : the recent events in the Equator region , which are essentially one more symptom of the Congolese disease , prove this .
Clearly , it is also important to stop the political and economic collusion from which the FDLR continue to benefit in the region and elsewhere in the world , including in our Member States .
The FDLR 's campaign is not a political campaign , but a criminal act of which the Congolese population is the main victim , and this is how the campaign and all those who are directly or indirectly associated with it must be treated .
This is why a firmer stance is needed against all forms of trafficking .
At the same time , beyond the disarmament , demobilisation , repatriation , reintegration and resettlement ( DDRRR ) process , the Rwandan and Congolese authorities must be more perceptive with regard to individuals who are not necessarily criminals .
That being said , the solution to a large part of the problem must also be found in the DRC .
I am , of course , thinking of the local origins of the conflict .
In this regard , the agreements of 23 March must be applied in full , otherwise , sooner or later , we will see the frustrations of the local populations gain the upper hand .
This is absolutely essential if the stabilisation efforts and the will to revive economic activity in the Kivus are to succeed .
At that point , the international community really will have a role to play .
However , the Kivus aside , I am also thinking of the huge mess that the DRC has become over the last 20 years or so .
It is a country in which practically everything needs to be rebuilt , starting with the state , the absence of which is at the heart of all the problems .
In order to achieve this task , certain elements are crucial .
Firstly , democracy must be consolidated .
I am , of course , thinking of the local , legislative and presidential elections announced for 2011 .
Elections are one element of democracy , but we must not forget the need to continue to support the political institutions and forces in a dialectic relationship with the opposition .
Without this , we would not be operating in a truly open political system .
The second element is without doubt the need to strengthen good governance .
While it is true that , given the extent of its problems , the DRC cannot do everything at once , it clearly must demonstrate a solid political will if it is to have a chance of success .
Parliament raised the issue of impunity .
This is a good example , because it is a matter of political will and it also underpins the whole business of affirming the rule of law .
The problem is that things cannot be done in isolation .
The rule of law also requires a reform of the security sector and real progress in economic governance terms .
The scale of the challenges implies the need for long-term policies .
However , that must not be an excuse for any lack of immediate action .
I am thinking in particular of the issues of sexual violence and human rights , which Parliament has highlighted .
Political will can play a crucial role here , and in this regard , we must welcome the commitment made by President Kabila to take a zero tolerance approach .
This approach must now be applied .
The Commission , which , by the way , is already doing a great deal of work in this area ( supporting the judiciary , helping victims ) , is prepared to continue to support the DRC .
In this connection I have also expressed my wish for the International Criminal Court and the Commission to cooperate more closely in practice with regard to the fight against sexual violence .
A consolidated democratic system , good governance and political will : those are the key elements on which we would like to build our partnership as equals with the DRC .
Mr President , practically every journalist who writes about Africa would like to be the next Joseph Conrad .
This is why journalists most often concentrate on unfavourable aspects , because they are looking for the heart of darkness .
However , Congo does not have to be a heart of darkness .
It can be a normal country .
There are normal countries in Africa , where rich natural resources serve the good of the people , the public authorities care for the common good , children go to school , and sex is associated with love and not rape and violence .
I am certain that the key to success in Kivu and the whole of Congo is the quality of government .
Without democratic , just , honest and effective government , peace and justice cannot be achieved .
Without responsible government , the country 's riches serve only a few , leaders look after themselves , schools are empty and violence becomes a part of everyday life .
I remember the optimism of 2006 .
I , myself , was an observer during the elections , and we were all pleased because , after a gap of 40 years , democratic elections were taking place in that large and important country .
However , our optimism has turned out to be premature .
It is hard not to ask the question why this has happened , and why the elections did not result in a better life for Congo .
In my opinion , it is a question of money , as Mrs Malmström and Mr De Gucht have said .
They spoke about the illegal use of resources and how this is used to finance arms , which serves to continue and escalate the conflict .
If we can put a stop to this , we will be closer to our goal .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his statement , which certainly reassures me .
Can I say , Commissioner , that I agree with you absolutely : we cannot pull out ; we cannot create a vacuum , because a vacuum exists there already and that is a vacuum of political will , and we need political leadership to resolve this according to international obligations as well as according to the rule of law .
Let me just deal with the reality of this .
In the conflict since 1998 , over 5 000 400 people have lost their lives and , indirectly or directly , as many as 45 000 deaths occur every month .
It is reported that there are 1 460 000 internally displaced people , most of them facing violence , and let me give a voice to those who do not have a voice , those who suffer such violence .
The armed actors in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) have perpetrated gender-based violence through various forms , including sexual slavery , kidnapping , forced recruitment , forced prostitution and rape .
The Congolese victims of sexual violence include women , men and boys who have also suffered rape , sexual humiliation and genital mutilation .
Resolution after resolution has been passed .
The time has come for us internationally to demand an end to these atrocities .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , I have always kept a close eye on events taking place in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Despite the promising progress made thanks to the recent rapprochement between Rwanda and the DRC - a rapprochement without which there will be no solution in the east and which must therefore be consolidated - despite the agreements of 23 March between Kinshasa and the Congolese rebel group , which the Commissioner spoke about , the situation in the east remains deeply concerning .
I would like to make seven observations .
The first is that peace certainly cannot be established in the east of Congo until the FDLR are prevented from doing harm .
Unfortunately , the main victims of the military pressure that the DRC is exerting at present and which is aimed at cutting these extremists off from their bases and their sources of income are the civilian populations , who are victims of collateral damage but also of the condemnation of some and the violent acts of others .
This risk was foreseeable and , as the Commissioner said , MONUC 's capabilities needed to be strengthened from the outset , as today it is still sorely lacking in resources suitable for coping with all the requests and its organisation on the ground is also not always ideal .
Even though we must demand a greater degree of coordination and a greater , more active presence on the ground , it would be dangerous to make judgments or comments about MONUC that could be used by certain negative forces as an excuse to demonise it .
Clearly , that would be even more serious .
Another element concerns the acts of violence by the FARDC .
The context of war cannot , of course , in any way justify such behaviour , and thus , I welcome the decision taken by the United Nations to stop providing logistical support to those Congolese units that fail to respect human rights .
The zero tolerance policy recently introduced by President Kabila clearly must be welcomed , but whether it is respected and implemented or not is another matter .
The shortcomings of the Congolese judicial system are creating a widespread feeling of impunity .
That is why I encourage the efforts made by the Commission , in close cooperation with certain EU Member States , to work on restoring a judicial system , including in the east .
Lastly , my final point : the one thing that still has to be rebuilt in Congo is a rule of law with real governing powers .
Today , these powers are completely non-existent and thus create an extremely serious vacuum .
Mr President , Mrs Malmström , Commissioner , as you have both said , the situation in the Kivu region is extremely worrying , despite the presence of almost 20 000 MONUC troops .
The civilian populations and , in particular , women , are the main victims of the conflict strategies employed by the armed groups and even , as someone said , by certain units of the Congolese army , which have made systematic rape a weapon of war .
Moreover , last month , a group of Congolese women came here to remind us of this - and rightly so - with the aim of enlisting our support against this scandalous strategy .
The pillaging of resources , as you said , Commissioner , is another factor that is exacerbating this conflict .
I agree with what was said just now : it is highly dangerous to discredit MONUC , to discredit it unnecessarily , to make it solely responsible for the situation in the eyes of the populations , who are already worn out by so many years of war and massacres .
I entirely agree that it is not MONUC 's mandate that must be reviewed and that it should obviously not be asked to withdraw .
What must be reviewed are its rules of engagement , its operational directives , so that it cannot in any way be associated with or support a Congolese unit that has men in its ranks who violate human rights or commit acts of violence .
The Congolese authorities , too , have a big responsibility in this fight against impunity concerning acts of sexual violence , crimes which , I might add , should be brought before the International Criminal Court .
These same authorities must also ensure that the soldiers are quartered in barracks immediately .
If they were quartered in barracks , things would no doubt be different .
Lastly , I believe that we must revisit the Amani programme .
This programme offers the possibility of building a dialogue and peace everywhere , since these alone are the guarantees of lasting reconstruction .
In any case , I welcome your intervention , which I broadly support , and I hope that the European Union will remain active .
This is crucial , even though , regrettably , it did not want to put a force together .
That would have been a possibility a little less than a year ago .
Nevertheless , I believe that European Union action is crucial .
Mr President , in no other country in the world have there , as yet , been more European Security and Defence Policy operations than in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
As always , the question arises of whose security is being defended .
Is it the security of the Congolese civilian population , the women and children ?
The UN mission MONUC did not prevent thousands of people being killed , tortured and raped and hundreds of thousands of people being expelled - atrocities in which the government forces supported by the EU were involved .
So what is being defended in the Congo ?
Humanity ?
Or are we safeguarding a regime that , between 2003 and 2006 , for example , concluded 61 contracts with international mining firms , not a single one of which was judged by international NGOs to be acceptable from the point of view of the Congolese people ?
President Kabila changed course for a while and concluded fewer contracts with Western firms .
This change was suspended when the war escalated once again .
My question is , why are the people who pull the strings of the largest group behind the murders in eastern Congo - the FDLR - reputed to be in Germany ?
I am referring here to the resolution that I have tabled on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left .
( DE ) Mr President , the expulsion of millions of people , thousands of rapes and hundreds of murders must not be the sad legacy of the largest UN peace-keeping operation in the world .
The Congo operation was decided on ten years ago , but nothing much has been achieved .
Militias continue to plunder the rich supply of natural resources in the region , terrorise the inhabitants and commit crimes against humanity .
Embargoes have been ineffective so far .
Rebels are simply changing sides and they carry out their crimes in the safe uniforms of Congolese soldiers .
Two war criminals were recently brought before the war crimes tribunal in The Hague and development projects and elections were able to take place - a partial success , at least .
We also succeeded in striking a small blow against the global Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda ( FDLR ) .
However , we have not been able to put an end to the cruel civil war .
The fronts are always changing .
It is particularly disturbing when accusations made against the UN mission turn out to be true .
UN soldiers must not stand there and do nothing when atrocities are being committed and , even more importantly , the army 's logistics support must not be associated with support for human rights violations .
The Congo mission simply must not turn into some kind of Vietnam for Europe .
Essentially , we need a coordinated European security policy and peace-keeping operations , but above all , in the area surrounding Europe and not in far-off Africa , where the ethnic fronts are unclear .
In my opinion , the EU must concentrate its peace-keeping operations on the crisis regions in its own backyard , such as the Balkans or the Caucasus .
Therefore , we should , perhaps , end the EU 's involvement in the UN mission in Africa .
Mr President , that the situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) is deplorable and that the effect of the conflict upon the people there is tragic goes without saying .
However , there are a number of important points that must be reiterated here and in our joint motion for a resolution .
We must remember that the violence in the DRC , like so many conflicts of its type , is often driven by greed but also stems from and is fuelled by poverty .
Fighting over territory , ethnicity , resources or politics are but branches of the same rotten tree of want .
Increase a man 's prosperity and give him purpose and you will reduce his desire to kill or be killed .
That is our development challenge as a Parliament .
Secondly , we must ensure that any military presence in a foreign country is designed and implemented to reduce suffering and violence , not exacerbate it .
We must stand as pillars against impunity rather than agents of it .
If there is evidence that Western missions are not living up to this standard , then their presence and practices must be urgently reassessed .
Finally , history has shown us that , in internecine conflicts such as in the DRC , a political solution is the only hope for peace .
Dialogue and engagement are the only roads toward such a solution .
With the post-Lisbon creation of our External Action Service , the European Union must take its place on the international stage as a more proactive facilitator of dialogue and a sponsor of peace .
( RO ) As has been emphasised so far , millions of civilians have been deliberately killed during military operations in the eastern part of the Republic of Congo .
There is a risk of this kind of news becoming quite routine due to the unprecedented frequency with which acts of violence are committed in this country .
The victims of these actions include children , young girls and women , not to mention civilians involved in protecting human rights and journalists .
The humanitarian crisis is deepening with every day that passes .
The lack of security in the area means that humanitarian organisations can no longer provide any intervention .
More than 7 500 cases of rape and sexual violence have been recorded in the first nine months of this year alone , which is more than the figure for the whole of last year .
All these incidents have taken place against a backdrop of famine and extreme poverty affecting millions of people .
The blame for this whole tragedy lies both with the Congolese army and Rwandan rebels .
Unfortunately , however , there are indications that the UN troops in the Congo bear a large share of the responsibility as they are allowing serious violations of human rights to take place .
This is why I believe that the European Union must discuss urgently how the UN forces in the Congo are going to achieve properly the mission objectives that have been assigned them .
Measures are also required to put an end to money-laundering activities , arms trafficking and gold trafficking , which results in more than 37 tonnes of gold being illegally removed from the Congo every year , with a value in excess of EUR 1 billion .
The money from this is used to procure weapons and encourage crime in this country .

( NL ) Mr President , I have just listened to the speech by Mr Mölzer , who has now left , the gist of which was : it is so hopeless that we should just give up and concentrate on our own neighbours .
I must say that , if one really looks at the situation , one is almost tempted to call it a day .
On the other hand , I then think of the group of women who visited us here last month , to whom Mrs Durant also referred , and I wonder whether we could look them in the eye and tell them that we are simply giving up , or that it is not one of our priorities , or that we mean to just adopt yet another resolution and consider our job done .
When I think of those women , of their despair and bitterness and the feeling that they have been left in the lurch , I do consider it eminently possible to hold such a debate .
The resolution contains very many positive elements , and I hope that we shall indeed lend force to them with action , but I just wanted to emphasise one aspect .
We frequently talk about rape , or sexual violence , but in fact , these terms scarcely cover the reality of the situation .
The women with whom we spoke said it goes far beyond attacks on individuals ; it is not individual violence but rather an attack on the community , aimed at destroying its fabric .
It is my view , therefore , that there is now a most urgent need for us not only to take action , put an end to impunity , pay on the nail and provide the resources for the actions we have announced , but also to show that we are extending a hand to the people there , that we stand in solidarity with them and are not leaving them in the lurch ; that we are shouldering our moral responsibility .
( RO ) At the present juncture , which also coincides with the moment when the United Nations is preparing to announce the extension of MONUC 's mandate , I think we need to reflect on the international community 's actions in light of the situation on the ground in the RDC , which is , unfortunately , continuing to deteriorate .
As is also borne out by the experience of Operation Kimia II conducted by the Congolese army with MONUC 's support , military success is not sufficient when the cost in humanitarian terms is high and if it is paid through the suffering of the Congolese civilian population .
I believe that the recent military operations conducted against the FDLR have had disastrous consequences , resulting , which we should be aware of , in large-scale human rights violations and exacerbating the humanitarian crisis .
On the other hand , impunity offers an invitation to commit these crimes over and over again .
I believe that protection of the civilian population must be the number one priority .
The European Parliament must strongly assert that acts of violence , particularly sexual violence , and human rights violations in general , as well as the abuses committed in Kivu , must stop immediately , along with the climate of impunity .
( ES ) Mr President , other Members have already spoken of the tragic situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
They have spoken of the millions of deaths and cases of rape and abuse against the civilian population .
They have spoken of the United Nations Organisation Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo ( MONUC ) and of cooperation by the European Commission on the ground .
Less has been said , however , about the need to control the illegal flow of raw materials , such as diamonds , gold and other products , to the rest of the world .
These products are being ' laundered ' through legitimate accounts and companies in our own countries or in the United States .
This is important work for Mrs Ashton .
With the authority conferred on her by the Treaty of Lisbon and the support of the 27 Member States and of this Parliament , she could coordinate a whole programme of action to prevent this wealth from ending up in the hands of the warlords who are responsible for the killing and rape .
( FR ) Mr President , in the light of the recent alarming reports coming out of North and South Kivu , and in the light of the extremely violent nature of the attacks perpetrated against civilians and , more specifically , against women , children and the elderly , urgency - a word so often used by the European Union and by the entire international community with regard to Congo - seems to me to be an immediate requirement .
Everything must be done to ensure the protection of the civilian populations .
The mandate given to the MONUC personnel on the ground will no doubt be extended , but it absolutely must be re-evaluated and strengthened , too , so that this rising tide of violence can be stemmed .
For many years now , international communities , NGOs and Congolese women have made constant efforts to combat the use of sexual assault as a weapon of war .
Today , systematic and widespread use is made of this weapon in peaceful areas , and always with total impunity .
I welcome the recent determination shown by the Congolese authorities to put a stop to this impunity , but this zero tolerance policy must be ambitious - all perpetrators of violence , without exception , will have to answer for their actions - and truly effective .
The opening , at the International Criminal Court , of the first trials of the alleged perpetrators of sexual crimes committed during an armed conflict must result in the Court being able to identify all the culprits so that they can be sentenced without delay .
Lastly , all this , needless to say , goes hand in hand with the strengthening of state structures , the maintenance of law and order , the promotion of gender equality , and the protection of human rights and , hence , of the rights of women and children , whose dignity , childhood and innocence are often sacrificed on the altar of another form of humiliation : indifference .
( FR ) Mr President , the humanitarian situation in the east of the Republic of Congo - and , more specifically , in the eastern province and in the Kivu region - is disastrous , as we now know .
The security situation of the civilian populations deteriorated following , among other things , the joint military operations conducted by the Congolese army and the Ugandan and Rwandan troops against all the rebel armed groups , operations which left countless massacres and human rights violations in their wake .
Sexual violence is a very disturbing and very widespread trend , and is now part of everyday life for the people of Congo .
What is more , numerous acts of violence are being committed against humanitarian workers .
According to official figures , there are 2 113 000 displaced persons in the east of the Republic of Congo .
Since 1 January 2009 , more than 775 000 new cases of displaced persons have been recorded in the Kivu and 165 000 in the districts of the east of the eastern province .
Currently , it is estimated that humanitarian aid is required for almost 350 000 vulnerable people : children , widows and victims of sexual violence .
A rapid response by the European Union is therefore crucial .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , all the speakers have rightly emphasised the terrible situation in which the Congolese people , and especially Congolese women , are living in the east of that country .
They have talked about the rapes and the barbaric acts that these people suffer and about the murders of which they are victims .
Rather than talk about them , however , I invite you to visit the UNICEF and V-Day websites , which obviously say all there is to say about this subject .
Today , I am going to talk to you about the real consequences that these barbaric acts have for Congo ; I am going to talk about the physically and mentally wounded women , who must be cared for ; and I am going to talk about the murdered women , who will no longer be able to contribute to the economic development of Congo and whose unborn children will never be able to contribute to it either .
I would also like to talk about the spread of AIDS , a trauma suffered by the entire Congolese population , which paints a negative picture of Congo to the international community - one , in short , of a country that is getting into more and more of a mess .
Encouraging a lasting peace and promoting the economic development of Congo are only achievable if the Congolese Government and the UN are successful in their efforts to combat sexual violence against Congolese women and , more broadly speaking , if they ensure that a genuine rule of law is established in that country .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , I , in turn , would like to refer to the tragedy of the sexual violence suffered by women in the DRC and , more specifically , in the east of the country .
The phenomenon is not new .
It is extremely complex .
It is multidimensional .
The physical and psychological suffering of the victims is made even worse by this social exclusion , which is tragic for them .
President Kabila 's zero tolerance policy is today tentatively beginning to bear fruit , but everyone is aware that only a global strategy can combat this scourge in the long term .
I know , Commissioner , that the Commission is already intervening , and is doing so via a multitude of projects and budgets , too .
However , faced with these figures and with the terrible , dreadful accounts we are hearing , do you not think that we in this House are entitled to have our doubts about the results of this strategy ?
Women , Commissioner , are the main vehicle for peace and reconstruction in a country .
They are the future of Congo .
How do you intend to act more effectively and more promptly ?
( FR ) Mr President , I , too , wished to speak in this debate , since it concerns a subject that I have been following for a long time .
Unfortunately , in the light of the constant acts of violence and the human rights violations in the east of the DRC , we are obliged once again to strongly condemn the massacres , the crimes against humanity and the acts of sexual violence committed against women and girls that are still taking place in the eastern province .
That is why I join with my fellow Members in calling for all the competent authorities to intervene immediately in order to bring the perpetrators of these crimes before the courts and in calling on the United Nations Security Council once again to urgently take any measures that have the capacity to actually prevent anyone else from committing further attacks against the civilian populations in the eastern province of the DRC .
Similarly , I call on all the parties involved to step up the fight against impunity and to enforce the rule of law by combating , among other things , the rape of women and girls and the enlistment of child soldiers .
( DE ) Mr President , in November 2009 , there was an exchange of ambassadors between Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of Congo - a tiny ray of hope for this ravaged country and its ravaged people .
In addition , the leader of the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda was arrested .
These are both signs of improvement in the situation in eastern Congo .
My question for the Commission is this : what measures are you intending to take to bring about further rapprochement between Congo and Rwanda ?
With regard to the UN mandate , a great deal has been said here today about taking all forms of action .
Let us be frank : if there is a UN mandate , then it should clearly be for the protection of those who are oppressed , tortured , violated and abused , in particular , the women and children of this country .
In this regard , one thing must be quite clear : if a UN mandate is issued - and we Austrians are a bit restrictive in this area - then it should be consistent and , if need be - including for the protection of the oppressed people - those on the ground must be armed .
Mr President , I think it is unfortunate that in this Christmas season , we have spent the last two days discussing violence around the world , be it in Chechnya or in Afghanistan and now in the Congo .
But , nevertheless , that is the reality .
At the same time , taking the message of the festive season of peace and goodwill , we must , as my colleague Mr Mitchell put it so well , become sponsors of peace .
And this is a great opportunity for the High Representative , Lady Ashton , to use the power and support of the European Union in a way that could not have been done before , to bring these countries to order and to try and alleviate the terrible suffering in these places .
The long-term solution , though , will come not from economic improvement but from education , and we have to try and ensure free access to proper education in these countries , because that is really the way to peace in the long term .
Mr President , in 1960 , the Swedish Secretary-General of the United Nations , Dag Hammarskjöld , asked the Irish troops to go as peacemakers into what was then the Belgian Congo , which became the Congo .
They did a tremendous job .
I am extremely worried about the role of the United Nations troops in the Congo at present : the Moroccans , the Pakistanis and the Indians .
We are talking about rape , violence , trading and so on , but the United Nations troops there are not covering themselves in glory and are actually doing a disservice .
I agree completely with Mr Mitchell , that the European Union needs to take a firmer hand .
We are a European Union , totally united .
We did excellent work in Chad .
We need our own peacekeepers in there and we cannot rely on the United Nations .
The situation is that we have a beautiful people , victims of European colonisation , victims of tribal conflict , victims of international blindness , and we cannot be blind any longer .
We simply have to go in and save those people .
( SV ) Mr President , it is almost impossible to grasp the terrible statistics being mentioned , and yet we know that they are true .
Nonetheless , there is a feeling - perhaps shared by many - that when it comes to the poorest of poor countries in sub-Saharan Africa , our commitment is not as strong or as specific as it should be .
There has been mention of military power .
I think we all realise that we have to fight poverty and corruption if we are to make any progress towards relieving and improving the situation of this country 's population , which has suffered so appallingly .
We are happy to talk about Afghanistan and spend a lot of time discussing the terror there and what the Taliban are doing , and rightly so .
Here is another people , however , who have suffered and are still suffering the most appalling conditions .
I would like to stress that there are non-governmental organisations which can carry out work if they are provided with state support and with EU support , but that often seems to be very difficult to bring about .
Mr President , as this debate has shown , there are incredibly good reasons for continuing our commitment to the Democratic Republic of Congo .
The EU is already highly committed to achieving long-term stability , security and development in the country .
Commissioner De Gucht gave a long account of the EU 's operations .
Taken together , the contributions of the Member States and the Commission make the EU one of the largest contributors of aid to the region , and therefore we can have an influence .
If stability is to be maintained in the Democratic Republic of Congo and in the region , however , it is crucial that the standard of living of the Congolese population is improved , that human rights are safeguarded , and that vigorous action is taken against corruption in order to establish a society based on the principles of the rule of law .
The appalling sexual violence that many Members have borne testimony to here and that we unfortunately hear about in far too many reports is naturally entirely unacceptable .
The perpetrators must not be allowed to go free .
They must be brought to justice .
The Congolese Government has a great responsibility to ensure that this happens and that President Kabila 's zero tolerance policy does not just consist of fine words but actually results in action .
As far as the Council is concerned , the mandate of the two ESDP missions was reviewed following the investigation mission in the Democratic Republic of Congo in early 2009 with a view to helping to combat precisely this kind of sexual violence .
As a result , EUPOL DR Congo is to send two multidisciplinary teams to the provinces of North Kivu and South Kivu , with a mandate covering the entire country .
These teams will provide various types of specialist expertise in areas such as the investigation of crimes and the control of sexual violence .
Recruitment for these missions is currently under way .
Of course , this is only a small contribution .
In such a large country , it is modest .
Nonetheless , it is important and this new specialist force will be able to support the implementation of correct investigation procedures for sexual violence , particularly where the acts are carried out by those in uniform .
We are about to embark upon question time , but this is my final debate in this House as a representative of the Swedish Presidency .
I would like to thank you for the many good debates , the enjoyable times and the very good cooperation that I have enjoyed with the Members of the European Parliament and with you , Mr President .
I too would like to express , on behalf of all my fellow Members , our sincere thanks for your efficiency and your efforts which gave us all so much pleasure .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank all the Members who have contributed to this debate .
I am not going to revert back to my initial statement .
Let me just focus on three things .
First , the European Commission is doing a lot with respect to humanitarian aid and programmes for re-establishing the rule of law .
We are speaking about tens of millions and even more than EUR 100 million initially .
But the problem is , of course , how effective is all this in the end , if you do not have a proper counterpart in the political arena ?
Secondly , I would like to comment on the mandate of MONUC because , although MONUC may be criticised and has to be criticised for what recently happened , I think it would be the ultimate mistake to ask that they leave the DRC .
This would be the worst thing one could imagine .
Let me just read to you some sections of the mandate adopted by the UN Security Council at the beginning of last year .
It states that ' the Council also decided that MONUC shall , from the adoption of this resolution , have the mandate , in this order of priority , working in close cooperation with the Government of the DRC in order to ensure , firstly , the protection of civilians , humanitarian personnel and United Nations personnel and facilities ; to ensure the protection of civilians , including humanitarian personnel , under imminent threat of physical violence , in particular , violence emanating from any of the parties engaged in the conflict ' .
Another very relevant paragraph is paragraph G regarding the coordinated operations .
It states ' coordinate operations with the FARDC - the army - integrated brigades deployed in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo and support operations led by and jointly planned with these brigades in accordance with international humanitarian , human rights and refugee law with a view to ' , etc .
So the mandate is , in fact , very clear and what should be discussed are the rules of engagement .
In fact , what MONUC should do is look at its own rules of engagement , because it is up to them to decide how they will proceed .
Lastly , there is a lot of criticism also of international criminal justice .
People are questioning whether this is compatible with politics .
Can you have international criminal justice , on the one hand , and proper political management of a crisis , on the other ?
That is a very interesting question .
In the Congo , you see one of the answers .
We have allowed Bosco Ntaganda to take over the leadership of the CNDP from Laurent Nkunda , although there is a warrant against Bosco Ntaganda , and you see what happens .
There is no such thing as a free lunch .
You cannot choose between , on the one hand , management of a political crisis and , on the other hand , putting international criminal justice into practice .
I think that , as the European Parliament and as the European Commission , the pre-eminence should go to the due application of international criminal justice .
I have received six motions for resolutiontabled in accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 17 December 2009 .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0236 / 2009 )
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Ethnic minorities in Serbia
How would the Council assess the situation of the ethnic minorities in Serbia , especially the Albanian community in the Preševo Valley , where civilians have again come under attack ?
Thank you for your question , Mr Posselt .
At the General Affairs Council meeting on 7-8 December this year , we adopted conclusions on enlargement and the stabilisation and association process .
In these conclusions , the Council welcomed Serbia 's commitment to EU integration and its work in implementing key reforms in line with European standards .
The Council also stressed that the reform agenda must be continued .
We noted the Commission 's communication of 14 October , which states that the general legal and institutional framework for respecting human rights is in place in Serbia and that progress has been made as regards improving compliance with international human rights legislation .
The new Ministry of Human and Minority Rights in Serbia is playing an important part in this work .
However , further efforts are needed to increase understanding of international standards .
The Council also noted that Serbia has ratified all the major human rights instruments .
With regard to the specific situation in southern Serbia to which the honourable Member referred , some very violent incidents did indeed take place in July , including an attack on the gendarmerie based there .
Several arrests were made , after which there were no more incidents .
The atmosphere within the Coordination Body for Southern Serbia has since improved .
It is fragile , but the main ethnic Albanian political parties from the region are involved in this work .
There are also positive developments with regard to the sensitive issue of education .
In this regard , I would particularly like to mention the opening of a university department in Medveđa , where teaching will be undertaken in Serbian and Albanian .
A national minority council for the Albanian population of Serbia will be set up in the near future .
This will give the people greater influence on education , culture and other issues .
The region 's weak economic and social development presents an obstacle for the ethnic minorities in southern Serbia .
The international community , and the OSCE in particular , is continuing to monitor the situation in southern Serbia and it is playing an active role in promoting peace and stability in the region in close cooperation with the Serbian Government and local leaders .
( DE ) Mrs Malmström , thank you for your excellent reply .
We are , of course , talking about three regions : two border regions - Vojvodina and the southern Serbian region of Preševo , in other words a tri-border area .
I would also like to ask you , in your future role as Commissioner , to ensure that these countries are developed further within the framework of the cross-border support programme .
Inner Serbia , in particular the Sandžak of Novi Pazar , is , of course , completely cut off .
This area must also be supported in order to improve the economic conditions so as to help resolve the problems in relation to the minorities .
However , there is a great deal of violence in southern Serbia in particular .
I would ask the Council to continue to address this explosive situation .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Mr Posselt , you may be assured that we will continue to survey the situation very closely , and that is also part of the Commission 's constant work .
They will do that , of course .
We are aware of the improvements , and the situation is fragile .
But there are improvements , and these institutional arrangements that I refer to , that have been done , are a good step in the right direction .
We can only hope that , with our support as well as the support from OSCE , this development will continue in that direction .
( DE ) Violence , incidentally - and I say this to the previous speaker - is unfortunately not only occurring in Serbia , but in Kosovo , too .
On the one hand , there is an Albanian minority in Serbia and , on the other , there is a Serbian minority in Kosovo .
My question is this : with regard to the visa facilitation for Serbia , how will the EU ensure that there will be no grey areas and no abuses of the system ?
Does this procedure of granting facilitation to one population group in Kosovo not run counter to the controversial recognition of Kosovo as a sovereign state ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I was not exactly sure about the question .
When it comes to Kosovo , there is further work , independent of the fact that not all Member States have recognised Kosovo .
There is work being conducted by the Commission in order to see how we can facilitate the situation for Kosovo , and that will take some time .
There are still difficulties there .
They are also subject to visa facilitation in the future but not all the conditions have been met yet .
It is clear that it did wander off the subject a little , but it was very much related .
Subject : Unemployment levels
What initiatives has the Council put in place to deal with rising levels of unemployment across the EU-27 , other than measures to retrain and upskill workers ?
Thank you for your question , Mrs Harkin .
The present crisis is having a very severe impact on millions of people .
As a result , dealing with the consequences of the economic crisis is one of the major challenges facing the EU .
In view of our ageing population , the Member States of the EU must bring down current levels of unemployment and ensure these high levels of unemployment do not become permanent .
Employment policy is primarily the responsibility of the Member States .
However , some years ago , certain guidelines were adopted by the Employment , Social Policy , Health and Consumer Affairs Council .
We underlined the fact that since the labour market situation varies so much between different Member States , the measures taken must also differ .
We have an annual joint report on employment , in which the Council and the Commission monitor the situation in the various Member States .
During the current crisis , the European Council has paid particular attention to precisely this issue of unemployment .
In December 2008 , an Economic Recovery Plan was agreed for Europe , providing uniform frameworks for the measures to be taken .
As part of this Plan , in June 2009 , the Council and the European Parliament adopted a Regulation amending the Regulation on establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
This amendment allows resources from the fund to be used to combat the crisis .
Various measures may be implemented , depending on the situation of the country concerned : temporary adjustment of working hours , lowering of social security contributions , reducing the administrative burden on enterprises , improving the processes used by the labour market authorities , targeting measures at unemployed young people and facilitating mobility .
These were highlighted in the Presidency 's report following the informal summit on employment .
In its conclusions from the June summit , the Council specifies a number of measures that should help the Member States - and the parties in the labour market if necessary - to deal with the effects of the global crisis through the application of flexicurity principles .
This may mean offering enterprises alternatives to redundancies , giving opportunities for flexible forms of working and temporary adjustment of working hours , improving conditions for entrepreneurs by providing a flexible , secure labour market and making available benefits systems that provide an incentive to work , appropriate levels of social security contributions , expanded and improved back-to-work measures , income support and free movement .
During the debate in November , the ministers took the general view that an active employment policy that includes short-term measures must be maintained .
These are measures such as short-term employment , improved employability and training aimed at integrating people into the labour market .
At the same Council meeting , ministers agreed that employment is an important factor for the avoidance of exclusion .
The link between equality , economic growth and employment is very important , and consequently , the Member States were called upon to expand child care and to reduce pay differentials and other gender-related differences .
In particular , measures must be targeted at those most severely affected by the crisis : older people , young people , people with disabilities and workers without a permanent employment contract .
Creating more opportunities and equal opportunities for young people in education , training and employment is one of the principal aims of the new framework of European cooperation in the youth field during the period 2010-2018 that was adopted by the Council on 27 November 2009 .
Thank you for your answer .
I must say I am delighted to see you , Minister , and hopefully will be seeing more of you next year ; you will be well used to answering our questions .
Two points which I feel are important but which you did not raise in your answer were : first of all , the encouraging of entrepreneurship : and , secondly , increased spending in R & D. But the real question which I want to ask you related to the fact that up to now , we have relied on the open method of coordination , which was really quite a weak instrument and did not work well in trying to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon Agenda .
Have you any suggestions at all for strengthening that mechanism ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - This is , indeed , a very important question and , as you know , the Council has already received the Commission proposal and has started to discuss the future of the Lisbon strategy or Europe 2020 .
That will be decided by the Spanish Presidency later next spring .
One issue is how do we , on a long-term basis , come out of the current situation ?
How can we create a Europe that is more competitive , with more entrepreneurship , and avoid social exclusion and unemployment ?
How do we invest in research and development in order for Europe to be the strong global player that we want it to be in the economic field ?
All that will possibly fit into the new strategy .
One very important aspect of the strategy is the governance method .
I think the open method of coordination has advantages but it needs to be improved .
We need to involve much more local and regional authorities because they are the ones who do the real implementation .
We need to have national ownership of the process and we need to look at governance .
That is also explained in the paper from the Commission , which is now out for consultation among the Member States .
I think very good proposals will come up for that as it is indeed one of the weak points of the strategy .
( DE ) As we know , the so-called micro-financing instrument planned by the EU is not going to be financed by new money , but from the Progress programme .
In this connection , what plan is there to prevent the new instrument from being detrimental to the employment and social solidarity programme , which was adopted before this one ?
( DE ) My question is this : would it not be sensible to prevent unemployment in the first place ?
Do you see any public jobs that could be given to the unemployed ?
In particular , how could we boost small and medium-sized enterprises so that new ones are started up ?
Are there opportunities here to apply cross-border methods and best practices to create more new companies ?

President-in-Office of the Council . - As I said , the ultimate responsibility to create jobs of course lies with the Member States . But there is a lot to do and - as I referred to in my introductory remarks to Mrs Harkin - the Council has made a lot of recommendations regarding how you could work in increasing the flexibility , work with the different support systems and activate people in order to avoid the exclusion mechanism .
It is very important that we continue with these meetings at a high level with the social partners and the Member States in order to exchange best practices .
They do vary between the countries , but we need to give each other examples and to monitor the best ways that could be used thereafter .
So it is a combination of the Council giving recommendations and the Member States needing to take their share of responsibility and adjust a little , depending on the circumstances in the countries .
Referring to your question , sir , I am not really sure that I understood it .
Maybe there was a translation problem .
I did not refer to any micro-authority .
I referred to the Globalisation Fund which we have now , with the help of the European Parliament , made more flexible in order to obtain support for Member States and for companies who run into difficulties to help with people who are unemployed or who are dismissed .
Subject : Negotiations for Turkey to take part in joint Frontex operations
On 21 October 2009 , Ms Malmstöm , President-in-Office of the Council , told the European Parliament meeting in plenary sitting that negotiations were being held ' with a view to a possible agreement which would also cover exchanges of information and the possibility for the Turkish authorities to take part in joint Frontex operations . '

Article 8e , paragraph 2 , of Regulation ( EC ) No 863 / 2007establishing a mechanism for the creation of Rapid Border Intervention Teams and amending Council Regulation ( EC ) No 2007 / 2004 provides that ' any amendments to or adaptations of the operational plan shall require the agreement of both the Executive Director and the requesting Member State . '
In view of the above , will the Council say what stage discussions for Turkish participation in joint Frontex operations have reached ?
What demands is Turkey making as a condition for its participation ?
Is Greece , a Member State which hosts the Frontex mission , aware of these discussions ?
An important element of the EU 's strategy for better management of migration is to establish partnerships with third countries on matters of border control .
This is a central tenet of the concept of integrated border management that was adopted by the Council in December 2006 .
I would also like to mention that operational cooperation with third countries is an important element of the work carried on by Frontex .
Under the terms of the Frontex Regulation , Frontex may facilitate operational cooperation between Member States and third countries within the framework of the European Union 's policy on external relations and may cooperate with third countries within the context of bilateral cooperation .
A number of such arrangements have already been concluded and others are currently under discussion .
The mandate for the negotiations is given by the Management Board , on which all the Member States are represented .
The discussions being conducted between Frontex and the competent Turkish authorities concerning operational cooperation have now made significant progress .
Since the negotiations are still in progress , it is difficult for the Council to comment in more detail on the content of and developments in the discussions .
( EL ) Madam President , Minister , I understand from your reply today that there are three points : firstly , that negotiations between Frontex and Turkey are at an advanced stage ; secondly , that all the Member States of the European Union , hence including Greece , are - I imagine - aware of the negotiations ; and finally that , according to the conclusions of the recent Foreign Ministers meeting , the readmission agreement is linked to border control .
In other words , for the purpose of cooperation , for the purpose of the readmission agreement with the European Union , is Turkey demanding joint operations with external border control ?
If that is the case , how do we get round the serious issue of protection of the human rights and dignity of immigrants and the highly sensitive issue , not so much of border control , but rather of border definition .
In other words , does Turkey accept the external borders of the European Union ?
Does it accept that Frontex is acting on the external borders of the European Union ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - This is , of course , a very vast question .
Negotiations with Turkey have just started .
The representative from the Commission , Commissioner Barrot , and Mr Billström , the Swedish Minister for Migration and Asylum Policy , were in Turkey just a few weeks ago in order to start those discussions .
The first discussions were fruitful but they have not yet reached an end so it is very difficult to give you an update .
All Member States , including Greece , are of course kept informed of the discussions .
In general , the respect for fundamental rights and European values are always mentioned in this regard so there is no exclusion for Turkey in that respect .
But , as I said to the honourable Member , discussions have just started ; they are making good progress but they have not been finalised yet .
They have been carried out openly in the way that all Member States are involved via the board of Frontex , where Greece is also represented .
( EL ) Madam President , Minister , from what I have understood , the understanding we have entered into with Turkey in the aim of ultimately arriving at a readmission agreement on immigration issues will also include issues in connection with cooperation with Frontex .
The second thing I want to say is that we have noticed in Greece recently that Frontex aircraft are being harassed by the Turkish authorities .
The Commission 's replies say nothing specific about the communications which take place and whether this ultimately constitutes harassment .
Do you have any comment on this ?
( DE ) In order to master the situation , it is certainly sensible to cooperate at an international level if - and I say this very clearly - this cooperation does not need to be bought with EU financial assistance .
With which other States are we currently negotiating or planning to negotiate and was the Turkish State offered financial incentives for its participation in this FRONTEX operation ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Vessels have been the subject of questions during Question Time on numerous occasions .
The Council has informed the Turkish authorities and the Turkish Government and its representatives that good cooperation in the region is a prerequisite for further discussions on this .
It has also asked the Turkish authorities to refrain from different provocative actions .
It has been very clear , and you can find those answers , some of which have been given by myself very recently .
Discussions are ongoing .
They have been mandated .
As I said , I cannot tell you exactly at what stage they are because they are ongoing , but they follow the usual procedure and , to answer your question , we are also having discussions with Senegal and Cape Verde .
We have started , but have made very little progress , with Morocco , Egypt and Mauritania .
This is the usual procedure .
They are being followed .
The Frontex board has been mandated to start those negotiations .
Some are more successful than others .
We have , for instance , cooperation with Russia , Moldova , Ukraine , Georgia , etc . , but less progress has been made in other areas .
Subject : Climate negotiations in Copenhagen
Can the Council give an update on the negotiations nearing conclusion in Copenhagen ?
Can it specify , in the absence of a legally binding agreement in Copenhagen , when it expects a legally binding successor to Kyoto to be in place ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Developments are ongoing as we speak in Copenhagen , but I will try to give you the latest .
They are two major issues as you are well aware : mitigation and financing .
As the Prime Minister said this morning , we are still confident that we can have a successful outcome in Copenhagen which allows us to keep the global temperature increase below 2 oC above the pre-industrial level .
The EU is playing a key role - a bridge-building role - in a process with a view to ultimately reaching a legally binding agreement : hopefully , a politically binding agreement now , with a clear timetable to reach a legally binding agreement for the period starting 1 January 2013 .
But reaching an agreement requires convergence on the following essential building blocks .
Firstly , deep and ambitious emission reduction commitments by the developed countries by 2020 .
Some countries , Japan and Norway , have upped their pledges but it is clear that what is currently on the table is not enough to reach the 2 ° C target .
In this context , the EU will reiterate its demands to other developed countries to take on an ambitious agenda , and to continue to seek measurable , reportable and verifiable mitigation actions by developing countries .
The larger developing countries have put their bids to limit their growth of emissions on the table - China , India , Indonesia , Brazil , South Africa and South Korea - and this accounts for significant contributions .
However , the Council believes that there is a larger potential for actions to come from these countries , especially China and India .
It is also clear that more is needed if we want to stay within the 2 ° C warming .
The EU will therefore ask them to increase their efforts further in the context of an ambitious agreement .
We also need a framework for adapting to climate changes as well as for technology transfer and capacity building .
We need financing in the framework of a fair and equitable governance system for mitigation , adaptation , capacity building and technology transfer to developing countries .
In this context , the last European Council concerning the figure for fast-start financing for the first three years gives an important impetus to the ongoing negotiations ; that also strengthens the credibility of the European Union .
Heads of State or Government are now approaching Copenhagen .
We hope that they will provide the necessary political impetus on the crucial issues of mitigation and financing .
So hopefully , an ambitious deal can be struck .
The EU has put forward proposals that the negotiation for a legally binding treaty for the period starting 1 January 2013 should be finalised as soon as possible after the Copenhagen conference .
When this can be achieved is too early to say , but we should aim for a deal within six months after the finalisation of the conference .
I would like to thank you , Mrs Malmström , for your concise , precise and logical response , not just to my question but to all questions since I came here to this Parliament last June .
You have been a star performer .
I am also proud to say that I am part of a European Union that is leading the climate change debate and influencing others to do the same .
I suppose the best example of that is the arrival today in Copenhagen of the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of China , something unthinkable a few years ago .
However , in the absence of a binding agreement , what would our modus operandi be going forward ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I think , as the real political negotiations will start tomorrow with , as you say , Prime Ministers and Presidents coming from all over the world , we should not talk about a Plan ' B ' already .
I think they can assert the input , strength and dynamics to create an ambitious , political commitment .
Should it not be possible to reach it - well , we will just have to continue to talk .
There is no way we will give up .
The world is expecting results from us .
This is the most important question of our generation ; we cannot fail .
If we do not reach a deal tomorrow or the day after tomorrow , we will keep on talking until we reach a deal .
Subject : Climate change funding for the developing world
The upcoming climate change talks in Copenhagen are set to define global attitudes to climate change in the short to medium term .
It is crucial that agreement is reached and that rich countries front up the money to pay for the effects of climate change in the developing world .
We cannot reasonably expect developing countries to pay for the effects of a problem that the Western World has caused .
The agreement reached in October at the European Council Summit estimated that developing countries would need EUR 100 billion in order to adapt to climate change , whereas developing countries argue that the cost would be three to four times as much .
How does the Council intend to reach a compromise between such disparate figures ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - As the honourable Member rightly points out , climate financing for developing countries is an essential element of the negotiations in Copenhagen and it will be key to reaching an agreement .
To start with , I would like to point out again that at the October European Council , we stressed the importance of fast-start financing in order to initiate immediate actions and to prepare for collective and efficient action in the medium and longer term with a special emphasis on these developed countries .
At the December Council a few days ago , the EU and its Member States expressed their readiness to allocate EUR 2.4 billion a year for the years 2010-2012 to help developing countries in their fight against climate change .
With this commitment I think we did send a very strong message to the negotiators at their ongoing conference and strengthened our credibility .
The European Council furthermore recognised the need for a significant increase in public and private financial flows up to 2020 .
The current financial architecture needs to be revised and , where necessary , reformed in order to ensure its capacity to meet the challenge .
As you have pointed out in your question , the October European Council has endorsed the Commission estimate that a total net incremented cost of adaptation and mitigation in developing countries could amount to around EUR 100 billion per year by 2020 , to be met through a combination of developing countries ' own efforts , the international carbon market and international public finance ; and this is what the Commission has estimated the need to be .
It is not an offer or a bid from the EU .
There is also a wide range of other estimates from other sources , but it is the Commission estimate that the Council has endorsed and believes to be the best assessment .
The overall level of international public support required is estimated to lie in the range of EUR 22 billion to EUR 50 billion per year to 2020 .
The EU and its Member States are ready to take a fair share of that amount , but all countries except the poorest ones should contribute to international public financing through a comprehensive distribution key based on emission levels and GDP .
And as the European Council stressed in October , the Copenhagen agreement needs to include provisions on the objective that global warming should not exceed 2 ° C , ambitious emission reduction commitments by developed countries , adaptation technology and a deal on financing .

I join with Mr Kelly in expressing my appreciation for the Minister 's replies in the House and for the conduct of the Swedish Presidency in general , which has been exemplary .
Minister , we have noted in recent days that the President of the United States has been in discussions with certain leaders in the developing world .
Has the European Union joined in those discussions in trying to bridge the gap with the United States and others to try to bring the remaining issues to a resolution ?
Can the Minister assure the House that , if there is to be funding for this , for the developing world , that it will be new money , that it will not be money that comes out of existing commitments to the developing world in terms of the hunger and development agenda ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Regarding the first question , there have been numerous bilateral meetings during the autumn in order to try to facilitate and prepare for the negotiations .
The EU is in constant contact with the United States of America trying to push and to call for a more ambitious statement from them .
They , in their turn , have their own bilateral contacts ; on some of these occasions , we have been involved and in some not , because we are trying to push from different corners .
We have also had six bilateral meetings during the Swedish presidency with important stakeholders such as China , India , Ukraine , South Africa , Russia and the United States .
Climate issues have been top of the agenda on all these occasions , so there has been a wide variety of meetings .
Regarding financing , it is a combination of old and new money , I must say .
Some countries have made a mixture .
Some have already allocated parts of their development budget .
As the least-developed countries are the ones who will suffer mostly from climate change , therefore it is logical that certain parts of the development budget are pinpointed to different kinds of climate actions .
Now , as a consequence of the economic crisis , many Member States have lowered their ambitions on their total development budgets , and that is deplorable .
It is a combination , and that is also very much due to the fact of the economic crisis .
Subject : Proposal for a Council Directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment for persons irrespective of religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation
It is absolutely vital to underline the importance of the general principle of access for all .
This will bring benefits not only for people with disabilities , but for the majority of people in Europe 's society within 10 years .
Will the Council consider establishing a uniform basis for an anti-discrimination policy , without exemptions ( e.g. for the design and manufacture of goods ) , in order to create a sustainable society and eliminate the hierarchy of legal provisions on combating discrimination ?
Given that access to infrastructure and services is a very real challenge for many people in many countries , I regard it as totally unacceptable to postpone for 10 or 20 years the imposition on Member States of a requirement to adopt new rules providing for genuine , better accessibility of ( new ) infrastructure and ( new ) services .
Is the Council in any way considering a further extension of the deadline for transposition of the accessibility requirement for existing and / or new infrastructure ?
If so , why ?
As the honourable Member states in his question , measures to improve access are vital in the fight against discrimination .
During the Swedish Presidency , we have continued to study at a technical level the proposed Directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment .
This covers four reasons for discrimination that are not currently included in the area of employment : religion or belief , disability , age and sexual orientation .
On 30 November 2009 , the Council studied a status report from the Presidency which calls attention to the need for further work on this issue , particularly as regards the scope , provisions concerning disability and the timetable for implementation .
The Presidency further reported that the specific issue of the ' design ' or ' manufacture of goods ' should also be covered by the proposal .
This needs to be discussed further .
According to the status report , there are other issues to resolve in respect of the financial consequences of the directive .
If we are to achieve political unity , we need to produce a text acceptable to every Member State .
We need all the Member States to be in agreement before we can proceed further in the Council .
I cannot anticipate the results of the negotiations , however .
Discussions concerning implementation , dates and scope are still in progress and will continue for some time yet .
( HU ) Thank you very much , Minister , for your answer .
The initial steps which have been taken are very encouraging , but I would like to highlight three matters .
There are 50 million people with disabilities living in the European Union .
This issue does not only affect them because European Union society is also ageing drastically .
Therefore , this problem does not only affect people with disabilities , but also the future of any elderly person , as well as all those in wheelchairs , for instance , if they need a ramp .
This means that , overall , this quickly becomes an issue for the whole of society , which is why it must be dealt with as a priority , as this is the future we face .
Access to services has been postponed for 10 years .
It is important that this deadline remains in place , precisely because it is in all our interests .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I definitely agree with the honourable Member about the need for such a directive .
There are still millions of people in the European Union who do not have access to the most ordinary things in life .
This hinders their freedom and the possibility of their living a normal life and I deplore that very much .
The Council discussions are taking a lot of time .
It is a ground-breaking proposal and it has a broad scope with enormous practical and financial implications .
Unanimity will be needed between the Member States and , after that , the consent of the European Parliament , before the directive can be adopted .
We have had negotiations .
We had lots of working groups within the Council .
We have made progress but , unfortunately - I have to be very honest with you - we have not reached the consensus that is required yet . But we will continue until the end of our Presidency , and I am quite optimistic that the Spanish Presidency will do their utmost to reach a solution .
Subject : Safeguarding the rights of disabled people
When economic conditions are complicated , it is very important to ensure adequate social protection for the most socially disadvantaged .
Disabled people constitute one of the most vulnerable groups in society .
It is highly regrettable that attempts are being made to balance national budgets by reducing social benefits and programmes for disabled people .
This not only runs counter to the principles of solidarity and social justice but weakens the processes and mechanisms integrating disabled people into society and increases their social exclusion .
Has the Council made provision for additional measures to help disabled people during an economic recession ?
Will not the unfavourable economic situation slow down consideration in Council of a proposal for a Council Directive putting into practice the principles of equal treatment for disabled people ?
We are all aware of the social problems following in the wake of the economic crisis .
It is essential to provide special protection for people and groups who are particularly vulnerable and to combat exclusion .
We know that there is often a failure to exploit the potential of those with disabilities and other vulnerable groups of people because of discrimination .
In view of this , the Council has consistently stressed the importance of promoting access to the labour market for people with disabilities .
This has been done within the framework of the Lisbon Strategy , including the current guidelines on employment .
In March 2008 , the Council - together with the governments of the Member States - also passed a resolution on the situation of people with disabilities within the EU .
The importance of integrating vulnerable people and groups into the labour market is further endorsed by the Council in its conclusions of 13 November 2009 , which I made reference to in relation to the previous question .
Facilitating access to the labour market for these groups is also a prerequisite for long-term growth .
I would like to remind you of the joint agreement by the European Parliament and the Council to designate 2010 as the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I believe that this decision will also include access to education for all .
Moreover , the decision involves working to achieve equal access for all to information and communication technology , giving particular consideration to the needs of disabled people .
A further priority that will be addressed concerns the needs of disabled people and their families and of other vulnerable groups .
We are looking forward to the many initiatives that I am sure will be taken in the year ahead .
As regards the proposed Council Directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation , we realise that life for people with disabilities would be very positively affected were the Commission 's proposal to become a reality .
The Council 's working group on social issues is still working on the text .
As I mentioned , we held a discussion on 30 November and prepared a status report , but we did not succeed in reaching a decision .
We cannot anticipate the result of negotiations that are still in progress , but it is essential that we get the wording right because it is a matter of legal certainty and defining the scope of the directive .
As mentioned previously , the Member States must be in agreement on the proposal .
It is their job to assess any repercussions of the economic recession in this context .
Once unanimity has been achieved , the European Parliament will naturally be asked to give its consent in accordance with Article 19 of the new Treaty of Lisbon .
( LT ) Thank you , Madam President and thank you , Minister Malmström for your response .
I would also like to thank Sweden , because it was precisely during the Swedish Presidency that the EU 's Council of Ministers ratified the United Nations Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities .
This is a great step , but it is only one step .
In truth , the lives of our disabled vary incredibly from country to country .
Some deaf people are unable to use sign language , while some blind people do not have access to blind assistance services .
There are no adjustments for persons with movement disabilities .
Also , a significant number of disabled people are simply unemployed .
All this when disabled people actually account for around 10 % of our residents in the European Union .
Minister , I know that there are certain problems and difficulties with the directive on anti-discrimination ( this is how I would summarise it ) , but perhaps it would be possible to have a separate directive on the rights of the disabled sooner .
Our directive would be binding for all EU Member States , so that disabled people would not face discrimination .
President-in-Office of the Council . - Let me underline that it is not a lack of political will .
We do understand the importance of this directive and we have been working really , really hard to get it into place .
But , as I have said , I cannot change the fact that we need unanimity , and the unanimity is not there .
The Swedish Presidency and presidencies before us have worked to try to propose different compromises , different ways forward .
There are lots of working groups meeting and working all the time ; and they still are meeting .
We will work on the issue until the end of our presidency .
But , unfortunately , we do not have the unanimity yet .
It would be unfortunate to separate the different parts of the directive because the whole purpose - and this was very much also encouraged by Parliament - was to have a comprehensive directive on discrimination .
If we start to pick up pieces , I think that thought would be lost and I think it would be deplorable .
So let us try a little bit more to get the whole directive into place because that would be very valuable in the fight against discrimination , for disabled people , but also for other discriminated people all around Europe .
( DE ) We must prevent discrimination , which is a social problem .
It is up to all of us to prevent discrimination of any kind .
Do you share my opinion that there are no clear standards for determining whether discrimination has occurred , an example being a situation where a landlord rents out a flat and an applicant claims that he had been discriminated against because he did not get the flat ?
Do you agree that a European directive can only lay down requirements that the Member States would then have to transpose into national law ?
It is very difficult for Europe to establish a European law in this area .

Could I just acknowledge , since we are talking about the rights of disabled people , that our colleague , Mr Kósa , has just been elected president of the Disability Intergroup of the European Parliament .
We wish him well in that .
Specifically regarding the economic crisis , on which we had a debate yesterday and you were nodding in agreement : we have huge concerns about institutional care of children and young adults , and I worry that the economic crisis - and perhaps you share this - will slow the process of de-institutionalisation , and that this is an issue we need to be very careful of , both within and outside the EU .
President-in-Office of the Council . - In times of economic crisis it is always the most vulnerable who suffer the most - children , young people , old people , people with disabilities - and that is why we , as responsible politicians , have to be very aware of this .
It has been added to the conclusions of various Council formations and recommendations that Member States should be encouraged to take particular consideration of the fact that the most vulnerable groups are always those who suffer most , so I do agree with that .
In response to your question , without first having the general overall far-reaching directive , it is very difficult to set standards of a European character in the area of discrimination against disabled people .
We need to have the overall directive first and then work from there .
I realise that a great deal of work has to be done , and I am well aware of the massive discrimination and the difficulties that disabled people face in ordinary life , which hinder them in fulfilling their life 's possibilities and potential .
I think we need to work on the overall directive first .
The decision to have next year as the year for combating social exclusion presents the possibility to come up with new concrete proposals and organise common events to reinforce this issue and awareness in all Member States .
I am sure that in the context of this discussion , the House would wish me also to congratulate Mr Kósa on his election to the Intergroup chair .
Questions 8 and 9 have been withdrawn .
Question 10 will not be taken as the subject to which it refers already appears in the agenda for this part-session .
As the author is not present , Question 11 lapses .
Subject : Appalling murders of poor Peruvian farmers for profit
Articles in the international press report that , in recent years in Peru , dozens of peasants in the Huánuco and Pasco regions have been murdered by a gang known as ' Los Pishtacos ' in order to sell their body fat - reportedly amounting to 17 kilos - to European cosmetics manufacturers for 15 000 dollars per kilo .
The Peruvian authorities consider that the disappearance of numerous people , including children , is attributable to this appalling practice .
We condemn the practices of European multinational companies which have been killing people and plundering the wealth of Latin America for profit for many decades .
What is the Council 's overall view of this criminal act by European multinational companies and what is the level of EU funding for these companies operating in Latin America ?
As the honourable Member knows , respect for human rights is one of the founding values of the European Union .
In all its relations with third countries , the Council always pays particular attention to ensuring that basic rights and the rule of law are respected .
With regard to the specific incidents mentioned by the honourable Member , the Council was not aware of these and they have not been discussed in the Council .
The Presidency has also read the newspapers and is aware of the reports in the media , but also notes that the latest reports suggest that the original story was a hoax .
Since the media reports are contradictory and as the Council does not normally comment on reports in the media , the Presidency cannot and should not speculate on this story or respond to this question .
( EL ) Madam President , I must say that the Minister 's reply does not satisfy me in the slightest .
This is an horrendous crime , an unprecedented crime , I would say , and in any event , I consider that the European Union , when it wants to , has the resources to investigate issues of this sort in greater detail .
Because we have relations with Peru , we demand official information on the part of the Peruvian Government about this specific incident and that measures be taken .
Otherwise , we shall see a repeat of the same situation .
The reports on this have been extremely contradictory .
It has emerged both from the authorities and from reports by journalists that there is no evidence to indicate that these terrible events actually occurred .
Since there are no certain indications and there is much to suggest that in actual fact , they did not happen and that instead it was a hoax , the Council is unable to take action in this area ; neither is it competent to do so .
Subject : Discrimination against the Polish minority in Lithuania
Does the Council intend to compel the Lithuanian Government to respect the rights of national minorities , given that discrimination against the Polish minority in Lithuania has a long history and manifests itself in the obligation to use the Lithuanian spellings of Polish surnames , discrimination in education , the ban on bilingual place names and the failure to return property seized from Poles by the Soviet authorities ?
When does the Council intend to take action in these matters ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - The Council reaffirms the primacy of fundamental and human rights as recognised in the treaties and in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Council is - and will remain - committed to the prevention and eradication of all forms of degrading and discriminatory treatment .
I would like to note that questions concerning the protection of minority rights are also dealt with by the Council of Europe under its framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities .
The issues raised by Mr Czarnecki are currently being examined by the competent organs of the Council of Europe .
In particular , under Council Directive 2000 / 43 / EC of 29 June 2000 implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin , all persons are protected against discrimination on grounds of race or ethnic origin , regardless of their legal status .
The scope of legal protection of this directive includes the areas of employment , social protection , education and access to goods and services .
It is the responsibility of the European Commission to monitor the implementation of , and compliance with , European law in the Member States .
Finally , in the Stockholm Programme approved by the European Council on 10 and 11 December this year , the need for an additional proposal as regards vulnerable groups is assessed in the light of the experience acquired from the application by the Member States of the 2000 Hague Convention on the international protection of adults , to which they will become parties in the future .
( PL ) Thank you very much , Mrs Malmström , for your answer , and especially for emphasising that the Council will oppose all forms of discrimination against national minorities in the European Union , including the Polish minority in Lithuania .
This is a very important statement .
Thank you for this .
I would like to stress that we are dealing , unfortunately , with the systematic activity of the Lithuanian authorities concerning the education system and bilingual place names , and at various levels of the administration .
It is , therefore , an extremely significant matter , and I would ask for it to be monitored by the Council .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I can only reiterate the principles and the values that the European Union stands for and that the Council , of course , defends .
Also , the particular events that Mr Czarnecki refers to are being examined by the relevant authorities of the Council of Europe and , should there be any other form of discrimination , it is the Commission 's task to make sure that the Member States comply with the treaties and with the laws of the European Union .
Subject : Persecution of Buddhist monks and nuns in Vietnam
Following the adoption of the European Parliament resolution on the situation in Laos and Vietnam on 26 November 2009 ( P7 _ TA ( 2009 ) 0104 ) , what concrete measures have been taken to address the persecution and harassment of Buddhist monks and nuns in Vietnam ?
Thank you for your question .
The Council is extremely aware of the human rights situation in Vietnam and we are monitoring developments in the country closely .
Twice a year , the Council and the Commission make an assessment of the situation within the framework of the human rights dialogue that we have with the Vietnamese authorities .
The latest dialogue meeting was held in Hanoi last week , on 11 December .
Many urgent issues were discussed , such as freedom of expression , reform of the penal code , including the death penalty , as well as freedom of religion and religious tolerance , including the situation of the adherents of Plum Village .
An EU list of persons and prisoners whose situation is of particular cause for concern was given to the Vietnamese Government .
In addition to the human rights dialogue , the EU also regularly raises issues of particular concern with the Vietnamese Government .
On 10 November , the Council and the Commission held a long discussion with the members of the Plum Village community .
On 26 November , the resolution from the European Parliament concerning the issue was published .
The same day , the Commission held high level talks with the authorities in Hanoi and this meeting took place within the framework of the Joint Committee for the negotiation of a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , which we hope will be concluded next year .
Our main message at the meeting was to express how pressing we consider the human rights situation in Vietnam to be .
We mentioned the expropriation of church property , we mentioned the attacks on campaigners for human rights and blog writers - as brought up by Members previously in this House - and we also mentioned the situation of the adherents of Plum Village .
We called upon our counterparts to safeguard and respect human rights and to meet all the commitments set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the international conventions to which Vietnam is party .
The Parliamentary resolution made this message particularly forceful , and I would like to thank the European Parliament for that .
We also informed Vietnam of the new and important role of the European Parliament , particularly as regards the future Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
On 8-10 December 2009 , an EU delegation visited the Bat Nha monastery and the Phuoc Hue temple , to which nearly 200 remaining members of Plum Village have fled .
We spoke to the religious representatives there and the local authorities in order to obtain more information on the current situation .
The EU will continue to monitor the situation at the Phuoc Hue temple very closely .

deputising for the author . - I would like to thank the President-in-Office on my own behalf and on behalf of Mr Crowley for her very comprehensive response and to say that I am very pleased with the approach of both the Council and the Commission .
I hope that you will continue to monitor developments in a pragmatic way .
Subject : Iceland 's application to join the European Union
Can the Council provide an updated assessment on the status of Iceland 's application to join the European Union ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - Madam President , I think this a question dear to you as well .
( SV ) Let me begin by reminding you of what was stated in the Council 's conclusions of 8 December , where the Council writes the following : ' Iceland is a country with long and deep democratic roots , with the potential to make a significant contribution to the EU , both strategically and politically .
The country is already closely integrated with the EU in several areas , through its membership of the European Economic Area and the Schengen area . '
Iceland 's application for membership of the European Union was officially submitted to the Swedish Presidency in Stockholm on 16 July 2009 .
I myself was there and received the application , which was immediately forwarded to the members of the Council .
At its meeting on 27 July 2009 , the Council gave a reminder of the renewed consensus on enlargement that was described in the conclusions of the European Council meeting in December 2006 , including the principle that each country is to be assessed on its own merits , and we decided to initiate the process stated in Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union .
The Commission was therefore asked to submit an opinion on this application to the Council .
The application will be assessed according to the principles set out in the treaty , the criteria established at the European Council meeting in Copenhagen in 1992 and the conclusions of the European Council 's meeting in December 2006 .
In accordance with the conclusions adopted by the General Affairs Council last week , it will take up the matter again when the Commission has submitted its opinion .
This should make it possible for the Council to make a decision on the possible opening of negotiations with Iceland during the initial months of the Spanish Presidency .
I want to thank the President-in-Office for her response .
As Chair of the Delegation for relations with Switzerland , Iceland and Norway and to the European Economic Area ( EEA ) Joint Parliamentary Committee , I fully understand that , of course , every application has to be dealt with on its own merits and progress is being made .
I think an indication of that is that Iceland responded to the many questions within a reasonably short time and , of course , it was helpful that it is a member of the EEA .
That is an indication of the Icelandic Government 's commitment .
I believe it would be another major step in the further expansion of Europe if Iceland were to become a member of the European Union .
However , you mentioned the old democracy as a matter for the Icelandic people to take this decision , but I look forward to further progress at the next Council meeting and , hopefully , a major step will be taken there and that there would be an announcement by the Council .
President-in-Office of the Council . - The Icelandic application has to be dealt with in accordance with the rules and procedures , and the Commission has not yet finalised its scrutiny and its elaboration of the opinion .
They are making progress , as is Iceland , and they have already appointed their negotiation teams and are prepared to be very thorough but quick in their work .
I think therefore that we can count on the Commission presenting an opinion at the beginning of next year and hopefully , the Council can take a decision on further measures .
As the author is not present , Question 16 lapses .
Subject : Biodegradable waste
Can the Council comment on Member State progress with regard to diverting biodegradable waste from landfill , as outlined in the Landfill Directive ( 1999 / 31 / EC ) ?
Every day , large quantities of waste are produced in the EU 's Member States .
How we deal with this waste naturally has a major impact on the environment .
The Commission 's recently published report on the implementation of the EU 's legislation on waste concludes that although some Member States have made progress , huge implementation efforts are required in a great many States if the infrastructure for waste management is to meet EU requirements .
The Directive on landfill is particularly difficult to implement .
As regards diverting biodegradable waste from landfill , the Commission 's report states that only nine countries achieved their target reductions in 2006 - according to the fairly limited information available .
The Council has stated previously in its conclusions of June 2009 that it agrees with the Commission .
It is very important that the EU 's targets for diverting biodegradable waste from landfill are met .
The Council also called upon the Commission to continue with its impact analysis in order to prepare a proposal for EU legislation on biodegradable waste if appropriate .
The Council stated that the need for EU legislation should be noted , and particularly the need for legislation on the recycling of biodegradable waste by means of composting and energy recovery in biogas facilities with subsequent recycling of residual material .
The Council also stated that better management of biodegradable waste would contribute to more sustainable management of our resources , increase land protection , help combat climate change and , in particular , enable targets for diverting waste from landfill , recycling and renewable energy to be met .
I think everyone in this House supports the efforts .
If you stand , as I have , on a landfill and inhale , it is pretty awful , and I think the public who dump should perhaps take a visit .
Could you , if you have any , give reasons that you could elaborate on as to why only nine Member States are at this stage ?
We know we need to do this ; I agree we need to do biogas .
Everybody agrees with the principles , but why are we failing to achieve the objectives ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - I have to confess that I am not an expert on this theme , but , as far as I understood from the Commission statements , the appropriate infrastructure to deal with it is missing and it is quite costly to put into place .
It is of course beneficial in the long term , but Member States have not invested in the appropriate infrastructure and that is why it has taken so much time .
We will now take what will be the last question this evening , and indeed the last question of your presidency .
It comes from Mr Hans-Peter Martin and concerns successes by the Swedish Council Presidency in matters of transparency where , I dare say , we have something to report .
Subject : Successes by the Swedish Council Presidency in matters of transparency
On 16 September 2009 , the Swedish Presidency stated in its answer to my question that it ' shares the Honourable Member 's view on the importance of increased transparency in the work of the Union ' .
It went on to state that ' the Presidency intends to give full effect to the relevant transparency provisions , set out in Article 8 paragraphs 1 - 4 , of the Council 's Rules of Procedure .
In principle , all deliberations on legislative acts to be adopted in accordance with the codecision procedure will be open to the public , as provided in the Council 's Rules of Procedure ' .
Now that it has reached the end of its Presidency , what specific successes were achieved by the Council and in which fields ?
As the honourable Member points out , increasing transparency in the work of the European Union is an important priority for Sweden as a Member State and as the holder of the Presidency .
Increasing transparency in every area of the Council 's work was one of the clear aims that we set out .
I would like to mention , for example , the Presidency website , where information on meetings , background documents and webstreaming links can be found in three languages .
In the last few months , the Presidency has also done its utmost to ensure that the provisions on transparency in the Council 's Rules of Procedure are applied .
In July , September , October and November 2009 , 20 public debates were held on the initiative of the Swedish Presidency , in accordance with Rule 8.3 of the Rules of Procedure .
Moreover , a public debate was held on the Presidency 's work programme for the work of the Ecofin Council .
That makes 21 public debates held over four months .
As regards the number of public deliberations , 59 items of legislation were adopted publicly as A items within the ordinary legislative procedure and nine proposed items of legislation were discussed as B items during a public Council meeting .
Furthermore , one public deliberation was held on the initiative of the Presidency .
If the honourable Member thinks that does not sound like much , it should be borne in mind that the number of items on the Council 's agenda for which public deliberations must be held varies somewhat depending on the number of items that are subject to the ordinary legislative procedure .
Moreover , the new parliament has not had as many items as usual .
The new Commission will no doubt increase the number of legislative proposals that are to be dealt with by the Council and the European Parliament and the number of items will then increase .
Furthermore , now that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , all Council meetings dealing with the part of the agenda that concerns deliberations on legislation are also public .
The Swedish Presidency welcomes this improvement .
It will make the European Union more effective and democratic .
In conclusion , I would like to mention that yesterday , the Swedish Presidency took the initiative for a meeting with the interinstitutional working group on transparency with Commission Vice-President Margot Wallström and Vice-President Diana Wallis .
We discussed a great many specific proposals for providing Europe 's citizens with better , more user-friendly access to information in the EU institutions .
( DE ) It is rare for there to be cause in plenary for a certain kind of emotion .
I think it is an honour and a pleasure that we , specifically , are able to hold the final dialogue .
Mrs Malmström , you know , yourself , that it is a slow , narrow path towards more transparency , which we , unfortunately , often only progress along at a snail 's pace , if I think about where we were ten years ago and where we are today .
Nevertheless , as a critical but passionate pro-European , I clearly cannot be satisfied merely with what we have achieved thus far .
I would be interested to know what message you would leave us with as regards what your successors could actually improve .
I am thinking in particular of the Council working groups .
I am actually not happy about the number of agenda items that have been publicly accessible up to now , nor about the manner in which access to the documents is obtained .
Taking a long-term perspective from your ten years of experience in European politics , do you think that we will ever reach the stage in terms of transparency that Sweden reached decades ago ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - It is indeed a very important question .
I would say that access to documents and transparency has increased considerably over the last ten years .
This is due to Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 , which is a very important regulation , and I am proud to have been able to take part in the birth of this regulation .
It is also how we implement it and it is about attitudes .
They have improved during the last 10 years .
Lots of people in our European institutions have realised that transparency and openness is not dangerous .
It is good .
It is efficient .
It is good for legitimacy and it also decreases the possibilities of wrongdoings and corruption .
We still have work to do .
The Lisbon Treaty presents us with new possibilities .
I hope all incoming presidencies will use those possibilities in the best possible way .
The Commission said yesterday that they will come back with proposals arising from the Lisbon Treaty as to how we can move forward with transparency .
There is still a lot to do , but we have come quite a long way .
As the honourable Member says , it is a constant fight , and I look forward to going along that fighting path together .
It therefore remains for me to say , Minister , dear Cecilia , thank you very much for your cooperation and such full participation in Question Time during the Swedish Presidency .
We look forward , subject to the approval of this House , to seeing you on that side .
Thank you very much , and thank you to your team .
That concludes Question Time .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 09.00 )
Mutual recognition of professional qualifications ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Malcolm Harbour , Andreas Schwab , Evelyne Gebhardt , Cristian Silviu Buşoi , Heide Rühle , Adam Bielan and Kyriacos Triantaphyllides , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on the transposition of Directive 2005 / 36 / EC on the recognition of professional qualifications ( O-0108 / 2009 / rev.2 - B7-0217 / 2009 ) .

author . - Mr President , with your permission , I would propose that we delay a moment or two because this is an oral question to the Commission and we were hoping that Mr McCreevy would be here , but I see that Mr Samecki is going to speak .

I have not met Mr Samecki before , so I am interested that he is here to provide an answer to an issue that Mr McCreevy and his team have been working on .
Thank you very much .
I was going to have welcomed Mr McCreevy here and thanked him for his work previously , so perhaps you will pass on our good wishes for what might have been his final appearance here .
Nevertheless , I am particularly pleased that Mr Barnier has joined us as a very active member of my committee to hear this , because this is a dossier which will be very much in his in-tray , assuming of course that the Parliament approves his nomination and the Commission moves forward .
It is nevertheless very good that he is here .
The free movement of professionals and the Directive on the mutual recognition of professional qualifications are among the flagship issues that my committee is most concerned about in the whole construction of the single market .
It is very appropriate that we are discussing this question to the Commission this morning , which is essentially to ask for an update on the progress in transposing the revised directive that my committee worked on back in 2004-2005 , and on how that is actually being implemented by the Member States .
It is also very timely because Professor Monti came to our committee on Monday to talk about his mission for the President of the Commission on the future direction of the internal market .
He made a very strong point that part of the problem with the internal market is actually not the lack of legislation , but the consistent enforcement and effectiveness of the existing instruments that we have in place to create the internal market .
In the case of the mutual recognition of professional qualifications , as the text of our question quite clearly sets out , we already know that a significant number of problems in relation to recognition of professional qualifications are encountered by citizens across the European Union .
It has one of the highest levels of complaints in the Solvit mechanism that we very much support at member government level .
Many people feel frustrated by the absence of clear decisions and also by the lack of contact between authorisation bodies in different Member States .
One of the things that our own research has done , and this committee commissioned research on this topic , is to demonstrate the fact that there is nothing like enough coordinated activity on helping people to recognise their rights under mutual recognition .
The other aspect is that it is also clear from the work we and others have done that not enough professions are actually thinking in terms of moving into a European qualifications framework .
There are serious questions that we need to ask about the mechanism , about how simple it is to access and about how effective it is in practical terms .
We know from the statistics and the information - and I am sure we will hear from the Commission shortly - that transposition of this instrument has been delayed in just about every Member State .
It has taken much longer than people expected to bring this into operation , and that of itself raises concerns about the complexity of the instrument itself .
Just to pull all these things together in the context of the work of the Internal Market Committee over the next five years , I am delighted that , I think , all the coordinators of the committee are here today and I want to thank them for the work they have done , together with myself , on shaping the forward agenda for this committee .
This question of mutual recognition of professional qualifications is not just a one-off .
It is part of our feeling that the role of our committee is to continue to investigate , to promote and to make recommendations about the future evolution of the key legislations , the key building blocks of the single market .
We know that the Commission is due to review the mutual recognition directive in 2011 .
We plan to have a meeting of national parliaments and national parliamentarians to discuss this proposal .
We have already had a hearing on this and we have our research report .
These are the instruments that my committee can use and , if the coordinators agree , I am sure that we will be doing an own-initiative report sometime in 2010 to feed into this discussion that the Commission will have .
That is the context of the question .
We look forward to hearing the Commission 's reply to set the framework for that , but this is just the beginning of the process and I am sure that the new Commissioner will be able to take that forward and work with us to really develop this crucial piece of legislation and make the single market work better .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection for raising these important questions .
Before responding to the individual questions , let me start with an overview .
The objective of the Professional Qualifications Directive is to facilitate the free movement of our citizens in the internal market .
Two years after the end of the transposition period , transposition is complete in 22 Member States , and four Member States will hopefully deliver by the end of the year .
At this stage I am , however , concerned about Greece , from which we have not received any transposition measure yet .
Let me now turn to the first question .
The transposition has constituted a challenge for Member States mainly because it affects more than 800 different professions .
These professions have often even been regulated in federal or regional laws .
However , this cannot be an excuse for any delays , and the Court of Justice has not accepted such delays in six judgments so far .
Concerning the second question , the main problems relate to the health professions and architects , where a higher degree of harmonisation of training requirements at European level is in place .
Problems also occur in professions with higher levels of cross-border mobility of workers such as teachers or tourist guides .
On the third question , the priority of the Commission is to ensure correct and consistent implementation of the directive .
To this end , we have developed a code of conduct on administrative practices and a user guide addressed to citizens , which will also promote more consistency .
As to the obstacles which Solvit identified , we are fully aware of problems on the ground , such as delays occurring in the recognition procedure , lack of response from the national competent authorities , unsubstantiated decisions , lost files , etc .
Sometimes , erroneous information is even given to migrants and they are invited to follow wrong procedures .
However , the Solvit network has proven to be effective in solving many of these problems .
But there is not only Solvit .
National contact points are now in place in all Member States to inform and assist citizens , and the Commission expects them to be even more active in the future .
Moreover , the Internal Market Information System has also provided a medium for supporting more than 1 200 information exchanges for many of the regulated professions this year .
This has brought about enhancements in day-to-day administrative cooperation between Member States .
Finally , on the last question , the Commission is not in a position to assess whether there is a need for reform at the moment .
This will be done during an ex post evaluation exercise foreseen by the directive .
Our intention is certainly to respect the timetable set in the directive .
It will be up to the next Commission to decide how to take this forward .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in 2005 , we adopted this directive after several years of work and debate in Parliament and it came into force .
In 2007 , it was implemented .
Now we have reached 2009 and it is hard to accept that the directive has not been implemented everywhere , particularly since it was not completely new , because there were already proposals in place .
I can only encourage the Commission to exert more pressure on the Member States .
I had expected that the problems would lie in the practical management of the directive .
That is the main subject of the forthcoming investigations : to find out where there are specific local problems and to discover what is actually happening .
There has already been a reference to the fact that 20 % of the complaints to SOLVIT concern this subject .
This is a very serious matter .
Mr Harbour rightly pointed out - and I do not want to repeat what he said - the importance of this problem for the internal market from an economic perspective .
However , apart from the economic issues , it is also one of the fundamental freedoms of citizens to be able to exercise their profession and to fulfil their potential in another state , for example , when they marry or move to another country for some other reason .
This is a genuine problem for the citizens of Europe .
It is important for us to acknowledge that there will inevitably be problems .
It is a complex matter , it takes time to implement and different cultures and traditions are involved , particularly with regard to the professions and the concepts of quality and qualifications within those professions .
Therefore , it is not possible to recognise every qualification from one country in another country without question .
For me and for us , this is less about dealing with the individual cases of hardship which will inevitably occur and more about investigating - and this is where SOLVIT comes in - whether there are faults in the structures or in the system and whether and how improvements can be introduced .
I would like to point out that it will never be possible to bring this subject to a close .
It is a long-running issue because new professions and new job descriptions are , of course , constantly coming into existence .
For this reason , this is an ongoing task for the Commission and for Parliament , but also for the Member States , whose goodwill I would like to call on at this point .
Mr President , I would first like to say that it is totally outrageous that there are no members of the Commission here , because this is a question directed at the European Commission .
This shows contempt for Parliament .
It is simply outrageous and we find it totally unacceptable .
( Heckling )
Yes ?
Yes , he did not get up .
Well , I am sorry .
I cannot accept that .
Moving on to the matter in hand , ladies and gentlemen , this is all about the citizenship of the Union , about the people who have the right to move freely throughout the European Union and to practise their professions where they live and where they choose to work .
We have put this legislation in place so that this will become easier and so that the process of recognising professional qualifications can genuinely be brought up to date .
I find it simply appalling that the Member States in many cases have not taken the necessary steps to implement this legislation and to ensure that citizens really have this freedom of movement .
There is still a great deal to be done by the European Commission in this respect .
I would like to draw attention to one point which is very important to me and which we have repeatedly brought up in Parliament .
We must ensure that the European professional card , which we have proposed , is introduced .
This will put into citizens ' hands something that will allow them to move throughout Europe .
There are organisations which are attempting to do this .
However , I feel it is important to ask the European Commission whether this is an area in which it could become involved in order to speed this process up .
The free movement of persons is one of the fundamental rights of the European Union 's citizens .
This also includes the free movement of professionals , which is a vital condition for ensuring that the internal market operates as efficiently as possible .
As has been mentioned in all the speeches made so far , in spite of the adoption of the Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications in 2005 , professionals wishing to exercise their right of free movement are still encountering numerous difficulties .
I have personally come across various cases of this type , which have been brought to my knowledge not only by Romanian citizens , but also by European citizens , relating to a variety of professions .
My colleagues from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection did the honour of appointing me as rapporteur for the European Solvit network .
As has been mentioned so far , a significant proportion of the cases which Solvit has to resolve are linked to failures in the system for mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
I believe , fellow Members , that we need to analyse in detail the problems which have been submitted to the Solvit centres so that we can see what we can improve .
Better communication is also needed between contact points in order to promote mutual understanding between Member States .
They must understand how the other systems work in the European Union so that the maximum possible flexibility can be used when applying the directive , as well as to avoid the administrative obstacles blocking the professionals ' path .
Lastly , it would be desirable for the five Member States which have not yet completed transposition of the directive , or any state among the 22 which has done this but is still having problems with transposition or has transposed it inappropriately , to quickly rectify these situations .
The ultimate aim is to facilitate the smooth operation of the internal market for the provision of services which is directly affected by problems relating to the recognition of professional qualifications .
Mr President , Commissioner , I think we all agree on the objective here .
Of course , we all want the citizens of Europe to be able to move about freely and to exercise their professions .
The question is why this directive has still not been properly implemented after four or now nearly five years .
I believe it would make sense if the committee was involved not only in drawing up and enacting the legislation , but if it also carried out an analysis afterwards of the reasons why transposition is delayed in this way .
The Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications is not the only directive which is causing problems .
When there are so many cases in the Court of Justice of the European Union , when there are so many complaints procedures and when SOLVIT is so heavily involved with this subject , this should act as a wake-up call for us .
We must look more closely at the reasons behind this .
There are a number of causes .
On the one hand , it is always very easy to say that the Member States are responsible for the delay .
Protectionism is doubtless another of the reasons .
The different cultures and legal systems certainly also play a role .
What effect does European legislation have on these differing legal systems ?
That is another issue that we will have to address .
In addition , we must consider whether the directive has had the intended effect or whether it was incapable of achieving certain results right from its conception .
I believe it is very important that we look at this issue again .
This type of ex-ante analysis is one of the important subjects which this committee will have to deal with and make progress on .
However , I also have questions for the Commission .
I am surprised that these guidelines are only appearing after more than four years .
This could have been done much earlier .
However , I do welcome the guidelines .
I have read them and they are certainly helpful .
Nevertheless , it would have been useful to have them some time ago .
I would like to join with Mrs Gebhardt in asking what is happening about the European professional card .
That will be the second important step .
Mr President , the crisis which has affected the European Union in recent months has shown irrefutably how important the internal market is for the functioning of the entire Union .
We will not finish building it without introducing a certain freedom for people to migrate , which is guaranteed , among others , by the Directive on the mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
Therefore , it is a sad and disturbing fact that , four years after adoption of the directive , it still is not in force in four countries , and none of the Member States adopted it before the deadline contained in the directive , 20 October 2007 .
In relation to this , my first question to the European Commission is as follows : has the Commission not been too passive over the last four years , and what exactly did the Commission do so that all the countries would manage to transpose the directive in time ?
Secondly , I would like to ask when the Commission will publish a report evaluating transposition of the directive , and what will be used as the basis for the conclusions in the report ?
The Services Directive should be implemented at the end of the year .
Today , in Parliament , we know already that many countries will not manage to pass laws about this in time .
I would like to ask what connection the Commission sees between these two documents ?
Finally , a very important matter for the country I represent is the question of migration of nurses .
The directive introduces harmonisation of training requirements for nurses .
I would like to ask what specific action the Commission has taken to help nurses from the countries of Central and Eastern Europe , including those from Poland ?
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , firstly I would like to express my sincere thanks to the Commission for presenting its opinion to us .
However , I would also like to point out that , following the interinstitutional agreement between the Commission and Parliament , and I have seen this happen with the Services Directive , which we discussed in Brussels months ago , Parliament has a right to demand that the Commissioner responsible should be here to answer difficult questions .
I do not think that we can resolve this issue with this Commission and there is no point in trying to do so .
On behalf of Parliament , I would like to explain to the representative of the Commission who is here that we believe that this part of the interinstitutional agreement is extremely important .
Why is that ?
Not for reasons of mere formalism , but because this is a very important political question for the citizens of the European Union .
Mr Bielan has just referred to the Services Directive , which can only function if professional qualifications are recognised by both sides .
It is of great importance , but many people also connect it with a feeling of helplessness , if they have the impression that their employer is making use of discrepancies in the cross-border mutual recognition of professional qualifications simply to reduce their earnings .
These people feel abandoned and helpless .
I have seen this myself in a number of cases here on the border between Germany and France .
However , this is obviously not the only problem area .
It is true that we cannot resolve all the difficulties overnight and that this process will remain an ongoing issue in future , as Mr Lechner , the rapporteur , has said .
Nevertheless , it is our job to show the citizens that we take their concerns seriously and , in my opinion , this also includes the Commission attaching sufficient importance to this issue .
I hope that we will be able to work together with the new Commission on this in order to make progress .
I would like to ask you to arrange this with the Directorate General responsible for this area .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have already discussed the fears linked to the transposition of the Services Directive .
In this sense , the example of the Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications is symbolic .
Some States have failed to respect the transposition deadline and are having problems due to the gaps in the text .
Although this directive lays a solid foundation for mutual recognition , the specific characteristics of certain professions have not been taken into account .
The fact is , recognising qualifications without having established actual common levels of qualification and training , including for higher education , can only cause complications and create mistrust on the part of Member States , professionals and the citizens .
The most obvious example is that of the medical professions .
For example , French midwives are authorised to write prescriptions and are trained for that , which is not the case in other countries .
What happens when a midwife without such authorisation arrives in France without additional training and has to write a medical prescription ?
Similarly , certain specialisms do not exist in every Member State .
This directive is crucial to the free movement of workers , the foundation on which the European project is based , but it must be improved and enhanced , and the difficulties encountered must serve to identify the professions for which language teaching and harmonised training are necessary .
I should like to mention the remarkable initiative , which is supported by all health professionals , to create a European card .
This is a genuine guarantee as much for the carrier as for the customer or patient , and I call on the Commission to extend it to other professions , since this will enable us to improve mutual recognition and to gain the citizens ' trust .
Mr President , when discussing the mutual recognition of professional qualifications and the good functioning of the internal market , we have to look at the current situation in the health sector , for which the directive and its implementation may need to be further discussed .
In addition to the full implementation of this directive , it is crucial to introduce further measures applying to mutual recognition , not only of diplomas , but of health professionals ' qualifications as well .
The provision of health services requires appropriate linguistic skills , registration through national regulators and , most importantly , the ability to deliver safe and high-quality care .
I think there is a need for better sharing of information between Member States regarding health professionals ' registration , for example through a common EU database .
A competence assurance system is also a key element of safe health care services provision , and we should think about common standards for the assessment of competences and skills .
Health professionals ' mobility is also a question of public health and public safety .
On these grounds , the ECJ has already approved additional national safeguards for the circulation of goods .
There is also a rationale for such measures applying to the provision of health services , especially when new communication technologies allow controversial practices such as e-doctor consultations .
We have to face the challenge of an ageing population , and this will put even more pressure on the European health workforce .
While ensuring the mobility of health professionals , we must also be able to guarantee to all European citizens accessible health services , timely delivered with the highest quality standards .
This is a responsibility for all of us .
I hope that the European institutions and Member States will consider it seriously , given the fact that some national health care systems are almost drained of professionals and this will make it extremely difficult for us to provide basic health care service .
( PL ) Mr President , if we want our citizens to be mobile - and this is what the European economy needs - they have to be sure that when they gain their qualifications , for example , in Poland , they will not have problems with recognition of these qualifications in any Member State .
I understand the scale of the problem perfectly .
The 800 regulated professions of which Mr Samecki spoke , together with numerous regulations of these professions at national and regional level , are a considerable challenge for the administrations of the Member States .
However , the challenge for our citizens who are having problems with recognition of their qualifications is , principally , how to find their feet in the complexities of the entire system .
This is confirmed by data from Solvit , and this is why the problem with implementing the directive in time is only one aspect of our discussion .
We should not , however , forget that many problems are emerging because there is a lack of trust in Member States towards the education and training systems in other Member States .
We lack , finally , cooperation , resources and the engagement of national administrations .
The introduction of a European professional card is a good idea , and we had the opportunity to discuss this during the previous term of the European Parliament .
Such a card must , however , facilitate the flow of people , and not make it more difficult .
Introduction of this card - and I would like to stress this very strongly - should not become another barrier in the internal market .
Ladies and gentlemen , in just under ten days , the deadline for transposition of the Services Directive expires .
I mention this because it is also important in the context of our debate today .
These two directives complement each other in certain respects .
Transposition of the Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications cannot be called a success , and so I will permit myself once again to appeal from this place for an intensification of work on both directives , because without them , we will not make progress with the internal market .
( PT ) Mr President , as we are all aware , 15 directives were consolidated into a single legislative act for the mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
That has given rise to a number of practical problems with transposition in the various Member States .
The difficulties are well known , and the Commission should list the sticking points and analyse the problem areas found in the transposition of this important internal market provision .
The protectionism that rears its head at various levels is an obstacle not only to the free movement of persons but also to the internal market .
We must try to identify the hazy areas so that the directive is not made less effective through mistrust .
We are not asking the Union to do what the Member States should be doing , but an effort is needed to facilitate matters by helping to demolish professional corporatism .
To improve the transposition of this directive will require dissemination of the recognition of qualifications via the Solvit and EURES networks , the encouragement of joint platforms , implementation of effective contact points and , no less importantly , the linking of this directive to the Services Directive .
( MT ) The biggest issue affecting the proper enforcement of this directive is the Member States ' lack of trust in each others ' systems .
The Member States ' disinterest in collaborating with each other is also reflected in the incoherent manner in which they perceive the internal market information system .
Every Member State claims to use the system , but the frequency of use varies in accordance with the purpose for which it is used .
It is impossible for an information exchange system to work properly when the Member States do not use it in the same way .
It is necessary to have a full compilation of data which is updated regularly and it is also necessary to create a point of reference for all Member States , where each Member State inputs all necessary data which will allow the concrete application of the directive .
I would like to ask the Commission to inform us on the plans of action it intends to adopt for the proper transposition of this directive , if we truly wish to embrace the concept of the single market and not merely interpret it as we deem fit .
Mr President , before I go onto my question , there has been a lot of talk this morning about Solvit .
At the last IMCO Committee meeting , we were told of the under funding of Solvit centres .
You may want to take note of this before your hearing , Mr Barnier , but there is one intern running the organisation in one large Member State .
We cannot allow that to go on , because Solvit provides us with an excellent service .
My question to the Commission is connected to health care professionals .
An impaired professional risks putting patients ' health at risk and , in the most extreme cases , can cause death .
Is the Commission considering a legal duty for competent authorities to proactively and effectively share information about struck-off professionals to ensure that the mobility of health care professionals does not compromise patient safety ?
The current internal market information system allows for the sharing of information , but only when a competent regulator has a question about an applicant to its register , so we have to have a better exchange to alert authorities when an individual has been struck off due to incompetence .
Thank you , Mr President , for raising this issue for the committee .
( FR ) Mr President , much has been said about the mutual recognition of professional qualifications .
The question is : why is this directive , which is so important and so universally longed-for , difficult to apply ?
Well , quite simply because it is difficult and complex to apply in everyday , operational terms .

I see three main problems : the first is obviously language , a point that has been raised ; the second is the complexity of the procedures to be followed to have a person 's qualifications recognised as valid - at times , people have to literally jump through hoops to have their initial diplomas recognised ; and the third is perhaps the variety of types of initial training .

In this regard , I think it would be a good idea for the Commission to ask the Member States to appoint , for each profession , a single competent professional body to be in charge of continuing training - continuing training being one of the solutions .
These competent bodies should be asked to sit as a board , at European level , to define a common European form of certification .
In that way , we would gradually see professionals go from an initially heterogeneous level to a common level of continuing training .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Belgium is one of five Member States to have not yet fully transposed the Directive on the recognition of professional qualifications .
However , according to the information that I have , the only thing it has left to do to comply with European law is to solve the problem of travel professionals .
Leaving aside the difficulties inherent in the Belgian institutional system with regard to the transposition of the various European directives , it seems that the directive that we are discussing here is particularly complex .
That has already been mentioned .
Belgium is not the only country to be affected by the non-transposition , poor transposition or partial transposition of directives .
That is why , in the interests of professionals , I call on the European Commission to help those Member States that are having difficulties .
Professionals should be able to benefit from the free movement of persons and freedom of establishment which , I would point out , constitute the main objective of this directive .
Mr President , firstly , my thanks to Mr Samecki for his good work .
I think we all agree with the principle we are discussing here this morning , but it should apply not only across the European Union but worldwide as well .
This is something we discussed recently at the Canadian delegation , which is a step in the right direction .
However , if we want that Utopian situation , we must ensure that professional qualifications are of an equal standard across the European Union and , ideally , worldwide .
There is anecdotal evidence to suggest that , in some countries at least , when students have not reached the educational standard to qualify for a course , they can go to another country and pay to do it there .
So there is a need for independent verifiable evidence that the standards are equal and , if they are equal , then there is no excuse for not transposing this principle across the European Union and , hopefully , in due course worldwide , to attain what we desire - the free movement of labour for professionals .
Mr President , let us get straight to the point here .
The failure of Member States to get their act together in terms of the recognition of qualifications is costing us jobs .
The failure of Member States to actually take this seriously enough is a serious issue .
Our level of cross-border trade for what is supposed to be a single market is nowhere near what it should be .
We are in the process of rebuilding the European economy , and part of this move must involve ways to enhance cross-border trade and make labour more mobile than it is now .
We must move to a new area of entrepreneurial innovation , where in Europe we are working together to make the world 's most cutting-edge products .
Given that our manufacturing base has dried up - Ireland being a case in point - exporting our services represents a new way of enhancing trade within Europe .
However , for this , Europe must have standards when it comes to qualifications .
So far , the failure of Member States to agree on the rules for this matter is limiting our ability to sell these same services across borders .
For the individuals involved , it is restricting the free movement of labour .
I agree with my colleague , MEP Grech , that Member States are not showing enough respect in particular for the information system they use and somebody needs to be held responsible in each Member State for the same .
I urge the Commission to identify and tackle the obstacles which are preventing the realisation of the single market in this instance .
( NL ) Mr President , I should like to pick out one aspect in this debate .
There seems to be a great shortage of specialised professions , which has resulted in a trade in these qualifications and led to genuine qualifications being disregarded .
This can entail great risks , both in the security sector , for example , and in large-scale plants such as chemical companies and oil refineries .
National supervision in this regard seems to be inadequate .
I should like to ask the Commissioner three questions .
Firstly , whether he knows about this ; secondly , whether the European Commission can give us a report on this ; and , thirdly , what we can do about it .
This is an absolutely ridiculous , undesirable phenomenon that I believe must be eliminated .
( SL ) Ladies and gentlemen , this is really a very important issue that we are dealing with here , that of mutual recognition of professional qualifications within the European Union .
This is a major problem because qualifications are granted by the education systems of EU Member States , of which there are at least 27 .
Some of you will probably recall that , in March last year , we established the European Qualification Framework , which is a mechanism enabling comparison between education systems .
However , one problem with this qualification framework is that it has not been implemented by the Member States .
Some of them have not implemented it fully and some have used it merely as a convenient translator of various qualifications , occupations , skills and educational levels .
In my opinion , a major task lies ahead for the Member States in this particular area and , if they were really to enforce the European Qualification Framework , which was previously adopted at European institution level , they would greatly facilitate the comparison and the real mutual recognition of educational qualifications .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , my apologies for not standing up during my first intervention .
It is because of a lack of experience and the early morning hour .
In general , I would like to refer to a couple of selected questions .
First of all , we should underline that the Commission has been supporting Member States in preparing the transposition of the directive .
Where the transposition period has lapsed , we have also been vigorous in enforcing transposition .
In 2007 , we published a transposition guide .
Then we developed the internal market information system , which is now used quite intensively by all Member States , and we also published a code of conduct on administrative practices in June this year .
A year ago , the Commission brought non-compliant Member States to the European Court of Justice , and the Court of Justice issued six favourable judgments condemning the lack of transposition by the Member States concerned .
Very recently , we published a scoreboard illustrating the state of transposition in the Member States , as well as a user guide for citizens and the business community .
To conclude , I would like to thank you for all the questions and comments , and especially the Chair , Malcolm Harbour , for his valuable input .
We believe that it is up to the Member States to deliver now .
The Commission is looking forward to developing a special relationship with Parliament also as regards this file .
In particular , we are ready to actively discuss how the directive works in practice , and how to take best account of a swiftly changing environment in the coming years .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
One stated goal of this directive is to implement fully the current legal provisions concerning the freedom of movement of professionals within the EU .
The free movement of professionals has already been adopted in Directive 2005 / 36 / EC .
However , problems are occurring repeatedly , particularly in regions near national borders .
Many people in the region I come from work in Luxembourg , Belgium or France .
I receive numerous enquiries from citizens who cross into one of the neighbouring countries to work .
These enquiries often relate to the recognition of professional qualifications .
This situation must change .
Agreements have been reached by the professional organisations for specific professions , but this does not help in every case and all too often , citizens have to fight to have their qualifications recognised .
It becomes particularly difficult when a particular country does not have a specific profession or that profession is organised differently , for example , physiotherapists or people with a PhD in business administration .
At the same time , many areas are short-staffed .
Nurses or toolmakers , for example , must , in future , have better opportunities on our labour markets and , above all , the internal market must function effectively as far as work is concerned .
We need a transparent , simple and clear recognition procedure .
The cohesion policy after 2013 ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission by Danuta Maria Hübner , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development , on the cohesion policy after 2013 ( O-0121 / 2009 / rev. 1 - B7-0229 / 2009 )
author . - Mr President , three years ago , a major reform of European cohesion policy was introduced taking into account the unprecedented enlargement of the Union and new emerging challenges .
It was not by chance that , back in 2005 and 2006 , the top priorities for European cohesion policy were : the Lisbon strategy , innovation and competitiveness , climate change , energy security and efficiency , water efficiency , investment in new skills , attractiveness of territories for young people , and quality of life .
It is because we have understood that the mission of cohesion policy is to anticipate change , not to follow it , that we have put on the cohesion policy agenda for 2007-2013 all those priorities which we see today in the Commission 's Europe 2020 agenda .
That is why , more than two years ago , the Regions 2020 analytical report was published .
The purpose was to know what the cohesion policy priorities should be after 2013 .
Today , we are well prepared to face the future .
A year ago , the policy put all its assets at the disposal of the European Recovery Package , thereby also providing the essential link between the exit strategy from a real economic crisis , on the one hand , and long-term sustainable growth and structural transformation on the other .
But our oral question is about the future .
In years to come , the Europe we live in will be in need of strong collective action to respond to the expectations of its citizens , who are today informed citizens , fully aware of how much depends on choices made by policy makers .
Those expectations are confirmed by public opinion polls .
Jacques Delors once said that the European single market is about competition that stimulates , about cooperation that makes us stronger and about solidarity that makes us united .
European cohesion that makes the single market work is delivered by the European regional policy , which is today based exactly on this triple foundation : competitiveness , cooperation and solidarity .
For years , we have talked about the need to unlock , to mobilise , the development potential of all European regions and cities .
Experience and logic clearly show that this mobilisation turns out to be most effective and efficient if pursued through the direct engagement of subnational levels of European governments .
The European regional policy has already passed the subsidiarity test .
Subsidiarity works for Europe .
The 2006 reform of cohesion policy has made it a modern place-based policy founded on a balance between equity and efficiency , between bottom-up and top-down approaches , between common strategic European objectives and local flexibility .
There is a need to move further on those issues , to continue the reform of policy governance , but certain principles should not be abandoned .
The new treaty has cemented the new understanding of European subsidiarity already deeply rooted in the cohesion policy , that is , subsidiarity extended to local and regional levels of governance .
We can do more on it , especially with regard to the local level .
Those who suggest that cohesion policy can be limited to Brussels and national level either do not know the European reality , or do not understand that excluding local and regional Europe from the pursuit of common European objectives is economically at best unwise and politically dangerous .
Cohesion is a notion that excludes exclusion .
For political , economic , social and legitimacy reasons , cohesion policy must not be divisive : it should be a policy for all , as the internal market is , as the common currency is .
All elements of this integration triangle - common market , common currency , cohesion - are mutually strengthening and interdependent .
They are our common European public good .
We policy makers have raised the stakes by promising to deliver .
The challenges are well known ; the EU 2020 strategy has been opened to public consultations .
Development policy with clear targets and tools is needed .
Cohesion policy is a policy for development that engages all levels of European governance working in concert for European citizens .
To conclude , Europe needs new energy to take care of its future , to renew itself in an assertive way .
It is legitimate to ask where this energy could and should come from .
For me , the answer is clear .
Today , this energy should come from below .
Today this energy can be released through the direct engagement of local and regional levels of European governance in the pursuit of common European objectives .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the questions put forward are very pertinent .
They underline the importance you attach to cohesion policy as well as your dedication to keep the policy at the heart of European integration .
As regards your question on multi-level governance , multi-level governance has been recognised as a fundamental mechanism in delivering EU policy priorities .
The growing interdependence between different levels of government in the Union was stressed by the consultation paper launched by the Commission on the EU 2020 strategy .
Cohesion policy is a good example of multi-level governance .
It offers a governance system which values and exploits local and regional knowledge , combines it with strategic direction from the Community level , and coordinates interventions between levels of government .
The strengths of multi-level governance were also stressed by the Committee of the Regions in its White Paper of June 2009 , where it called on the Union to strengthen mechanisms of multi-level governance and pointed to the leverage effects generated by cohesion policy , which contributed to the implementation of other Community policies as well .
On your two questions concerning the eventual abandonment of Objective 2 and the eligibility of all European regions , in the period 2007-2013 , all regions are eligible for structural funds support .
Concerning the period post-2013 , there is no official Commission position at this stage .
As regards your third question on the weakening of the principle of additionality , additionality is one of the basic principles of cohesion policy .
It ensures that the structural funds do not replace the public or equivalent structural expenditure by a Member State .
Thus , it guarantees the genuine economic impact of EU interventions and provides cohesion policy with an important European added value .
As to your question on the regional dimension of cohesion policy after 2013 , the Lisbon Treaty maintains the objective of reducing disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least-favoured regions as part of the Union 's remit on economic , social and territorial cohesion under Article 174 .
In addition , Article 176 points out that the European Regional Development Fund is intended to help to redress the main regional imbalances in the Union through participation in the development and structural adjustment of regions whose development is lagging behind and in the conversion of declining industrial regions .
As regards your question on the involvement of regional and local levels of governance in the pursuit of European objectives within the framework of post-2013 cohesion policy , once again , I would like to draw your attention to the Commission 's consultation paper on the EU 2020 strategy , which looks for the active support of stakeholders , such as the social partners and civil society , and recognises that the take-up of the EU 2020 vision across all the regions of the EU will also be crucial to its success .
The Commission has not yet developed a position on what role cohesion policy will play in the delivery of the EU 2020 strategy .
But the cohesion policy has the capacity to mobilise regional or local actors across all boundaries in pursuit of European objectives .
In relation to your question whether the Commission intends to publish a White Paper on Territorial Cohesion , at the current stage , a separate White Paper on Territorial Cohesion is not foreseen .
Policy conclusions resulting from the public debate on the Green Paper on Territorial Cohesion will instead be incorporated in the comprehensive cohesion policy legislative package for post-2013 prepared in the context of the Fifth Cohesion Report which , according to the new treaty , is due for submission in 2010 .
On your question concerning the role of the European Social Fund in cohesion policy , in pursuing the objective of balanced and sustainable development , cohesion policy plays a crucial role in the delivery of European priorities .
This is also the case for the European Social Fund , which will continue to pursue its objectives as defined by Title XI of the new treaty .
Achieving social , economic and territorial cohesion requires appropriate policies and a mix of investments from various levels .
Human capital investments financed by the ESF form an essential component of this policy mix in the context of the global knowledge-based economy .
With regard to your question on the role of cohesion policy in relation to other EU policies , cohesion policy provides the EU with its largest source of investment in the real economy .
The December 2008 communication of the Commission on ' Cohesion policy : investing in real economy ' , underlined the importance of the policy for focusing on the EU Lisbon Agenda delivery , investing in people , business , research and innovation , priority infrastructures and energy .
The Commission 's current focus is on ensuring that the implementation of the planned investments can be delivered in partnership with national and regional authorities as effectively as possible .
This effort involves close cooperation between relevant Commission services and between the Commission and relevant regional and local authorities .
A practical example of cooperation between the Commission services is the ' Practical Guide to EU funding opportunities for research and innovation ' published in 2007 , which was conceived to help potential beneficiaries to find their way through the three funding Community instruments and provides policy makers with advice on coordinated access to those instruments .
As far as the ESF is concerned , the close alignment of its priorities with the Employment Guidelines provides for a direct link between EU employment policy priorities and EU financial support .
Complementarity also exists between actions supported by the cohesion policy and by the rural development policy as clearly set out in the Community Strategic Guidelines of both policies .
I hope that I have responded to some of your questions and I look forward to an interesting debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , today 's debate primarily concerns the substantive assessment of the cohesion policy and the way ahead for this policy .
Of course , the European Parliament wants a financial mid-term review .
The cohesion policy and the use of the funds now and in this subsequent period up to 2020 forms a key part of this .
However , much to our surprise , we found absolutely no mention of a substantive assessment in the ' non-paper ' preparatory to the mid-term review .
I should like to make clear , as the first speaker from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , that the new Commission must present the European Parliament with a substantive assessment rather than a caricature of regional policy .
Commission President Barroso 's vision document EU 2020 envisages growth and a knowledge-based economy , equipping and training , competition and a green economy .
Well , then , regional policy now and in the future constitutes the European integration framework for the realisation of these objectives .
Look at energy transition , climate change and the Lisbon Strategy : these are all essential elements for regions and cities .
As far as the PPE Group is concerned , we wish to focus the cohesion policy rather more on the key elements of this EU 2020 strategy , whilst retaining solidarity among all the regions and also Objective 2 , about which the Commissioner spoke so vaguely just now .
The promotion of competition in the rich regions forms part of the comprehensive assessment .
Splitting budgets , increasing the sectoral fragmentation of funds at European level within the framework of such a mid-term review , serves no purpose whatsoever and is the wrong approach to take .
In the present times of crisis , we are seeing how important regional funds are to recovery .
These are being disbursed faster and are being fully utilised : in 2009 , virtually 100 % has been mobilised for innovation and new objectives in my region , the South Netherlands region .
In early 2010 , I myself shall be issuing a report on the synergy between regional funds and research and development .
I should like to finish off with a question .
Commissioner , you say you will not be presenting a White Paper on Territorial Cohesion , yet it is Parliament that will be dealing with this by means of the ordinary legislative procedure and ensuring that these things are laid down in the new regulations .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would have liked to see a more exciting introduction to this topic , because I believe that the European cohesion policy must change after 2013 .
We are faced with quite different challenges than was the case 10 or 15 years ago .
The focus for my group is on the fact that solidarity between the regions is not negotiable .
On the one hand , this means that all the regions must have the opportunity to participate in the European Union cohesion policy and , on the other hand , it also means that we must oppose any attempt to renationalise the cohesion policy .
We need a European approach which allows citizens to identify with the European Union .
For us , there is no question that we also need to change .
In the next few years , the spotlight will be on a discussion about prioritising the areas which will receive funding from the European cohesion policy .
In future , we will not be able to subsidise everyone with European money .
We must focus on establishing effective infrastructures , in particular , in the new Member States , and on developing research and innovation .
Of course , we must also bear in mind that in future , the European cohesion policy will have to respond appropriately to challenges such as climate change , demographic change and globalisation .
We also need to concentrate on urban development .
This is not because I want to neglect rural areas , but because we know that 80 % of citizens live in towns , cities and urban hinterlands and because rural development unfortunately does not form part of the cohesion policy at the moment , but is covered by agriculture policy .
Our approach is to create stronger networks .
I do not yet know whether this will work , but we must rise to the challenge .
Importantly , support for people themselves also forms part of the cohesion policy and this is why I regret the fact that the Commissioner 's response was slightly evasive .
For us , this means primarily education , training and qualifications for everyone from small children right through to the elderly .
Life-long learning is an important concept .
However , this also means that the European Social Fund ( ESF ) must continue to be integrated with the cohesion policy .
There must be no thoughts of separating the ESF from the cohesion policy .
Cross-border cooperation is very important to us .
We want to strengthen this cooperation at the same time as simplifying the bureaucracy involved .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the reform of the Structural Funds is of fundamental importance in terms of the opportunity for the European Union to have financial instruments which are suitable for the economic situation , along with the relevant natural and human resources .
We are faced with a tough task in forecasting and devising a cohesion policy which will promote citizens ' long-term prosperity .
This policy was and still is one of the visible quantifiable indicators of European solidarity .
However , the disparities between some regions are fairly extreme and we must not ignore this fact .
What is alarming is that trends are being observed indicating that these disparities are growing , which may increase inequality and lead to isolation .
As a representative of one of the poorest Member States in the European Union , I urge that one of the focuses of the cohesion policy will be cohesion between low-income Member States .
I note that we are not looking at the Structural Funds as a panacea .
It is clear to us that we need to join efforts and increase our pace towards achieving the European Union 's basic standards .
We should also warn of the possibility that the fact that countries are moving at different speeds may lead , at a suitable moment , to an internal restructuring of the European Union .
Above all , we must set criteria , simplified terms and an equal chance of acquiring resources from the EU funds .
Only after this should a clause be added for reducing the support for countries which fail to make any progress .
I feel it is appropriate , if some countries encounter difficulties while acting on their own , to have them included in areas and problems with a significantly transnational dimension .
As a result , European resources will also be allocated to richer countries and their regions with a lower GDP .
Ultimately , the results of the cohesion policy must also be measured in terms of employment generated .
This is also an indicator of how it integrates with other policies and ensures added value .
Mr President , Commissioner , not much has been said about the significance of the European cohesion policy in Europe .
It lies at the centre of the European Union , as it is the policy which holds the EU together at its heart .
It is a symbol of solidarity and of overcoming national egoism .
It is an instrument for all the regions .
This is why the European Parliament is so concerned that this solidarity mechanism may simply be abolished behind our backs .
It does not say much for good governance when the Commission secretly issues strategic documents , instead of holding an open debate about how we can continue with the solidarity mechanism in the light of the major challenges which face us , such as climate change and demographic change , given the tight budgetary constraints .
We need reform , but it must result in genuine change .
It must bring about sustainable development in the regions .
It must provide the regions with support for their projects and not consist of top-down policy , in the way that this earmarking mechanism currently does .
Instead , it must develop a bottom-up process in close partnership with all the players in the regions .
We are familiar with this process .
We already have the LEADER method for the development of rural areas .
This is an excellent method for promoting sustainable development and getting everyone involved in order to ensure a very high level of local acceptance .
However , we need a Commission which is brave enough to say yes to the solidarity mechanism and yes to the regions deciding on their own development , rather than this being the responsibility of national governments .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the current cohesion policy is a living organism .
As Europe changes , the position of individual states and groups changes in respect of this policy .
Unfortunately , more questions than answers have emerged in discussions over the future of cohesion policy after 2014 .
Will cohesion policy continue to serve mainly the least developed regions of the Union ?
Will we have the opportunity to construct transport and technical infrastructure in the coming period ?
Will we manage to improve quality of life and make savings ?
Will we manage to reduce the bureaucracy and excessive administration connected with the drawing of EU funding ?
We will be looking for consensual answers to these and other questions in the very near future .
From the perspective of future developments , I personally consider it vital firstly to align the role of local authorities correctly in managing European funds and secondly , to target European funds at supporting the use of modern technologies .
It is precisely these two areas that are combined in the so-called Smart Cities initiative , which offers an opportunity to revitalise municipal authorities and , at the same time , to offer the business sector the opportunity in a period of economic crisis to apply modern systems and intelligent technologies and to generate economic growth .
This is unquestionably a reason for focusing strategic investments on this area not only at a local authority level but also at a Member State and even EU level .
Intelligent transport systems that can liberate cities from transport chaos , supportive navigation mechanisms that can increase the attractiveness of tourism in cities , and teleassistance systems enabling senior citizens to remain longer in their own homes are all types of investment that should be given the green light .
As a result of the economic crisis , our debate on the future of the cohesion policy has become even more urgent than it ever was in the past .
Today , we must think twice before deciding where to direct European funds .
Mr President , the European Union 's cohesion policy has not only failed to reduce regional and social inequalities , but it has also helped to exacerbate them .
The values given in statistics are often fictitious , as the European Union itself admits , which is why it created the transitional support regime for a series of regions , three of which are in my country , Greece .
The rule of unequal development in the capitalist system is implacable , especially in times of crisis , during which contrasts are even more marked .
Unfortunately , forecasts for 2013 are even worse for the workers , especially in less developed areas .
The European Union 's cohesion policy tries to gloss over this anti-grassroots policy , to buy people off , to disorientate the workers and , more importantly , to secure the profitability of capital .
The aim of temporarily ironing out the contrasts between sections of the plutocracy , misleadingly referred to as ' solidarity ' , is now being replaced by the rule of competition and the free market .
These elements also exist in the Lisbon Strategy and the EU strategy for 2020 .
It calls for new forms of regional and local governance , as proposed in Greece by the PASOK and New Democracy parties , extended and more direct intervention by the European Union in regional bodies and differentiated territorial cooperation which will also cross national borders .
We call on the workers to reject this policy .
Finally , I should like to take advantage of my speaking time to call on you , Mr President , to exert your influence in obtaining satisfaction in the European Parliament of the just demands of the workers , who are taking to the streets .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , regarding post-2013 cohesion policy , a leaked draft budgetary document entitled ' A Reform Agenda for a Global Europe ' reveal that EU funding from 2013 onwards could change entirely to a nationally coordinated rather than regionally allocated distribution .
The draft abandons regional and local level control in multi-level governance , overturning the shared management principle .
Instead , a sectoral approach to the new budget is adopted rather than operating independently within current structures .
The proposal to limit the policy to national level would lead to qualifying Member States governing redistribution .
Not only does this mean that net contributors will lose further return funding , but those Member States expected to join the European Union under future expansion would enter membership under cohesion funding likely to remain for the forthcoming budgetary duration .
As a result , those countries who currently shoulder a large proportion of the Union 's financial burden , like the UK , will discover they must finance an ever-increasing pool of Member States qualifying for support .
Even fewer will have to carry even more , with a possible loss of the rebate for the UK .
With more countries queuing up to join the EU , I am concerned Wales will see much needed support go to newer Member States .
It is no surprise that some of Europe 's richest countries like Norway and Switzerland have given the European Union a wide berth , knowing that they would be paying to fund their poorer neighbours .
But Wales cannot afford to pay if nothing is paid back out .
The move reinforces the European Union 's increasing ambition to become further integrated , centralised and federal , yet abandons the regional dimension of cohesion policy which underpins the European Union 's pledge to support territorial cohesion and deliver benefits to all members .
Instead the EU , like a wolf in sheep 's clothing , is covertly abandoning cooperation and compromise in favour of consolidation .
Whereas the people of Europe were told the Union - on the grounds that it enhanced trade links - strengthened agriculture ties and promoted equality , the machinations of an increasing bureaucratic global Europe see the focus on farming and regional development decrease in favour of an unwanted ambitious global strategy , including increased emigration to countries like the UK .
Larger shares of the EU budget will need to be devoted to such an agenda at the expense of regions such as Wales .
The last payments to projects under the 2007-2013 EU structural funds programmes will be made in 2015 .
There is uncertainty over what , if any , subsequent EU funding will be available to Wales in future funding rounds .
The implication that cohesion might disappear entirely from richer nations with no mention at all of transitional funding would further disenfranchise the people of the UK .
The disproportionate membership bill would be better steered towards funding economic development through self-sufficiency determined by the UK itself .
The EU budget review set to be published in the spring will likely see every government in Europe declare the necessity for increased public sector borrowing .
It seems increasingly likely that the level of funding available to Wales will reduce substantially .
The consequences will include reductions in programme budgets , less investment in the wider economy in Wales , and broad-reaching loss of jobs connected to programme management and project delivery .
Rather than having any sort of beneficial effect on my constituents , the EU will serve a glancing blow to the people of Wales if they decide to pull the rug from under our feet .
The likely result of the reduction in funding to Wales and the UK will have a major impact on our country as a whole which will affect the farming sector as well .
It now must be time that the people of Wales and the UK have a referendum on its relations with the European Union so the people can decide if they want to be governed by Westminster or Brussels .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us just imagine for a moment the European regions without the European regional policy .
Many towns and rural regions would lack decisive incentives for structural change .
The border regions with their problems of cross-border workers and cross-border infrastructure would simply be neglected .
Social policy would no longer be able to benefit from European contributions to education and employment policy .
Medium-sized companies would be prevented from taking part successfully in international networks .
Without European regional policy , the communities in the regions would no longer be visible .
For this reason , we are very annoyed by the signals coming from the Commission which include proposals for social programmes without the support of structural funding .
This would turn the Commission into a social monopoly without the regions or would lead to calls for subsidy policy only for the weakest in our society .
This , in turn , would mean that we would completely lose sight of the European context and we would return to the age of renationalisation .
Whether or not the Commission has now made these documents public , the European Parliament will not lend its support to the move that they describe to a regional policy without the regions .
This does not mean that we are closed to the idea of reform .
New challenges relating to the environment , to energy policy or to demographic change must be integrated into our existing subsidy structures .
I am also in favour of making it easier to measure the European contribution to the regions .
We must also impose stricter sanctions on the Member States which consistently fail to demonstrate that they are managing the funds properly .
More regional cofinancing , more loans , more transparency and more efficiency : these are the types of proposals we would like to see for the reform of the cohesion policy .
We will support proposals of this kind , but we will fight every attempt to destroy regional policy .
Reforms yes , renationalisation no !
( EL ) Mr President , I agree with the members who have spoken so far and I , too , should like to point out that we cannot accept a post-2013 cohesion policy which , firstly , will distinguish between the regions of the Europe with proposals such as abolishing Objective 2 ( competitiveness ) ; secondly , will include the renationalisation of policies ; and , thirdly , will exclude local authorities from the programming and implementation of Community policies .
On the contrary , we envision a post-2013 cohesion policy , a period in which there will still be a common European policy applied to all regions of the European Union , that will continue to have adequate funds to achieve its objective and will have simplified application rules so that it acquires even greater added value .
I am concerned about the contents of the document for the 2020 strategy , because there is no reference to cohesion policy , which is the most appropriate tool for achieving the Lisbon objectives .
In fact , a large part of cohesion policy is already serving these objectives and will prove its added value .
Also , important proof of its significance is that cohesion policy has spearheaded the European Economic Recovery Plan .
There is one development policy , one solidarity policy , one policy for every European citizen regardless of the region of the European Union where they are living .
Unfortunately , however , in the European Commission , they forget this or they appear to ignore it and they process proposals that change the principles and form of cohesion policy .
However , you can be sure that we shall take every opportunity to remind them .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , funding for the regions and structural funding form part of our practical economic policy and make Europe widely visible .
In local authority areas , towns and municipalities in the regions , different players are working closely together .
For this reason , we must retain this integrated approach for the entire European Union .
I call on the Commission to focus much more closely on small and medium-sized enterprises and to involve the local authority areas , the towns and the municipalities much more in the future cohesion policy .
We will definitely need to invest in the infrastructure in future , but most importantly , we must ensure that innovation and technology transfer are guaranteed for small and medium-sized enterprises .
In future , we should also enable jobs to be subsidised .
These are the crucial issues in choosing a new direction for the structural and cohesion policy in the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , as far as the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance is concerned , cohesion policy is at the heart of one of the most fundamental policies of the European Union : solidarity .
Europe becomes stronger whenever European solidarity is shown .
This is a fundamental issue for us .
The European Commission must , in our view , integrate the following principles .
Firstly , since territorial cohesion is a political priority , it should therefore also be a budgetary priority .
Secondly , the region is the appropriate level of partnership for a regional development policy .
Renationalising this policy would be unacceptable for us .
Thirdly , cohesion must also be used to reduce the most serious economic and social disparities within a territory for the benefit of deprived urban areas or rural areas that are in difficulty or which receive very few services on account of structural handicaps , as is the case with islands , for example .
Lastly , the eligibility of all EU regions to benefit from cohesion policy must be judged on an individual basis , of course , according to their level of wealth , but the European Union must be able to make its contribution whenever cohesion policies are at stake .
( DE ) Mr President , this is a central debate about the character of the European Union .
The choice is between the market and social policy .
The Commission 's current ideas about the future of the cohesion policy are unacceptable .
The structural funds must be strengthened and not weakened .
Europe must do more and not less to overcome economic and social differences in development .
I would like to say quite openly that the renationalisation even of parts of the current cohesion policy would have a serious impact on disadvantaged regions , including those in Germany and , in particular , eastern Germany .
After the last phase of enlargement of the European Union , the differences between the regions in the Union have increased .
In addition , it is important to me that , in particular , socio-economic requirements in the regions which are just above the eligibility threshold of 75 % of the EU average GDP per head are recognised .
The sudden removal of subsidies after 2013 would be devastating for these regions .
Of course , it is extremely important for specific subsidies for towns to be increased by the European Union , as this is where the major potential for the economy and finance lies , because the towns have been particularly hard hit by the crisis .
I would like to say one last word about the border regions .
As a Member of Parliament from eastern Germany , I know that we need to invest and achieve a great deal there .
I am very concerned that the Commission will fail us in this respect .
( DE ) Mr President , you will probably have heard in the meantime that there is serious consternation and disquiet among the members of the Committee on Regional Development , because a so-called secret document from the Commission has been circulating since October .
This document contains the draft of a budget reform for the period 2013-2020 which represents a U-turn in budget policy .
The original regional focus of the budget has been replaced by a sectoral approach .
The new draft represents a huge restriction on the principles of subsidiarity and multi-level governance , which is in contradiction to the Lisbon strategy .
In specific terms , the draft includes plans to abolish Objective 2 , in other words , competitiveness and employment policy .
As there are Objective 2 regions in every Member State , this would , of course , sadly affect two thirds of all the EU regions .
This unfortunate proposal is justified on the basis that the difference between new - or in other words , future - Member States and Western Europe at a national level is so great that a new budget policy is needed .
In the light of the financial crisis , this is said to be a way of stimulating the economy .
It seems obvious to me that this proposal is anticipating the possible accession of Turkey .
We know that increased funding would be needed and this is a way of planning to ensure that the huge amounts of money required for the accession will be available .
However , I would like to say quite clearly that at a regional level , the success of the cohesion policy lies in its proximity to local economic problems .
As a result , money will be invested sensibly and efficiently , as it has been until now .
If the regional component is not included , it will not be possible to bring an end to the economic crisis .
I was not convinced by Mr Barroso 's answer to Mrs Hübner 's open letter , which indicated her concern , and , therefore , I expect to see a concrete statement soon .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , our group clearly supports a strong and well-financed cohesion policy that can promote the convergence of Europe 's regions .
Indeed , we believe that , to be effective , this policy must be reformed and enhanced .
We , Parliament and the European Commission , must design this policy together , with maximum transparency .
I welcome the creation , by Parliament 's Committee on Regional Development , of a working group on the future of cohesion policy .
Consultation on the post-2013 budget and the future objectives of this policy must involve all the actors concerned : the Member States , the regions , the European Commission and Parliament .
It is inconceivable to weaken , or indeed abolish , the regional and local levels that give full meaning to this policy .
Where financing in particular is concerned , we are today faced with great uncertainty regarding the future of this cohesion policy .
The expiry date of the current financial framework is uncertain , as is the extent of the reform of the financial perspective .
The importance of maintaining stability in the financing of this policy must be remembered .
It is also crucial to reject any idea of renationalising cohesion policy , since this would deprive the regions of the choice of how to share out the Structural Funds and would destroy the regional dimension of this policy .
We expect an unmistakably proactive attitude from the Commission concerning the preparation of a White Paper on Territorial Cohesion , Commissioner .
With regard to the distribution of these funds , we do not want egalitarianism but financial equity , and we want this in conjunction with a form of harmonious development that is based on findings and on situations that vary according to territory .
Cohesion policy must not just focus on the most impoverished regions ; it must be aimed at all of Europe 's regions , including those overseas .
It is vitally important for Parliament to have clearly identified local contact points .
That is the price - the only price - at which the European Structural Funds will be distributed fairly and effectively .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by sending a greeting to all the social organisations present in Copenhagen , hoping for a positive outcome for the future of the planet and for the future of global cohesion .
We must defend cohesion policy as a Community policy that is a bulwark against attempts at renationalisation .
This is necessary not only because of its direct impact on the development of cohesion across our regions and Member States , but also because of its added value in terms of strategic planning , financial stability and the visibility of the European project .
At the same time , it is important to bear in mind the vital role the regions play and must play in cohesion policy .
Decentralised management and good governance at various levels are crucial to ensuring the success of regional development policy .
The establishment of transition mechanisms providing for a smooth transition in those regions and countries where intervention is gradually being reduced within the framework of the so-called convergence objective and the Cohesion Fund is another matter of concern to me .
So , too , is the development of European regions that have to cope with natural difficulties , including the peculiarities of border regions .
( PT ) Mr President , we have been extremely concerned to witness all the developments surrounding the reform of the budget , particularly in relation to the structural and cohesion policy .
In a crisis marked by huge social inequalities and regional asymmetries , the structural and cohesion policy is a basic factor for effective economic and social cohesion .
That means maintaining tight objectives in this area and not attempting to nationalise the costs of Community policies in either agriculture or fisheries , which would harm less developed countries and regions as well as outermost regions .
There are various signs , however , that moves are afoot to subvert the cohesion concept even further , either by trying to make it include and finance all kinds of actions and actors that have no connection with cohesion objectives - especially the European Union 's strategy for 2020 and climate change policy - or by changing eligibility and management criteria .
This debate on the cohesion policy after 2013 is therefore much needed .
We look forward to obtaining clear responses in support of a genuine economic and social cohesion policy .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we urgently need a debate on the Community budget and how to improve its sustainability and transparency in future .
The post-2013 financial framework must be built on the basis of solidarity and territorial cohesion .
These are crucial values for regions like Madeira , which face permanent difficulties and therefore require permanent support .
I should like to share with you a few ideas that I think should always be present when we think about and develop our cohesion policy .
On a number of occasions , the Commission has mentioned certain aspects that I believe are essential , such as the need for this policy to be more flexible , simpler , more efficient and more results-oriented in its definition and implementation .
There are , however , issues that cause me some concern , particularly with regard to the needs of the outermost regions .
I should like to make three brief remarks in this respect .
Firstly , the current regional approach should prevail over alternative criteria , such as added-value sectors .
Such a change could jeopardise Objective 2 , which currently benefits roughly two thirds of the European regions , as well as being potentially counterproductive in regions with highly specific economic profiles and competitive advantages .
Secondly , I believe it is vital to maintain the proximity criterion in the cohesion policy .
Priority should still be given to allocating and managing the Structural Funds from a regional standpoint and not from a national or even a centralised European one .
For my third and final point , but one that is no less important , I should like to highlight Article 349 of the Treaty of Lisbon , which provides for special treatment for the outermost regions with regard to access to structural funds , precisely because of their economic and social situation compounded by permanent and unique constraints and characteristics , which reveal themselves in their constant difficulties and therefore require the permanent aid that is sought .
( PL ) Mr President , the cohesion policy is , today , contributing to the development of road and rail infrastructure , principally in the new Member States .
Thanks to the policy , many new jobs have been created , and more will doubtless be created in the next few years .
Investments related to environment protection are also extremely important .
When evaluating the policy and its effectiveness to date , it is worth answering a basic question : what will happen after 2013 ?
The European Parliament should say clearly that there is no consensus on rationalisation of the cohesion policy .
After 2013 , as well as its traditional activities and mechanisms , the cohesion policy should support research , science , development , innovativeness , job creation and the fight with global warming .
The cohesion policy should also include rural areas to a greater degree .
It is important that realisation of the cohesion policy be based on regions and macroregions .
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to speak briefly about three matters : equality of rights and status , secrecy and , last but not least , the importance of rural development .
Twenty years after the collapse of the Berlin Wall and 20 years after our fellow Member , László Tőkés , broke through the wall of silence at the start of the Romanian revolution in Temesvár ( Timişoara ) in Transylvania , it has been said more than once that in the 21st century , we no longer have old and new Member States in the European Union , but a single European Union .
I fully agree with this statement , which is , of course , very general , but I feel it is important that it does not only appear as part of token decisions , but also features in the everyday application of the cohesion policy , one of the European Union 's most important common policies .
If the European Union 's Member States enjoy equal rights and status , it is inconceivable that the cohesion policy should be reformed in such a way that the European Union Member States who joined in 2004 and 2007 lose out in the new cohesion policy .
Such a reform is simply unimaginable .
My second point is about secrecy .
It is a ridiculous state of affairs where the European Commission either pronounces some meaningless statements on the cohesion policy 's future or says absolutely nothing at all on the subject .
As an MEP and a member of the relevant European Parliament committee , I would expect the European Commission to adopt a clear , unambiguous position on these matters .
Last but not least , I want to talk about rural development .
I firmly believe that rural development must continue to be a crucial aspect of the cohesion policy .
Suitable resources need to be allocated to rural development policy .
Based on the technical position adopted by the European Council of Municipalities and Regions , I think it is important for us to think through the possibility of integrating rural development policy with the cohesion policy after 2013 .
( PT ) The cohesion policy is the European Union 's main instrument for ensuring that all European citizens have an equal chance of success wherever they live .
It contributes decisively to creating a European sense of belonging and is one of the most successful and effective European development policies .
Commissioner , I cannot hide my concern at the Commission 's now famous ' Non-Paper ' and its proposals .
We do not accept the renationalisation of the cohesion policy , which would , in practice , come to an end if its effectiveness depended on each Member State 's wealth .
I sincerely hope that the Commission will abandon that path once and for all .
As you are aware , Commissioner , the new Article 349 of the Treaty establishes the need for European policies to be adjusted to the special characteristics of the outermost regions , particularly to mitigate their handicaps , but also to make good use of their potential .
What ideas can you give us on the future strategy for the outermost regions that the Commission is to publish during 2010 ?
Mr President , like my colleagues , I , too , have been concerned by some of the trends outlined in the internal document which , in the grand old scheme of things , was leaked recently .
The area that is causing me most concern is the suggestion to deprioritise the competitiveness objectives .
These competitiveness objectives have been vital in creating rural and regional development - particularly the technology parks , which have helped to drive the smart economy and will be needed more so into the future .
They have also helped with cohesion within , as well as across , regions .
I think it is very important to realise that there are huge poverty gaps within regions .
This is not always recognised , and I think in particular the criterion of basing everything on national GDP is an erroneous measurement .
It should be more on purchasing power , and certainly the purchasing power within some regions is far lower than the national average .
I hope these things will be addressed in the forthcoming White Paper , as well as the opportunities that exist in synergies between research , innovation and regional development .
Like my colleague , I , too , would be concerned about rural development policy - albeit not as part of the cohesion policy , more in line with the CAP - but , at the same time , it is absolutely vital that it is not squeezed in any future proposals because rural development , and particularly the family farm , is vital for the social infrastructure of society .
Finally , I just want to say also that more needs to be done in combating fraud .
I know there have been improvements in recent years , but we must ensure that the money which is given by the EU goes to where it is supposed to go , so that we can have better opportunities for people right across the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , Podkarpacie - the region I represent - is a region of wonderful , ambitious , hard-working people , a place where many energetic businesses operate .
New initiatives are appearing , such as Aviation Valley , but at the same time , Podkarpacie is one of the most poorly developed areas in the European Union .
Our problems are not the result of a lack of willingness , but of structural and infrastructural limitations , which , with the help of a variety of programmes , we are trying to eliminate .
I would like to stress that , as part of our efforts , we are not asking for charity , but for support for our initiatives .
We , too , want the competitiveness of the European economy to rise , and we want solutions which will help protect our climate .
However , we also want the change in priority of financing to be gradual , not sudden , because that would mean leaving the weakest regions to look after themselves .
It is very important that the cohesion policy be realised by the regions , because such a solution brings the best effects .
I would also like to note that the cohesion policy carries with it a very important message for the citizens .
It shows that Europe is united and that it is worth participating in this exceptional project .
( DE ) Mr President , the regional structural funding is an important tool for European integration and the Objective 2 funding in particular has , in the past , been seen as an engine for local structural and economic development by the people in many regions .
It is an important means of managing structural change in the regions and in local authority areas .
This allows citizens to experience Europe at first hand , because the funding has a local impact .
However , we need simpler , clearer and more transparent structures and better controls in the cohesion funds , so that the money is used sustainably and efficiently .
Cohesion , or the convergence of social and economic development , is a major objective of the EU and , therefore , it is important that this instrument is strengthened rather than weakened in future .
The cohesion policy in Europe needs more clarity , more transparency and more efficiency .
The individual Member States must also take more responsibility in this area .
This is why it is important to retain the system of additionality in funding .
We do not want structural funding to be renationalised .
Therefore , I would like to ask the Commission to meet these requirements in the funding criteria for 2013 .
Mr President , Wales is probably the most positively European area in the UK , and the reason for that is that every community , almost every individual and many organisations benefit from European funding , formerly Objective 1 and now convergence funding .
Therefore , if the proposals suggested by the Commission are brought forward , I believe it would have huge political consequences in areas like Wales .
It would also , of course , have huge economic , financial and social consequences for those regions .
Therefore , I think it is absolutely vital that all Members of this Parliament urge the Commission to bring forward proposals which are acceptable to us - and by that I mean proposals which would allow every region across Europe that qualifies , to access structural funds - and also to ensure that those areas ceasing to be eligible for convergence funding after 2013 also have some transitional status in the future .
So , Mr Gollnisch , you have finally arrived .
I am going to give you the floor , but you have just one minute .
( FR ) Mr President , I have , in any case , listened very carefully to all of my fellow Members ' speeches .
I think that two main points have come out of these speeches .
The first is the secrecy surrounding the Commission 's mysterious ' non-document ' , and that is why we are eagerly awaiting the Commission 's explanations .
The second is this rather strange attitude whereby territorial cohesion policy is apparently being redefined on the basis of completely new priorities , which seem to have very little in common with cohesion itself .
I am thinking in particular of the issue of foreign policy , which we are well aware is a priority for the High Representative , but which is obviously much less of a priority in this area .
As for the common agricultural policy , unfortunately , it has already been sacrificed to a great extent to market forces .
Therefore , we believe that it would be extremely helpful if the Commission could give us a much clearer idea of what its objectives are from now on .
Lastly , global warming does not seem to me to come under cohesion policy .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I share the concerns of many of my fellow Members .
I strongly believe that GDP returning to barely positive growth rates such as those forecast for 2010 will not mark the end of the economic crisis we are experiencing .
We will only be able to consider it actually over when employment has returned to pre-crisis levels .
The most optimistic estimates put this time at around 2010 .
In this context , it is necessary to implement an investment policy and it is vital in strategic terms that Objective 2 , or something similar , is maintained , since it represents an effective instrument for helping our regions overcome the crisis .
Maintaining Objective 2 is in the interests of Italy and of many other European countries , since it fulfils an essential need : development of lagging regions and strengthening of the competitiveness of the most developed regions .
In view of these arguments , Commissioner , Mr President , do you not think that your abandonment is extremely harmful for the regions of Italy , Europe and the Mediterranean and also for other countries ?
( DE ) Mr President , all or at least the majority of the speakers are talking about the European social model , but this is not reflected sufficiently in the EU budget or in the cohesion policy .
Therefore , I would like to see an independent European Social Fund ( ESF ) which is separate from the European structural policy .
More funding should be allocated to the ESF and it should become more flexible .
It should also be possible to increase the funding available during the seven-year finance period .
By separating the social fund from structural policy , it will be possible to make sufficient funding available to those regions which are not economically underdeveloped and have therefore largely been ignored by EU structural fund policy .
The European Social Fund should therefore be used more effectively to combat problems on the labour market , such as high levels of unemployment , low employment rates for women , large numbers of early school leavers and low levels of further education .
( EL ) Mr President , I consider that our parliamentary committee took a very important decision for today 's debate , which is proving to be extremely interesting , with so many issues and very important dimensions being raised which relate not only to an effective post-2013 cohesion policy , but also to the character of the European Union .
I should like to point out that this debate , this concern , is being formulated at a very strange time for the European Union .
On the one hand , we have a positive step towards integration with the Treaty of Lisbon and , on the other , we are still experiencing the consequences of an unprecedented international financial crisis in which we all understood how important the solidarity of the European Union is in supporting the internal market and cohesion .
I should like to ask the European Commission about two issues which are worrying the European Parliament , on which I share my fellow members ' concern .
Firstly , is there any intention in your plans for innovative proposals , which we are happy to accept , of renationalising Community cohesion policy and , secondly , what is to happen with Objective 2 , because this is actually what is needed for the competitiveness , not only of certain areas , but ultimately of the entire European market .
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that the job of Parliament and of the European Union is to establish the basic conditions to allow people from all the Member States to have the best possible quality of life in the regions in which they live .
However , these conditions vary widely throughout Europe .
This is why we need a strong and adequately funded cohesion policy .
We must strongly reject any proposals that involve leaving our chosen path and we have heard today that some have been made .
We do not need renationalisation .
We need funding instruments for all the European regions , including those which are disadvantaged and those which already have high levels of development .
We must not put at risk what has already been achieved .
We need a transparent subsidy system which allows for easy access to funding , but also ensures that the money is used correctly and efficiently .
We must think on a European level , but act on a regional level .
( RO ) I find this debate on the future of the cohesion policy after 2013 particularly useful .
Nowadays , especially during this crisis , the differences between the levels of development in Europe 's various regions are considerable and are continuing to grow .
Local regions in Europe need to continue with the cohesion policy in order to achieve the proposed objectives .
The disparities between the different regions must be reduced at a faster pace , without delay .
The involvement of the regional and local levels of governance must definitely grow , but without these regions necessarily feeling that they are gradually being forgotten and abandoned .
Many countries in the European Union base their development efforts and national economic policy on the cohesion policy objectives as well .
My country , Romania , also thinks that it would be particularly useful to continue with the current cohesion policy after 2013 as well , combining efforts and national funds with those offered by the Structural Funds and finances at regional level .
( EL ) Mr President , I agree that regional policy is the lever for better cohesion and solidarity in the Community .
The present international economic crisis has bared its teeth .
It has caused numerous inequalities and pressures , especially among vulnerable groups .
It has increased unemployment , inequalities and social upheaval at national and regional level .
However , the present global economic crisis is also a challenge .
Community solidarity urgently needs to be strengthened in order to achieve a proper , integrated European regional cohesion policy which will set high priorities and safeguard proper infrastructures and closer cross-border cooperation through exchanges of best practices .
We say ' no ' to discrimination , ' no ' to renationalisation , ' no ' to bureaucracy , ' no ' to a lack of transparency , ' no ' to the secret disposal of funds and the abolition of Objective 2 , which will harm Southern Europe and the Mediterranean .
We say ' yes ' to the fair distribution of Community funds , to the participation of local authorities , to the strengthening of small and medium-sized enterprises , to proper reform , which must be carried out so that there is proper funding of actions in keeping with the objectives of Europe for 2010 .
Finally , we say ' yes ' to special treatment for remote areas , especially in Southern Europe and the Mediterranean .
Mr President , the rise of multi-level governance has resulted in an increasing need for coordinating mechanisms and platforms , and local authorities often find themselves having to address social disparities caused by developments of policies over which they have no control and little influence .
Moreover , it is very difficult to estimate the long-term effects of projects financed by European funds and the impact of programmes which are implemented at the same time .
I would like to know how the European Commission intends to support the efforts of local authorities to generate an integrated and sustainable development strategy based on the needs of the communities and taking into account the needs which could be influenced by external causes .
What instruments will be developed by the European Commission for local authorities ?
( PL ) Mr President , cohesion policy is a pillar of development policy .
It is , indeed , this policy which contributes most to strengthening the identity of regions and local society .
In my opinion , we go to two extremes here .
Some would like to put a bit too much into the policy , while others want to restrict it too much .
Surely , the most important objective of the policy is sustainable development in a variety of areas .
Cohesion policy must be the same for both urban and rural areas .
Let us remember that the Union , after such a major enlargement , is greatly differentiated .
Ensuring equal opportunities for development is an important task .
Contemporary challenges , which we have to face up to at the same time , are the fight against the economic crisis , the unfavourable demographic trend and , finally , climate change .
One thing is certain : there is a need to continue the cohesion policy and to adapt it to the present challenges .
( RO ) I would like to add to what my fellow Member said by saying that when we talk about intelligent cities , it is important for us to invest more in energy efficiency in residential buildings .
90 % of the buildings which will exist in 2020 already exist now .
This is why I am asking for the future cohesion policy to increase the European Regional Development Fund allocation so that it can be used by Member States to improve energy efficiency in buildings , especially homes .
I also think that we need to invest more in public transport to develop urban mobility .
( EL ) Mr President , my fellow Members have covered the basic issues of today 's debate .
I should just like to highlight two issues .
Firstly , it is unacceptable for the preconditions to be met and for the facility to exist for taking advantage of our cohesion policies and programmes and for this to ultimately be unfeasible for operational and , more importantly , bureaucratic reasons .
Therefore , the more we simplify our procedures and policies , the closer we shall be to what we are striving for , namely cohesion in Europe .
Secondly , we have said that we are , in any case , coming out of the economic crisis which has affected the whole of Europe and the entire world at the moment .
If we want to be optimistic , we obviously have to strengthen the areas with the greatest need and , more importantly , if I may say so - and I should like a reply from the Commission here - the social groups in greatest need of support .
I am referring here , above all , to young people .
This is our basic position and that of our political group on the social market economy .
This is the only way we can face the future with certainty .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , there is no doubt that the cohesion policy will be closely involved in the realisation of the EU 2020 Strategy .
The EU 2020 Strategy will respond to numerous global challenges , and the cohesion policy will be among the key and fundamental instruments at the disposal of the European Union and Member States to address these challenges .
Therefore , concerns that cohesion policy will be detached from the implementation of EU overall strategy are unfounded .
Secondly , the Commission does not have clear answers at this stage to many of the questions and issues raised by honourable Members , such as on geographical coverage , the coverage or existence of Objective 2 regions , the appropriate funding base , transitional arrangements , or the status of individual groups of regions .
I admit this , but there is an ongoing vivid and deep debate among Commission services , as well as between the governmental experts from the Member States and the Commission .
These debates will lead to the preparation of a fully-fledged Commission position in autumn 2010 .
In the course of the coming months , the questions and problems raised here should find proper responses from the Commission .
Finally , I would like to thank all honourable Members for their questions and suggestions .
They confirm the importance of the cohesion policy as an instrument of long-term investment in areas which are necessary for building the growth potential of European regions and Member States .
I will take your interesting and valuable comments back with me to Brussels , and I will report about them to my colleagues in the Commission services and to my successor .
The Commission will be ready to continue discussions with Parliament related to the shape of future cohesion policy in the forthcoming months .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the future of the cohesion policy is of paramount importance .
Given that we are dealing with a horizontal policy which redistributes more than a third of the EU 's budget , the results from achieving the cohesion objectives have a crucial bearing on the continent 's future .
Since its inception , the cohesion policy has achieved spectacular successes in the EU15 .
Unfortunately , more active intervention is required in the Member States which have recently joined and are affected by extreme poverty .
In addition , the situation is made even more difficult by new , strong challenges , such as climate change , the declining population or the global economic recession .
Consequently , we must deal in the future with the territorial differences in social and economic indicators within a more effective and flexible framework .
Strong emphasis must also be focused on the development of the least developed areas , especially small regions falling behind the regional average and struggling with far more severe disadvantages than even other areas surrounding them .
With this purpose in mind , it would be worth considering earmarking resources at EU level , aimed specifically at bringing LAU 1 ( formerly NUTS 4 ) planning-statistical regions into line where the decision about the use of these resources can be made by the relevant small regions or their associations .
Coordination with the EU 's other policies must also be improved .
The barriers between the various funds must be eliminated so that the maximum possible allocation of resources can be achieved .
The implementation rules must also be greatly simplified .
Furthermore , priority must be given to investments relating to education , vocational training and sustainable employment , and to the implementation of comprehensive programmes tailored to the small regions ' individual needs .
The Europe of the regions is a principle on which the EU has long agreed .
The cohesion policy after 2013 must continue to make this vision a reality .
One good approach is to make territorial cohesion the main objective .
In this context , interregional cooperation plays an important role .
In recent decades , the interregional approach has had some significant successes .
The various EU projects in this area allow citizens to experience Europe directly and bring the freedom of action characteristic of European policy down to a regional level .
However , there is still work to be done in the future .
An interregional approach requires effective coordination to bring the different structures in the different countries into line .
Other important cornerstones of regional policy in the years to come will be additionality in funding , cross-sectoral cooperation and conditionality .
In order to ensure that the funding reaches the areas where it is needed , projects must have clear and specific objectives .
In my opinion , careful long-term planning also brings added value and prevents funds from being wasted .
I fear the provisions put forward by the Commission - especially those concerning the ending of Objective 2 and abandonment of the regional aspect of cohesion policy in favour of a sectoral approach - may mean a return to the concept of a two-speed Europe and an increase in the distance , in terms of economy and civilisation , between the old and the new Europe .
Such a model would be a departure from integration of the entire 27 and from the idea of solidarity enshrined in Article 3 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
That idea , surely , lies at the root of the entire cohesion policy , which is intended to bring about equalisation of opportunities and elimination of differences between regions .
The proposal of the Commission concerning increasing the emphasis on research and the development of new technologies should be praised .
This is the route which Europe needs .
In choosing this , we must not , however , forget those regions and countries where bringing the standard of living up to the EU average is a fundamental matter .
Please remember that between the richest and poorest areas of the EU there is a greater than 11 times difference in wealth .
Eliminating these differences must continue to be the main principle of EU cohesion policy .
A new version of the document is currently being written .
I hope that in the new version , the Commission will take account of the words which were said during today 's debate , and of what is being said in various parts of the European Union and at various levels : local governments , governments , associations and non-governmental organisations .
Good regional policy can be achieved only with close cooperation from the regions .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.05 and resumed at 11.30 )

I have one announcement to make .
It concerns a lady who has supported us in the European Parliament for many years - Mrs Birgitte Stensballe .
She is , unfortunately , leaving us , and will retire on 1 January 2010 .
( The House accorded Mrs Stensballe a standing ovation )
Agenda
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to raise two points of order and I would like to be able to raise them one after another .
Firstly , I have a request for the entire House .
It refers to an urgent matter which we will be discussing this afternoon .
This is the case of Aminatou Haidar .
We have an urgent matter on the agenda this afternoon .
I would ask my fellow Members to put their trust in me with regard to the following process .
Some Members who have been closely involved with this case know - and I cannot give any more details at this point , but I am one of those who knows - that we will have a solution for this case during the course of the day .
Prominent government representatives from the EU are working to achieve a positive solution .
Therefore , it would be sensible to remove this urgent matter from the agenda this afternoon , because any further debate would only hinder the work which is being done through diplomatic channels .
This is why I am asking the House to agree that in this exceptional case , we should remove this urgent matter from the agenda , because this will be of greater help in resolving the case than debating it would be .
That was my first request , Mr President .
The second request will follow immediately .
Mr Schulz , I am not certain we can discuss this point again .
I am afraid it is already too late , because we made a decision on this matter earlier .
It is difficult , now , to discuss this point again .
( FR ) Mr President , I support Mr Schulz 's proposal .
I believe that the negotiations are extremely difficult .
We are talking about a case that concerns a human being , a woman , and efforts are under way to find a political solution .
I therefore believe that , when efforts are under way to find a political solution , it is important not to exacerbate the situation .
I ask that we first be allowed to find a political solution .
( Applause )
( PT ) I would just like to make a brief point .
The diplomatic efforts are very important , but Aminatou Haidar is on her 33rd day of hunger strike in hospital .
The worst thing we could do would be to tell a woman who is fighting for basic human rights that this Parliament was going to forget her here and now .
Ladies and gentlemen , in accordance with Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure , we can vote on the proposal to remove this from the order of business .
In relation to this , I would like someone to speak in favour of the motion .
( ES ) In my capacity as leader of the Spanish Socialist delegation to the European Parliament , I should like to express my appreciation of the words spoken by the President of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament supported by the President of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
I do so for two reasons .
Firstly , because as I see it , this House is clearly demonstrating its solidarity with Mrs Haidar personally and with her cause in this dangerous situation resulting from a prolonged hunger strike .
My second reason is that I believe the House is also adopting a positive stance in support of the intense multilateral diplomatic effort led by the government of the Kingdom of Spain .
This is , after all , the government of the country on whose territory Mrs Haidar is currently to be found .
It is also the government of the country in which the hunger strike is taking place that Mrs Haidar herself has stated will not end until she returns to a territory that is not under Spanish jurisdiction .
I therefore support the current diplomatic effort , and believe that our best course of action would be to avoid a resolution that could compromise the success of any negotiations that might take place in the next few hours ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Now I will ask for someone to speak against the motion .
( ES ) Mr President , I am taking the floor to voice my group 's opposition to this proposal , and I shall now explain our reasons .
I do not think it is appropriate to present such a proposal this morning .
Furthermore , it would amount to a failure to respect all the parliamentary groups that have tabled the text of a resolution .
We devoted three hours , only yesterday , to finding a way of taking this matter out of the political debate and ceasing to focus on what is happening in Spain .
Thanks to the efforts of all the groups involved , we succeeded in reconciling differing positions and arriving at a common text for a resolution .
We were also able to overcome differences of opinion in the same meeting .
Consequently , I believe that if it is deemed inappropriate , if this House does not make its voice heard on such a situation , when will it actually make itself heard ?
When will that be ?
( Loud applause )
I have one final request ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , it is not right to say that the House has expressed a view on the case of Mrs Haidar .
That has not happened .
The House was going to express its view today .
It was going to do so today , after a hunger strike that has lasted 33 days , yet an attempt is being made to prevent us from debating the matter .
I think this is immoral .
I repeat , it is utterly immoral .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , I asked for the floor to make a point of order .
This House is irrevocably committed to the cause of human rights and duty bound to honour that obligation .
Mr Schulz made a proposal to the House this morning .
If he is privy to data or important information relevant to Mrs Haidar 's case , he should make that information available to the House .
A decision should then be taken in plenary this afternoon at the start of the debate .
( Applause )
( DE ) Mr President , for many years , I was responsible for human rights debates in this House on behalf of my group .
I am dealing with this case with great care .
I would like to mention that I had a very long discussion about this case with the Moroccan foreign minister last Sunday .
I have the impression that there is the possibility today of ending Mrs Haidar 's hunger strike and finding a solution for her .
If I had the impression that a public statement would help to resolve this case , I would make a public statement .
However , because I believe that in complicated diplomatic cases of this kind , discretion is the best way of solving the problem , I would ask my fellow Members to use the necessary discretion to ensure that this lady is saved .
That is my only wish .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to ask you for a moment 's attention .
We cannot continue discussion on this matter indefinitely .
( ES ) Mr President , I should like to begin by expressing my surprise , given that , as Mrs Bilbao Barandica pointed out , we devoted almost three hours to debating this matter yesterday .
If Mr Schulz has been in possession of relevant information concerning this matter since Sunday , we should have been informed accordingly yesterday .
I repeat , the information should have been passed to us yesterday , before the joint resolution was debated .
We should have been aware of this information when talks were held between the different groups , leading to an agreement , that is to say , to a compromise .
( FR ) No , that is not true .
We have a responsibility to adopt a resolution , at least so that we may know this House 's position on the case of Aminatou Haidar .
Therefore , I am not asking that we do not vote , but that we should hold a debate as usual .
( Applause )
Mr President , clearly the House is divided .
This is a very delicate issue .
There is a lot of confusion .
Can I please request that we delay this vote until 15.00 so that we can consult both the parties and the groups , and also discover what is actually happening on the ground in Morocco ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we have heard all the comments .
You have heard everything and you have a full picture .
In accordance with Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure , I am putting this motion to a vote .
We have a specific motion , that we do not discuss this matter today .
( Parliament agreed to the request )
( DE ) Mr President , I very much regret having to ask once again for the patience of the House .
On the voting list today , we have the vote on the principle of subsidiarity .
Under the terms of Rule 177 ( 4 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I request that we postpone a vote on this point until the next plenary session and investigate the legitimacy of passing a resolution on this point .
I believe that there is substantial agreement throughout this House that the principle of subsidiarity and the fundamental rights should be guaranteed .
However , there is absolutely no point in raising this to the level of the European Union .
I would also like to say specifically on behalf of my Italian fellow Members that the debate taking place in Italy is an Italian and not a European debate and that , like us , my fellow Members will defend diversity and plurality .
However , it does not make sense to do this in a resolution of this kind .
( Heckling )
Mr President , it is amazing that groups which have the concept of democracy in their name are not even familiar with the democratic principle of allowing a speaker to finish what he is saying .
Under the terms of Rule 177 ( 4 ) , I request that the vote is postponed until the next session and that the legitimacy of the resolution and the vote is investigated .
( Applause )
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr Schulz , please put on your headphones .
I have a specific proposal - we will reach this point in the second part of the vote .
First we will vote on the budget , and then we have several additional points .
You can all think about Mr Schulz 's proposal and we will come back to it in a moment , when we all have the resolution in front of us , in the second part of the vote .
( DE ) Mr President , now that the urgent matter has been removed from the agenda , I would like to ask you to divide the speaking time for the Western Sahara item between the other two urgent matters , as we had some tough discussions yesterday about the speaking time for urgent matters .
This is my practical proposal for this afternoon and I would ask you to accept it , as we will be spending an hour discussing urgent matters .
We will take your suggestion into account .
1 .
Mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument (
2 .
Amendment to the multiannual financial framework 2007-2013 : financing energy projects under the European Economic Recovery Plan (
3 .
Draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 as modified by the Council ( vote )
Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , we are about to hold probably the shortest vote on the budget under the Nice Treaty , and it is sure that this will be the last vote under the Nice Treaty .
How is it possible that the voting list is so short ?
It is due to the excellent cooperation of the groups .
As a rapporteur , I should like to thank all the groups who participated in the preparation of this vote .
In addition to that , I should like to thank the Secretariat for its work .
Without them , it would also have been impossible to have been here with just these two pages .
Thank you very much to all of you .
( Applause )
And I think that this shortness is justified , for , in a time of crisis , we should work to manage the crisis and not spend time on lengthy votes .
Mr President , I propose that we vote on the Other Institutions block in a single vote as I am not expecting any problems .
Thank you .
A situation has arisen in which we are voting on different institutions , and in accordance with the rules , we are obliged to vote on each institution separately .
It is not possible to combine it all into one block .
That would be contrary to procedure .
Mr President , the Council notes with satisfaction that Parliament has confirmed the agreement that we reached at the conciliation meeting on 18 November this year .
In conjunction with the outcome of the second reading in the Council , we are happy that Parliament 's second reading can be deemed to represent a common text from the two parts of the budgetary authority in accordance with the new Article 314 of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The Council accepts this common text and the President of the European Parliament can thus declare the budget finally approved .
However , I would like to point out that once you , Mr President , have declared the budget finally approved , the Council believes that it should be signed by both parties since the new Treaty states that both the Council and Parliament are responsible for it .
The Council regrets the fact that this position has not been taken into account .
Having said that , we are not questioning in any way whatsoever what has been agreed .
Nonetheless , we hope that next year 's budgetary procedure will allow sufficient time to deal with these matters .
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank once again the Chair of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Lamassoure , and the three rapporteurs , Mr Surján , Mr Maňka and Mrs Haug , for their constructive attitude throughout the budgetary procedure , which also demonstrates the very good cooperation that we have enjoyed in this work .
I would like to finish with a personal reflection .
Being President-in-Office of the Council is probably the most distinguished office that I will ever hold .
It has been a great honour for me to serve Europe in this way and I would like to express my thanks for this opportunity .
Thank you very much indeed .
( Applause )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome
At the moment , there is a delegation from Serbia in the gallery .
We would like to extend a very warm welcome to the delegation .
Please stand up , so that everyone can see you .
( Applause )
1 .
Draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) (
rapporteur . - Mr President , it is proposed that Amendments 3 and 7 , which are identical in the text , be voted in three parts , and that an oral amendment be made to the second part .
Why ?
Because the original text mentioned the opinion of the Commission but , in the meantime , the Council has decided on this issue .
Therefore , I will read out the new proposal : ' notes the European Council conclusions that the EU and its Member States are ready to contribute with fast-start funding of EUR 2.4 billion annually for the years 2010 to 2012 ; stresses , however , the need for information on participation and contribution from the EU budget during 2011 and 2012 ' .
That is the oral amendment , and my proposal is to vote in favour of all three parts .
( The oral amendment was adopted )
I would like to take the opportunity to extend my best wishes to you all for the three-week break .
We have some very important work before us next year .
I would like to invite you all to cocktails on 12 January 2010 , to mark the new year and the beginning of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is so important for us .
So I invite everyone on 12 January .
Madam President , there is a mistake in the EPP voting list .
I wish to point out to EPP colleagues that the vote on the two separate votes should be a ' plus ' in our voting list - so , a ' plus ' for the two separate votes that we shall be voting upon now .
Mr President , this is a private matter for the EPP , and I do not see why the Assembly should be bored with it .
2 .
Improvement needed in the legal framework for access to documents following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty ( vote )
3 .
Defence of the principle of subsidiarity ( vote )
( DE ) Madam President , I would like to repeat my point of order :
( Uproar in the Chamber )
I am pleased that I am always able to wake my fellow Members up .
This is good for the circulation .
Once again , under the terms of Rule 177 ( 4 ) , I request that the vote is postponed and that the legitimacy of the resolution and the vote is investigated in the meantime .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly I would like to look at the procedural argument .
I would like to remind everyone that we have just voted on the Cashman report .
This is a report created by Parliament in the course of an ongoing legislative procedure .
Our Legal Service has stated that this is not permitted , but the socialists insisted on introducing it .
While we were discussing the freedom of the press in Italy and the Commissioner responsible explained that the European Union has no authority in this area , the socialists still felt that it was worthwhile to attack Berlusconi .
Whenever it suits the socialists , it is a question of there being no authority . Whenever other people are being opposed , the authority is in place .
For this reason , we should not give in to them .
However , the second argument is worthy of serious discussion .
Are we responsible for the Convention on Human Rights ?
I would like to remind my fellow Members that , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union will become party to the Convention on Human Rights .
This means that if it is legitimate for the Italian Parliament to discuss this , because Italy is party to the Convention on Human Rights , then it is also legitimate for the European Parliament to discuss this , as it will be party to the Convention on Human Rights in future .
My third and final argument concerns the fact that we are not lawyers , we are politicians .
This judgment affects millions of people and , therefore , we should vote on it today .
( Applause )
4 .
Belarus ( vote )
Madam President , the rationale of this amendment is to raise awareness of recent cases of repression in Belarus .
My oral amendment is just to add one more name - that of a young democratic activist who was kidnapped on 6 December this year - to the list of names listed in this amendment .
So it will read as follows : after mentioning Zmitser Dashkevich , I would like to add ' and Yauhen Afnahel on 6 December 2009 ' .
This is just adding one more person to the list of those who are being harassed by the Belarusian Government .
5 .
Violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( vote )
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( ET ) Mr President , the decision taken on the implementation of the flexibility instrument shows the success of international cooperation and , once again , gives an assurance that the institutions of Europe consider it urgent to fund the second stage of the recovery plan for the European economy .
Another positive thing in this resolution was the fact that we were able to find unspent funds in the economy recovery plan for energy projects , confirming this later in the budget .
I voted in favour of the resolution .
( ET ) I also supported this report , the adoption of the report , because the result from the Conciliation Committee - apparently the Conciliation Committee does not proceed very straightforwardly and quickly - was positive : to implement the recovery plan for the European economy , to implement the stated aim of this plan .
Another positive thing was that we supported the previous decision in the later vote on the budget to set aside EUR 2.4 billion for the purposes mentioned .
I supported this report .
Madam President , Nick Griffin of the British National Party has suggested that my voting is influenced by commercial interests .
I want to make it clear that I am proud to be an advocate of low-carbon technologies to fight climate change .
I have never requested or been paid a penny for my work ; I do it because I believe in it .
Any shareholdings I have ever had have always been declared in the declaration of interests , and they have never stopped me from criticising some wind-power projects .
Openness and transparency have always been the hallmarks of my political life , and , before Nick Griffin tries to smear the reputation of Members here , let him explain why the party he leads has failed twice to submit its accounts on time to Britain 's Electoral Commission .
His accountants say that the accounts do not give a true and fair view of his party 's affairs .
Many people suspect that money from his party 's members have been used for personal gain .
If he denies it , then perhaps Mr Griffin could produce a set of accounts that his own auditors will approve .
Madam President , if I may misquote John Dunning , an English MP in the 18th century , the EU budget has increased , is increasing and ought to be diminished .
I voted against the budget resolution because it breaches the 1 % limit on gross domestic product .
That is a limit we should not breach .
We need to be aware that every euro we spend comes from the taxpayer .
We should be prudent with their money , and this is not a prudent budget .
Madam President , I , like my previous colleague , also voted against the budget .
It is interesting how we often talk about European common values and solidarity with the citizens .
Yet , at a time when many communities and families are struggling with the current economic situation , struggling to pay the bills , some of them losing their jobs , many even taking pay cuts , I think it is outrageous that we are voting to increase a budget which takes no account of the current economic situation .
We need sound finances , we need to show that we understand the concerns of our electorate and we need to be prudent with taxpayers ' money .
Only in that way can we generate the growth which is so badly needed to help citizens right across countries of the European Union .
That is why I voted against this budget .
I would like to wish everyone a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year .
Madam President , I voted in favour of the resolution because the Belarusians here today demonstrate the level of their engagement with the European Union .
Despite a lot of talking on the Belarusian side , only modest changes have so far taken place .
Most recently , we have heard from the opposition that the President intends to sign a decree limiting access to free information on the Internet .
The EU certainly needs to support Belarus to draw it closer to Europe , but first of all , we need to engage with the Belarusian people .
It seems that now we are trying to engage with the Belarusian authorities by suspending the travel bans , but the travel bans are still there for the ordinary people of Belarus .
EUR 60 for the Schengen visa is too expensive for the majority of Belarusians .
At the same time , the price for Russian citizens is half as much .
The EU would not suffer if the citizens of Belarus covered only the cost of the visa , which is not more than EUR 5 .
I would be grateful if Mr Brok and Mr Saryusz-Wolski would go and have their discussions somewhere else .
Mr Brok , could you have your discussion outside of the Chamber , please ?
Could you please have your discussion outside of the Chamber ?
Out !
Mr Brok , will you please leave the Chamber and have your discussion outside .
Mr Preda , if you wish to make an explanation of vote on Belarus , I will take it now .
Is that what you wish ?
( RO ) I was wanting to provide an explanation of why I voted for the proposal made by Mr Schulz .
As I did not think there would be such a proposal , I did not register beforehand , but I would like to explain my vote for Mr Schulz 's first proposal relating ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
I am sorry , it is not possible .
I thought you wanted to speak on Belarus .
Madam President , I voted in favour of this resolution because the situation in Congo is horrific .
Tens of thousands of people are killed in the country every month because of violence from the armed groups .
The Congolese armed forces are often at the centre of such crimes , using unrestrained force at times , and civilians are usually the victims of such violence .
The situation of women is appalling , with sexual violence a specific problem in the country .
There are reported rapes by almost all fighting parties , including the Congolese army .
We welcome the EU 's engagement in Congo .
European military engagement contributed to the prevention of a situation similar to the one in Rwanda .
The EU police mission is especially important , since the main problem Congo faces is impunity and lack of criminal-prosecution capacity .
However , in order to achieve significant progress , we need more engagement from the international community .
That is why more action needs to be conducted through the MONUC and more resources have to be given to the United Nations .
Madam President , as we leave for our Christmas vacations and our fat turkeys and whatever we eat in the festive season , we must also go with the thought that , in the Democratic Republic of the Congo , many people will die during the same period .
Nearly five million people have been killed there since 1999 , and it is estimated that 45 000 - the size of a small English town - 45 000 people get killed there every month .
As we celebrate Christmas , we ought to think about this and wonder whether these people in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and ourselves are still living on the same planet .
For twenty odd years or more , the United Nations has been trying valiantly to bring this situation to some stability , but only with 20 000 soldiers .
How on earth can they manage to keep the peace with 20 000 soldiers ?
We need to help the UN do an effective job and arrest those people who are behaving with impunity and who are raping and killing women and children .
We need seriously to end this now .

Madam President , on behalf of the EPP Group , I wish to state that the EPP voted against the resolution , not because it does not favour transparency or access to documents , certainly under the new treaty , but because it had tabled its own resolution - which eventually we did not vote on - which presented , to our mind , a more balanced approach to this very delicate issue .
We have to be careful when discussing the issue of access to documentation and transparency that we do not go overboard , and that we do not expose documentation and procedures to a degree which makes the entire system unfeasible .
If we are to open up secret negotiations and closed negotiations completely , then we might end up undermining the very negotiations and the very system on which we are built .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - I voted in favour of this very reluctantly .
Whilst it mainly concerned the reallocation of existing funds , it would involve subsidy , by use of the Flexibility Instrument .
However , the main purpose was to reimburse Bulgaria and other countries that had been forced to decommission functioning nuclear reactors , against their better judgment .
A promise of funding had been made by the EU and that promise had to be kept .
in writing . - Following the conciliation meeting held on 18 November 2009 , Parliament and the Council were capable of coming to an agreement regarding the use of the Flexibility Instrument in favour of the EERP as well as of the decommissioning of the Kozloduy power plant in Bulgaria .
While both are important , I feel that the proper and correct decommissioning of this power plant is particularly important .
I have thereby decided to support the rapporteur and vote in favour of this report .
The motion for a resolution that is being debated concerns European financing for the period 2010-2013 for the decommissioning of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in Bulgaria and the mobilisation of the Flexibility Instrument for this purpose , thus honouring a commitment made to Bulgaria during its accession process .
It also concerns additional financing under the Flexibility Instrument for the second phase of the European Economic Recovery Plan ( EERP ) in the area of energy , since this plan had not yet been adequately financed .
I do not deny that nuclear energy can form part of a well-balanced European energy basket and that its use may lessen our external dependence in this field , but I believe the European Union cannot avoid sharing in the effort to close down that obsolete nuclear facility while also ensuring that economic recovery projects deserve adequate funding .
The environmental safety resulting from the decommissioning of Kozloduy and greater investment in energy projects are both good reasons to mobilise the Flexibility Instrument .
At the conciliation meeting of 18 November 2009 , the Flexibility Instrument was mobilised to finance the decommissioning of the Kozloduy nuclear plant to the sum of EUR 75 million in 2010 .
I deplore the fact that the Commission only presented these financing needs in Amending Letter No 2 / 2010 after Parliament 's first reading , in other words , after Parliament had set its priorities .
That created additional pressure on subheading 1a , considerably affecting the dynamics of the negotiations on the 2010 budget and jeopardising Parliament 's political priorities .
Nonetheless , promises once made have to be kept , as in the case of the protocol concerning the conditions for the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union , which contains the EU 's commitment to finance the decommissioning of Kozloduy .
The additional financing needs in 2011-2013 , totalling EUR 225 million , must be addressed in a mid-term review of the multiannual financial framework .
Further financing of Kozloduy in 2011-2013 should be without prejudice to the financing of existing multiannual programmes and actions .
I therefore voted in favour .
The use of this fund is based on the logic behind the energy strand of the European economic recovery plan .
I shall abstain for the same reasons .
in writing . - The recovery plan has been one of the Commission 's responses to the economic crisis that has plagued Europe in recent years .
Its goals include restoring business as well as consumer confidence and , in particular , ensuring that lending is carried out .
There has been a need to be flexible and allow for funds to be reallocated from different budgets when necessary .
This is why I have to support the rapporteur 's views and vote in favour of the proposal .
The European Economic Recovery Plan ( EERP ) , to which the sum of EUR 5 billion was allocated by Parliament in March 2009 , is divided into trans-European energy projects and projects to develop broadband Internet in rural areas .
This is an important instrument for tackling the economic crisis , reviving the economy and hence creating jobs .
During the conciliation meeting of 18 November , an agreement was reached by Parliament , the Council and the Commission on financing for the second year ( 2010 ) of the EERP , to the sum of EUR 2.4 billion .
This financing , for energy and broadband Internet projects , requires a review of the multiannual financial framework for 2007-2013 .
Financing of the EERP should not be postponed to subsequent years , and I therefore welcome the agreement that was reached .
I would also point out that the current multiannual financial framework does not meet the European Union 's financial needs .
Consequently , the Commission should urgently submit a proposal for a mid-term review of the MFF .
I also endorse the need to extend the 2007-2013 MFF to the years 2015-2016 .
I therefore voted in favour .
Even if some positive use is made of the funds being mobilised here , they are still far from enough to address rural areas ' need for support .
Agriculture in the countries of the European Union has many other needs and the farmers who work the land are calling for an agricultural policy that encourages production , guarantees them a decent living and prevents the ongoing desertification of rural areas .
It is not enough , therefore , merely to say that we are promoting solidarity in the energy resources field and promoting broadband in rural areas if we really want to contribute to the recovery of Europe 's economy .
As we have advocated , what is needed is a thorough revision of Community policies and a substantial increase in budget funding .
That is why we abstained .
The energy strand of the European Economic Recovery Plan contains some striking proposals . These include the creation of a specific 2020 fund , the increase in state requirements concerning the environmental performance of goods , and the incentive to construct energy-efficient buildings .
The decommissioning of the first-generation Kozloduy nuclear power plant in Bulgaria , for its part , fulfils an urgent requirement .
Just as remarkable , however , is the fact that the EU plans to provide no assistance whatsoever to a project to move us away from nuclear power .
Clearly , although it is a matter of urgency , the EU is not firmly committed to making the break from maximum productivity .
How could it , when it is committed to giving absolute priority to the principles of liberalism glorified by this recovery plan ?
That is why , on this chapter , I decided to abstain .
I supported the European Union budget for the financial year 2010 .
I particularly welcome the agreement with the Council , which will provide extra aid to the value of EUR 300 million to dairy farmers .
One of the demands the Parliament made at the talks about budget 2010 was that a dairy fund worth EUR 300 million would be provided to deal with the dairy crisis .
Although the Commission agreed with the proposal initially , it wanted to put only EUR 280 million into that fund .
This money will be a great help to dairy farmers who were severely affected by the low prices over the summer and who are having problems with liquidity .
I also welcome the support provided in the budget for the Special Olympic Games organisation and for their request regarding funding for the European Special Olympic Games in Warsaw in 2010 and for the World Special Olympic Games in Athens in 2011 .
EUR 6 million has been allocated to the Special Olympic Games , with a provision for further funding to be provided in 2011 .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted , unenthusiastically , for the European budget for the financial year 2010 so as not to jeopardise the funding of the second section of the European recovery plan ( energy infrastructure and broadband Internet ) , the launch of a new European initiative to promote micro-credit ( amounting to EUR 25 million in 2010 ) , or emergency aid for the milk sector ( an additional EUR 300 million ) .
I would point out that my French socialist colleagues and I voted against the financial perspective for 2007-2013 as far back as 2006 .
Back then , we criticised a cut-price budget which , because of its shortcomings , would not have enabled far-reaching innovative projects to be developed .
Today , our analysis is being confirmed : this budget does not put us in a position to tackle the crisis , and it reflects the absence of a European political project .
Although the unprecedented economic crisis that Europe is going through requires a strong , common response from the Union , the Council and the European Commission have chosen to allow the Member States to develop their own recovery plans .
It is not with a budget such as this that we will restore lasting growth and successfully combat climate change .
The outcome of the vote on the 2010 budget marks an important step in the drafting and application of joint norms and measures required to regulate the areas of energy , technology , agriculture and infrastructure .
It is seen as providing proper support in a context where Member States ' economies are facing a crisis situation .
I welcome the allocation of EUR 300 million , although only EUR 280 million had been allocated initially , as immediate aid intended for dairy producers who are facing a collapse in prices , leading to insecurity .
I believe that this action will tackle the causes but , above all , the effects which have led to this considerable slump in the dairy product market , which is happening against the backdrop of the current economic crisis .
The 2010 EU budget has just been adopted .
With this budget of EUR 2.4 billion , we will be able to finance the second and final phase of the European Economic Recovery Plan , and that is good news .
Unfortunately , the negotiations on the financing of a European programme to promote micro-credit - a particularly useful and necessary instrument for reviving growth - are being held up at the Council .
Similarly , the Council 's rejection of Parliament 's amendment proposing to increase the aid granted to people most in need , at a time of unprecedented economic and social crisis , is highly regrettable , when 2010 has been declared the ' European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion ' .
On the other hand , the European Council 's announcement , last Friday , of the willingness of the EU and its Member States to contribute to the financing and prompt implementation of EUR 2.4 billion per year from 2010 to 2012 to help developing countries combat climate change is along the right lines .
However , if the Council wants to be consistent and responsible , it must accept the urgent need for a mid-term review of the 2007-2013 financial framework .
Without it , this news would unfortunately be nothing other than a publicity stunt .
We Swedish Social Democrats have decided to vote today in favour of the second tranche of financing for the European Economic Recovery Plan .
The plan is an important step in our joint efforts to enable the EU to recover from the financial and economic crisis .
However , a large part of the recovery plan involves investments in CCS technologies .
We are in favour of further research in this area , but we feel that we should not focus too much on this technology until CCS has been compared with other existing methods of reducing carbon emissions .
Such a comparison would enable us to invest the EU 's resources where they would be of most benefit in combating climate change .
We support the budgetary commitment and voted in favour of all the parts with the exception of the requirement to introduce permanent support for the milk sector , which we voted against .
As I said before , I think it essential that the specific conditions of the crisis that we are currently experiencing be taken into account when we discuss the allocation of funds to the various sectors of the European economy .
In particular , I believe it is essential to allocate funds to implementing the European Economic Recovery Plan , particularly with regard to adopting measures to stimulate economic growth , competitiveness , cohesion and job protection .
I reiterate that allocating the necessary funds so that small and medium-sized enterprises , which are among the main victims of the crisis , can receive support to help them weather this crisis is essential , and the Structural and Cohesion Funds are crucially important for national economic growth .
I regret , however , that only EUR 300 million , which I regard as too little , has been allocated for the creation of a fund for the dairy farming sector .
The serious crisis that the sector is currently experiencing would justify the allocation of more funds to help producers overcome the difficulties they are currently facing .
This is a budget that will help to fight unemployment and kick-start the economy .
Parliament is prioritising the European Economic Recovery Plan , with financing of EUR 2.4 billion for the coming year .
I welcome the granting of EUR 300 million of additional support to the dairy sector , but I advocate creating a budget heading to establish a permanent fund for this sector .
I also consider it very important that the current multiannual financial framework for 2007-2013 be revised and extended to the 2015-2016 financial years , as we proposed in this budget .
I would point out that the fight against climate change is an EU priority that is not sufficiently addressed in this budget .
I would also point out that energy security is crucial for the Union , and I therefore welcome the signing of the Nabucco project .
The budgets for Parliament and the other institutions , which have been tabled for second reading , are the same as we approved at first reading .
Under heading 5 , we have a margin of EUR 72 million , which will be used preferentially for financing additional expenditure directly attributable to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I therefore voted in favour .
We voted against this report , which ' welcomes the overall agreement on Budget 2010 ' , because this is a Community budget that already reflects the priorities set in the Treaty of Lisbon for a European Union that is increasingly neoliberal and militaristic and less and less concerned with economic and social cohesion .
In the midst of an economic and social crisis that is having terrible effects on employment and people 's living conditions , it is unacceptable for the Community draft budget to have EUR 11 billion less in payments than was projected in the financial perspective .
We welcome the fact , however , that some of the proposals we tabled were adopted , namely :
the creation of a budget heading for actions in the textile and footwear industry , with a view to creating a Community programme for the industry ;
the creation of another heading to promote the transformation of jobs with no stability into jobs with rights .
The aims of these proposals are firstly to draw attention to the severe crisis that the textile industry is currently undergoing , which was partly caused by the exponential rise in imports from third countries , and secondly to help fight the rapid growth in job instability , unemployment and poverty .
Madam President , as a result of the conciliation procedure , a level of expenditure was agreed which was satisfactory for Parliament and sufficient for realisation of the most important objectives of the Union next year .
Especially significant are the agreements concerning means for realisation of the European Economic Recovery Plan , including projects in the field of energy , for which EUR 1 980 million has been reserved .
A sum of EUR 420 million will be allocated to increasing the availability of broadband Internet , which will contribute to realisation of the principles of the Lisbon Strategy .
Significant last-minute changes were made to planned administrative expenditures in connection with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Establishment of the European Council as an EU institution , as well as establishment of the office of President of the European Council and the External Action Service , entail consequences for the Union budget .
Costs related to the European Council and the President are estimated at EUR 23.5 million and will be met with savings from 2009 , whereas costs associated with establishment of the External Action Service may exceed even the EUR 72 million which is currently in the budget reserve for 2010 .
So the debate on expenditure in 2010 will not end today .
The funds in the reserve may turn out to be insufficient , and then it will be essential to make a correction to the budget .
It is necessary , therefore , to appeal to the Member States to show responsibility and make available the means needed for the Union to meet the new obligations which result from the Treaty of Lisbon .
It was somewhat unenthusiastically that I voted in favour of the 2010 budget , since it is no match for the challenges that we have to face , not only in this context of serious economic and social crisis , but also in view of the fight against climate change .
My main aim , with my vote , was to prioritise support for the European recovery plan , for the launch of a new initiative on micro-credit ( EUR 25 million in 2010 ) and for emergency aid for the milk sector ( EUR 300 million ) .
In future , it is the effectiveness of the EU budgetary framework that we will have to review in order to equip ourselves with collective resources for action that are genuinely in keeping with reforms .
I am voting in favour of the report on the 2010 EU budget .
I am particularly pleased that , although this is the last budget negotiated on the basis of the Treaty of Nice and although , on this basis , the European Parliament has no formal decision-making authority on agricultural spending , we have succeeded in negotiating a budgetary item of EUR 300 million to support dairy farmers .
The 2010 EU budget respects the previous commitments assumed at European level with regard to the European Economic Recovery Plan .
Although it has been a fairly difficult task for us to find the necessary resources both for tackling the problems triggered by the crisis and for continuing the development projects which the European Union already has , I think that the budget extensively covers both situations .
For example , the commitments made by the President of the European Commission at the end of 2008 were retained and innovative measures were also introduced , such as the Preparatory Action - Erasmus for young entrepreneurs .
This budget will enable Romania to continue to enjoy financial support provided from the Structural and Cohesion Funds .
In addition , good prospects are being created for dealing with the matter of the borders in the eastern part of the European Union , as well as for the Black Sea Basin area , given that resources have been allocated for preparatory action aimed at environmental monitoring of the Black Sea Basin and for a common European framework programme for developing this region .
Furthermore , we have considered , although we are going through a difficult period , focusing attention on tourism as a source of development , as highlighted by the budget allocation for sustainable and social tourism .
The European Union 's budget is a reflection of its policies : it is neoliberal and oblivious to the interest of the majority .
The crisis in the capitalist system and the environmental crisis - the consequence of the fanatical obsession with maximum productivity entailed by the endless pursuit of profit - will not have had any effect on it .
The EU continues indiscriminately to apply neoliberal dogmas without giving due regard to the evidence of their economic ineffectiveness and environmental and social harmfulness .
Only yesterday , Parliament was voting for aid to be granted under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
This fund is purely and simply about putting a socialist slant on the senseless relocations of large groups such as Ford , Nokia and Dell .
And that is just one example .
What can we say about the European Economic Recovery Plan , which advocates free trade , flexible working and maximum productivity ?
No , that Europe is definitely not the solution but the problem .
Voting for this budget would go against the European general interest .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report adopted today is extremely important in several respects , first of all , because it provides for an economic recovery plan worth EUR 2.5 billion .

The sum of EUR 300 million has also been approved for the textile sector , something that Parliament had been demanding for a long time .
The budget also includes several lines of support aimed at evaluating the status of key sectors of the economy , such as the textile and footwear industry and the fisheries sector , to promote renewal of the fishing fleet , which are very important sectors for my country .
The pilot projects to halt desertification and to preserve jobs are also extremely relevant in these times of economic crisis .
It should also be noted that this was the last EU budget under the Treaty of Nice .
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , Parliament 's powers are extended to the whole budget .
in writing . - ( ES ) This budget will not help to resolve the economic , social and environmental problems facing the European Union which have been aggravated by the crisis .
It also fails to take account of increased social and regional inequalities , unemployment and poverty .
The European Union 's budget must serve to effectively prioritise convergence policies based on social progress , the preservation and promotion of each Member State 's potential , the sustainable use of natural resources and environmental protection , in order to achieve genuine economic and social cohesion .
My entire group is united in rejecting the idea of using the Community 's budget to promote a more militarist and neoliberal European Union .
That is why we are opposed to the increase in military expenditure contained in the budget .
In this connection , we wish to highlight the need for democratic control of expenditure relating to the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
This is a grey area outside the scope of the control to which budgetary expenditure is subject .
During an economic crisis , when the citizens of Europe are being subjected to waves of redundancies and cuts in social services , the European Union must also make savings .
In difficult economic times , measures are , of course , needed to stimulate the economy , but it is doubtful whether instruments such as the European Economic Recovery Plan can achieve this .
In the past , much-vaunted EU programmes have turned out to be paper tigers .
In addition , various EU subsidies have proved to be an invitation to commit abuses of many different kinds .
This means that hard-earned taxpayers ' money has , for years , been trickling away into mysterious channels .
Instead of continuing to inflate the EU budget , far-reaching renationalisation of the subsidy system is needed .
For this reason , I reject the draft budget .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the excellent work done by the rapporteur , who has succeeded in securing funding for the European Economic Recovery Plan to the tune of EUR 1.98 billion , making it a fundamental objective of the 2010 budget .
I am sure that the new plan will provide a renewed impetus for economic growth , competitiveness , cohesion and job protection in Europe , at the same time showing that the EU budget is a tool aimed at putting European citizens first and which can provide specific responses so as to be instrumental in helping to overcome the recent economic crisis that has affected our continent .
It is now up to the Commission to ensure that all projects to be financed under the recovery plan will be fully compatible with current EU environmental legislation .
The joint declaration calling for the simplification and a more targeted use of the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund to help overcome the effects of the economic crisis should also be welcomed .
The allocation of EUR 300 million to overcome the crisis in the milk sector is also very effective .
This represents an additional EUR 20 million compared with the Council recommendation , which we can only welcome .
We believe that agricultural policy needs to be deregulated and market-based if it is to be of benefit to consumers and the rural population .
Thorough reform of the common agricultural policy is therefore necessary .
All forms of export and production subsidies for agriculture should be abolished as soon as possible , and by 2015 at the latest .
Abolition of the EU and US farming subsidies is also vital if we are to combat global poverty and hunger .
During the same period , all trade barriers in respect of agricultural produce and fish should be phased out , thereby allowing free trade in food .
The part of the EU budget for 2010 that concerns agriculture falls under heading 2 - ' Conservation and management of natural resources ' - and makes up what is known as Block 3 .
This block contains intervention and support measures that we oppose , including various stockpiling measures - such as for alcohol - and extensive EU support for the wine sector .
It also includes EU support for milk and fruit in schools .
This in itself is important , but we believe this matter should instead be dealt with at national level .
At the same time , the block contains important initiatives in respect of animal welfare and controls on animal transports , for example , which we would , in principle , welcome .
However , since the voting procedure forces us to take a position on this group of amendments as a whole , we have chosen to abstain from voting on Block 3 .
Since Parliament acknowledges European citizens ' wish for a safe and secure Europe , it welcomes the increases in sub-heading 3a on freedom , security and justice relative to the 2009 budget .
It stresses the importance of further funding being made available via the EU budget to manage legal immigration and integration of third-country nationals while in parallel tackling illegal immigration .
It points out that these policies must always be implemented against the backcloth of respect for the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Equally important is the increase in funding for border protection , including the European Return Fund and the European Refugee Fund , to facilitate solidarity between the Member States .
It acknowledges that all countries in the Union are facing growing challenges in relation to policies covered by this heading , and urges the Member States to make use of the increase in funding for freedom , security and justice relative to the 2009 budget so that they can together face these and any new challenges that may arise by promoting a common immigration policy that is as inclusive as possible but grounded in absolute respect for human rights .
in writing . - I welcome the outcome of this vote on the 2010 budget .
It will ensure funds are directed to various important projects and will provide much needed support , especially in the light of the economic difficulties still facing the European Union .
Of particular importance is the EUR 300 million which will be allocated to the dairy sector following the recent crisis .
The Council finally agreed to the European Parliament 's request for this amount , having previously argued for EUR 280 million .
There is also significant funding being allocated to the second stage of the Economic Recovery Plan - EUR 2.4 billion - which includes vital support for energy ( including renewable energy ) projects and infrastructure , as well as EUR 420 million to provide broadband access in rural areas .
The budget will therefore allow significant developments in the areas of energy , infrastructure , and technology , as well as providing crucial assistance in the current economic climate .
The vote on the European Union budget is an annual institutional landmark whereby the commitment to Community programmes is confirmed and Parliament 's role is emphasised .
I welcome the conclusion of the second phase of funding for the European Economic Recovery Plan for 2009 and 2010 , since economic and employment recovery are major concerns for the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) in the current crisis .
Confirmation of the new microfinance facility programme demonstrates the priority being given to the goals of the Lisbon Strategy and the important role played by small and medium-sized enterprises in job creation .
I must express my concern regarding the cuts in budget appropriations for the Structural and Cohesion Funds , which are vital for economic revival and territorial cohesion , especially in the outermost regions like Madeira .
I think it is essential to continue to make the cohesion policy more flexible with a view to raising the currently low levels of implementation of programmes financed from Community funds .
In addition , projects that have strategic aims , provide added value and encourage competitiveness in the long term should continue to be promoted .
For all these reasons , I voted in favour of this report , which is the culmination of a technically intricate process that was difficult to negotiate .
I voted in favour of the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 as modified by the Council ( all sections ) and for the Letters of Amendment to the draft general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2010 .
The 2010 EU budget provides considerable sums for the commitments made through the European Economic Recovery Plan , such as power networks ( EUR 1 175 million ) , the European offshore wind power network ( EUR 208 million ) and capture and geological storage of carbon ( EUR 523.2 million ) .


The European Parliament has also managed to top up the sums allocated for transport safety , the SESAR Joint Undertaking , activities for supporting European policies in the areas of transport and passenger rights , the Intelligent Energy Europe programme , which is part of the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme , and the Clean Sky Joint Undertaking .
Furthermore , the sums allocated for agriculture include an increase of EUR 14 billion for promoting rural development and EUR 300 million for supporting dairy producers who have been hit very hard by the economic and financial crisis .
Due to the economic and financial crisis , the main concern European citizens have nowadays is about losing their job .
I believe that in 2010 , particular attention should be focused on programmes for training young entrepreneurs and for supporting them in setting up their own companies .
Today , we have adopted a European Union budget for 2010 amounting to almost EUR 123 billion .
Every budget is a kind of compromise .
Perhaps many of us are conscious of its deficiencies , but it is worth stressing that the average citizen of the EU gains by the document adopted today .
Above all , the European Union is strengthening its energy security and is banking on the development of businesses , and particularly of micro-enterprises .
I am pleased that EUR 20 million has been reserved for the Baltic Sea Strategy .
It is true that the reserve funds will be released only when the European Commission presents written proposals for their use . I do believe , however , that this will happen as quickly as possible .
I am particularly pleased by the inclusion in the budget of three projects which are important to my country .
I am thinking of the support for the Special Olympics , which will be held in Warsaw and Athens , grants for young people from countries included in the programme of the European Neighbourhood Policy and establishment of the Bronisław Geremek Chair of European Civilisation at the College of Europe in Natolin .
The openness of European institutions and the transparency of their procedures are guarantees that civil society and public opinion in the Member States are not only kept informed but are also an integral and informed part of their decision-making processes .
Although people feel somewhat divorced from Europe , not least because the procedure that led to the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon was troubled , not always clear and often open to criticism , the European institutions must persist in and commit themselves wholeheartedly to making the greatest possible number of documents available in good time , thus helping to close the gap .
I must , however , deplore the fact that the left in Parliament has used the necessary improvement in the legal framework regulating document access , in the wake of the entry into force of the treaty , to take the populist stance of dismissing the real need for confidentiality in some areas of European action and seeking to elevate itself as the sole champion of transparency .
Affairs of such sensitivity can do without artificial and populist splits ; they deserve to be taken seriously , with a sense of responsibility and the broadest possible consensus .
I regret that that has not been possible .
I gave my full support to the resolution tabled by my colleague , Mr Cashman , in order to call on the Commission and the Council to review the rules on access to European institutional documents , in accordance with the clauses on transparency laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
This issue is crucial to ensuring the democratic and responsible functioning of our institutions and must help to restore European citizens ' confidence in Europe .

In the vote on Thursday , 17 December 2009 , I voted against resolution from Mr Cashman on the improvements needed to the legal framework for access to documents following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon ( Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 ) for the following reasons : this resolution refers to facts which have nothing to do with the subject of transparency and calls for changes , the consequences of which would not make a constructive contribution to improving transparency .
I would like to emphasise that I am very much in favour of transparency and public access to documents .
However , these important objectives will not be achieved by fulfilling Mr Cashman 's demands , but only by dealing with the subject responsibly as highlighted in the resolution of Renate Sommer , Simon Busuttil and Manfred Weber of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) on this subject .


It is vitally important to make European action more transparent and to permit the broadest possible access to European institutional documents in order to give European citizens a greater understanding of how the Union works .
However , we must be vigilant on this point and guard against any kind of demagogy .
For the sake of the effectiveness of European action , restrictions must be placed on this sacrosanct principle of transparency .
The risk , in permitting maximum transparency , is that we will have sterile debates insofar as MEPs will be afraid to speak openly on sensitive issues .
Negotiations , by definition , demand a discrete environment .
Without it , these debates will take place in informal settings far removed from official meetings , and the end result will be the opposite of what we were trying to achieve . Therefore , yes to greater transparency , and , in this connection , I welcome the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It will enable these changes to take place , but this must not be at the expense of sound European decision making .
The entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon makes it necessary to introduce improvements in the legal framework regulating document access .
Such improvements must safeguard the rights of all citizens of the Union .
Since the Union is an area of freedom , security and justice , as laid down in the Preamble to the Charter of Fundamental Rights , any effort that leads to greater transparency in access to EU institution documents is welcome .
It is also highly important , however , to evaluate to what extent total freedom of access to all documents may be prejudicial to the proper functioning of the institutions .
It is therefore essential to find a balance on this subject .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted resolutely in favour of the ambitious European Parliament resolution on access to documents for the citizens .
I did so because it is always important to remind people that transparency is key to democracy , because the path to gaining access to European Union information is still too often full of pitfalls for the average citizen , and also because the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , on 1 December , significantly alters the situation .
The right of citizens to access European institutional documents , in any form , is now enshrined in Article 42 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Citizens are , moreover , seeing their rights extended to the legal opinions of the Council with , in return , obligations extended to all the European institutions .
This vote also crowns all the work carried out by my political group , which has always been in the vanguard of this fight .
On this subject , nine months ago , Parliament was adopting the Cappato report and calling for the Council 's activities to be more transparent , open and democratic .
Indeed , that institution has a moral obligation to make its decisions and its debates public ; this is quite simply a democratic requirement that it is duty-bound to fulfil for the citizens .
Transparency is important and its importance is growing in the age of globalisation .
Therefore , I support the efforts to introduce more transparency at an EU level .
However , we need to maintain a balance .
The resolution presented to us goes far beyond the transparency required by citizens and , therefore , I have voted against it .
This motion for a resolution fails to find a balance between the necessary transparency and reasonable activity by the administration and the Members of Parliament at an EU level .
In the current version , it is no longer possible to ensure the confidentiality of the written word , citizens ' privacy can no longer be guaranteed when questions are asked , data protection is called into question and the consequences for our security and for the financial market policy of the European Central Bank cannot be predicted .
In addition , it would give rise to a level of bureaucracy for the administration and the Members of Parliament that is totally out of proportion to its objective .
in writing . - The Maltese delegation in the S & D Group will be voting in favour of the motion for resolution on the subsidiarity principle as presented by Mr Mauro , Mr Busuttil and Mr Weber .

However , the delegation feels that a wider consensus and a bigger majority on the motion would send a stronger message to Europe .
In this respect , therefore , it would be more beneficial to support the postponement motion - within a specific timeframe , since this could offer greater possibility for a broader consensus to be reached .
It is the duty of all European institutions - national and Community institutions alike - to represent European citizens in their entirety , without distinction .
Secularism is the only principle by which the institutions can allow citizens as a whole to access public services according to their beliefs .
It is our common philosophical heritage and safeguards the principle of civil peace around which the EU was built .
That is why it is absolutely crucial that Italy complies with the Lautsi v. Italy judgment handed down by the European Court of Human Rights .
As the Court points out , the display of religious symbols must be prohibited in all public buildings within the EU .
It is high time that crucifixes , which were imposed in classrooms under Mussolini , were withdrawn from the state school environment .
in writing . - The Maltese delegation in the S & D Group will be voting in favour of the motion for resolution on the subsidiarity principle as presented by Mr Mauro , Mr Busuttil and Mr Weber .

However , the delegation feels that a wider consensus and a bigger majority on the motion would send a stronger message to Europe .
In this respect , therefore , it would be more beneficial to support the postponement motion - within a specific timeframe , since this could offer greater possibility for a broader consensus to be reached .
Belarus has deservedly been given the unflattering sobriquet of the last Soviet republic in Europe .
Despite the progress that has been made in some aspects of that country 's political , social and economic life , it is clear that none of the reforms implemented there can yet justify rejecting that deplorable description .
In Belarus , elections are not free , there is no freedom of expression , association or demonstration , and repression by the authorities is increasing .
The European Union is in danger of being inclined to follow a line of appeasement with this dictatorship , as it did with Cuba .
I think it will be wrong if it does so and does not make it clear that the values of democracy and freedom are not only non-negotiable but also inseparable from any agreements to be made with Belarus .
The European Union must therefore maintain and strengthen its contacts with the democratic opposition in Belarus to keep faith with those to whom Parliament awarded the Sakharov Prize for their fight to democratise that country .
The European Union cannot be an area concerned solely with the affairs of the countries that it comprises .
It must also be a driving force for the democratisation of the countries that have emerged since the dismembering of the former Soviet Union .
Any measures aimed at improving conditions in these countries are very important .
That is the context for the spirit of this motion for a resolution , which calls for measures to be adopted to support Belarus , which must be accompanied by clear signs of democratic reforms by that country , as well as respect for human rights and the rule of law .
The participation of Belarus in the Eastern Partnership is an important step in that direction , yet there are still many aspects to improve with regard to freedoms and safeguards within Belarus .
I have voted in favour of the joint resolution on Belarus , because it gives a balanced presentation of the situation and highlights both the positive aspects and progress made and the democratic deficit in many areas .
From my perspective , it is particularly important to ensure that the government of Belarus guarantees freedom of expression and freedom of association and assembly as quickly as possible , which would allow opposition parties to function effectively .
The resolution on Belarus is an important signal from the European Union and from Europe .
We should show both the democratic opposition and the Belarusian authorities , and not only by such resolutions , that we do not agree with the violations of human rights or the ban on registration of political parties , non-governmental organisations and independent media .
The European Parliament cannot agree with the use of capital punishment , and Belarus is the only country in Europe which applies this kind of penalty .
We cannot ease sanctions against Belarus if there is no noticeable progress in the direction of democratisation of the country .
The European Union must not close its eyes to the flagrant restrictions on freedom of speech , respect for human and civil rights and non-governmental organisations .
The European Parliament , which is composed of Members from 27 Member States , is an expression of democracy and cooperation .
The only measures which we can and will support are democratic measures , because they are the foundation of the European Union .
There can be no consent , on our part , to other measures .
I hope the resolution on Belarus is one of many steps we will take .
Belarusians , and also the whole of Europe , expect this of us .
in writing . - ( LT ) I voted for the resolution on Belarus with some doubt , because in the European Parliament , documents on Belarus are adopted too often and are thus devalued .
On the other hand , while maintaining a critical tone towards the Minsk regime , this resolution accentuates more clearly than previous ones certain positive changes in EU-Belarus relations .
In order for there to be a fundamental improvement in relations between the European Union , its Member States and Belarus , Belarus must steer towards reforms and democratisation .
Such a turn would ease the development of all sorts of ties with this state .
In Lithuania , 39 towns and regions are cooperating productively with Belarusian towns and regions , exchanging experience and participating in joint projects .
I also approved of this resolution because it calls on the EU to devote more attention to concrete projects that coincide with the interests of the partner countries .
In the resolution , we congratulated Belarus , Ukraine and Lithuania , which became the first states to submit trilateral projects to the European Commission and EU Member States for the Eastern Partnership Programme .
This is a list of concrete projects in the areas of border control , transport , transit , cultural and historical heritage and social and energy security .
I welcome the vote on this resolution .
Today , despite the Goma Conference on peace , stability and development and the conclusion of a ceasefire agreement in January 2008 , violent fighting continues to take place in the east of the DRC , leading to the worst possible atrocities being committed against the civilian populations , in particular , women , children and the elderly .
This sexual violence is becoming widespread and is today being perpetrated not only by the warring parties but also by civilians .
Everything must urgently be done to ensure the protection of the populations at a time when the number of MONUC soldiers present on the ground means that it is not always possible to curb this increase in violence .
The Congolese authorities have recently shown their determination to put a stop to impunity .
However , this zero tolerance policy must not only be ambitious - every single perpetrator of the atrocities , without exception , will have to answer for his actions - but must also be applied in practice .
We have a duty , as MEPs , to point out the need to respect these international obligations , such as human rights and gender equality , so that the dignity of women and the innocence of countless Congolese children are preserved .
Ever since the fall of Mobutu Sese Seko 's kleptocratic regime , the Democratic Republic of Congo ( formerly Belgian Congo and formerly Zaire ) has been mired in agitation and the most brutal violence , which has already led to millions of deaths .
The east of the country has suffered particularly badly from this scourge , which knows no borders and has taken on much more of an ethnic than a national profile .
The worst atrocities are repeated at such a rate that it is impossible to keep up with them , and the international community , particularly the UN forces , have not shown the ability to deal with them , despite all the civilian and military efforts that have been made so far .
That some African countries appear to be ungovernable and central governments have lost control of parts of their territories are , unfortunately , phenomena that have yet to be eradicated .
They are often connected with the illegal exploitation and plundering of raw materials either by insurgent forces or by regular troops and their leaders .
Even if these phenomena have their origins in the European decolonisation process and the way the borders were drawn , that cannot release African leaders and decision makers from their responsibilities or from calling on civil society in those countries to take decisive control of their own destinies .
I voted in favour of the resolution denouncing the serious ethnic violence that Congo has experienced recently and which has led to the displacement of almost 44 000 abandoned and totally destitute people .
I am particularly concerned about the issue of sexual violence , which is being used as a weapon of war .
This is an unacceptable crime , which must not go unpunished and which the European Union must take a stand against .
We must ensure that those within the Congolese army who are responsible for these human rights violations are actually brought to justice .
The European Union cannot remain aloof from the various armed conflicts that occur to some extent throughout the world .
The violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo is a conflict that has been dragging on for many years , causing millions of people to die , to be displaced or to lose their homes .
It is therefore very important to urge all parties in this conflict to cease hostilities so that the people of those regions can once again live in a climate of peace .
It is vital that we continue to support the United Nations missions on the ground so as to ease the suffering of the whole population , especially the elderly , women and children .
The armed conflict in the area can only be resolved by way of a political solution .
All intervention by neighbouring and other countries must therefore cease .
A diplomatic solution negotiated between the parties is required to bring the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo ( DRC ) to an end .
Such a solution must comply fully with the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
The United Nations Security Council should review the mandate of MONUC .
The mandate under Chapter VII should be done away with , to avoid strengthening the Congolese Armed Forces , thus endangering the United Nations peacekeeping mission .
We call for the EUPOL and EUSEC missions to the DRC to be closed down .
These missions have made a negative contribution to the escalation of violence and to the deteriorating situation in the country because they have trained security forces that have gone on to commit crimes against their own civilian population .
United Nations resolutions concerning an embargo on the supply of arms to the DRC must be implemented .
We wish to report that several Member States of the European Union are violating that embargo .
The joint resolution tabled by the other political groups does not refer to these fundamental points , and I have therefore voted against it .
This joint motion for a resolution on the Democratic Republic of Congo reflects the complicated situation in this African country .
Despite the large amounts of human resources and funding provided by the international community , it has not yet been possible to bring peace and stability to the area .
On the contrary , the UN soldiers are being accused of taking sides and of helping to escalate the situation further .
It is important that this issue is resolved .
The huge cost of over EUR 7 billion for the UN mission , including humanitarian aid , can only be justified if it is clear exactly how the funds were used .
As the resolution does not specifically call for this to be clarified , I have abstained .
The massacres , crimes against humanity , recruitment of child soldiers and acts of sexual violence against women and girls that are still taking place in the Democratic Republic of Congo cannot leave us unmoved .
Further efforts are needed to put an end to the activities of foreign armed groups in the east of the DRC .
The international community cannot look on helplessly .
It must ensure that the March 2009 agreements on the ceasefire are respected effectively and in good faith .
Two recent reports of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights show that the humanitarian situation is worsening considerably .
MONUC plays a vital role , but its mandate and rules of engagement must be implemented with determination and on a permanent basis in order to guarantee the population 's security more effectively .
MONUC 's presence remains necessary .
Every effort must be made to allow it to carry out its mandate in full in order to protect those under threat .
The Council must play a leading role and ensure that the United Nations Security Council supports MONUC by reinforcing its operational capacities and providing a better definition of its priorities , of which there are currently 41 .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting
( PT ) Mr President , I have a point of order .
This morning we held a vote here to justify negotiations that existed between the European Union and Morocco .
Since a Commission document has just come out , dated today , saying that EU - Morocco negotiations on the agri-food and fisheries sectors are progressing , I should like to know if it was these negotiations that the Chairman of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament was referring to this morning when he used the negotiations as an argument to delete from today 's agenda the topic on Aminatou Haidar , the Sahrawi fighter who has been on hunger strike for 32 days and is in a life-threatening condition at this very moment .
This , then , is a point that needs to be duly clarified , because what happened here this morning is unacceptable .
Thank you , Mrs Figueiredo .
Unfortunately , I cannot give you an answer , because I can no longer remember myself what the group chair said at midday today .
( ES ) Mr President , two items were withdrawn from the agenda this morning .
I wish to enquire about the resolution agreed between the parliamentary groups .
Could you please clarify under which of the Rules of Procedure was the question raised and an on-the-spot vote taken to withdraw an agenda item we were due to debate this afternoon ?
I believe this is an important issue and that Members of the House present today need to be informed appropriately as a matter of urgency .
Mrs Bilbao Barandica , this concerned a point of order under the terms of Rule 140 of the Rules of Procedure which allows the agenda to be changed .
I regret that I can now only permit points of order .
We will not be restarting this debate .
I would like to point out that I will immediately cut off any speaker who attempts to begin the debate again .
( ES ) Mr President , pursuant to Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure , a group or at least 40 Members may indeed move that a debate be adjourned .
This is what happened this morning , in a highly unusual manner .
In fact , the Rules of Procedure state that if an adjournment is to be requested , the President of the House must be informed 24 hours in advance .
The President must then inform Parliament immediately .
I would like to enquire whether this process was followed because the situation we find ourselves in is quite extraordinary : This is the first time that the European Parliament has been prevented from debating a resolution agreed by all the parliamentary groups in response to an extremely serious situation , such as the case of Mrs Haidar .
I would therefore like to know if this process was followed .
If it was not , the resolution should be debated immediately .
The resolution agreed by all the parliamentary groups must be recovered and put to the vote .
Are there any other points of order ?

( RO ) I was only wanting to say that , in the meantime , Mr Schulz has arrived in the Chamber and we would be delighted if he could reply to the question which was asked by our fellow Member at the start while he was absent .
( Applause )
Mr Preda , that was a very brief question , but it was not a point of order .
( ES ) Mr President , we , too , wish to refer to Rule 177 of the Rules of Procedure .
With that rule in mind , we cannot understand how an item can be withdrawn from the agenda , unless this is done prior to the relevant debate or vote .
Consequently , we also believe the Rules of Procedure have been applied incorrectly . We therefore call on the President to resolve the matter .
As the questions refer to this point , I am happy to give you an answer .
Under the terms of Rule 140 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , the agenda can be changed under certain circumstances , including ' on a proposal from the President ' .
A point of order was raised by a group chair and the President agreed to a vote on it .
This is in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .

Mr President , on a point of order , regarding my request on behalf of my group , the ECR Group , to postpone the vote that Mr Schulz called for to 15.00 to give us enough time to understand what this was all about .
That was not actually put to the House .
The President just put to the House the Schulz motion , and did not put my request for a motion to postpone it to give us two or three hours to cool down and find out the facts .
I object to the fact that was not actually put to the House .
Mr Tannock , the point of order raised by Mr Schulz is the ongoing point of order .
Your point of order is therefore superfluous .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to emphasise what Mr Meyer has said .
I shall be brief .
A large number of Members , a large proportion of those present in this House , have been very surprised by the train of events surrounding this morning 's proposal .
The latter was voted through quite unexpectedly , and in a way that suggests it does not comply with the spirit of the provisions in force and is not in keeping with them .
I have explained my understanding of the Rules of Procedure to you .
Therefore , the procedure is in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
I am not able to acknowledge other new points of order .
I would like to ask for your forbearance .
We have two further important points .
Mr Salafranca , if you have a point of order , please go ahead .
However , I must tell you that I will cut you off , if this is not the case .
( ES ) Mr President , this is indeed a point of order .
This morning , the President of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament asked for a motion for a joint resolution to be withdrawn from the agenda .
This is an unprecedented decision , and strong arguments were adduced for it , namely that Mrs Haidar 's life would be endangered .
With this in mind , my Group did not wish to compromise the situation , bearing in mind also the views expressed by Mr Schulz .
As I see it , however , there is no reason why a statement by this House should endanger Mrs Haidar 's life .
In particular , I cannot understand why it should be necessary to act in contravention of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , Rule 177 clearly states that submissions should be made 24 hours in advance and prior to the debate .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr Salafranca , I am very sorry , but it is no longer possible for us to investigate the motives of the Members of Parliament from earlier today .
The question of what information has been received this afternoon is no longer a subject for today 's agenda .
I will therefore return to the agenda .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
( DE ) Mr President , I believe that Rule 140 is not applicable to the urgency procedure and I would therefore ask you to have this checked by the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , because it could set a dangerous precedent .
I am happy to accept this suggestion , but it too was not a point of order .
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
1 .
Uganda : anti-homosexual draft legislation
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on the anti-homosexual draft legislation in Uganda .
author . - Mr President , I crave the House 's indulgence , if we can move away from points of order and to the issue of discrimination .
There is currently a bill before the Ugandan Parliament , and some argue : what is it to do with us ?
Breaches of international obligations , the Cotonou agreement and breaches of human rights - as we have always shown - have everything to do with us .
This bill 's provisions are draconian and among them , let me inform the House , are : any person alleged to be homosexual would be at risk of life imprisonment or in some circumstances the death penalty ; any parent who does not denounce their lesbian daughter or gay son to the authorities would face fines and probably three years in prison ; any teacher who does not report a lesbian or gay pupil to the authorities within 24 hours would face the same penalties ; any landlord or landlady who happens to give housing to a ' suspected ' homosexual would risk seven years of imprisonment .
Similarly , the bill threatens to punish or ruin the reputation of anyone who works with a gay or lesbian population , such as medical doctors working on AIDS and HIV , civil society leaders active in the fields of sexual and reproductive health , hence , further undermining public health efforts to counter the spread of HIV .
It is vital that this afternoon in this House we put aside our prejudices and we defend those who have no one left to defend them .
Therefore , I warmly welcome the statement by the Commissioner on Development and Humanitarian Aid , Commissioner De Gucht , statements from the British , French and Swedish Governments as well as President Obama and the Chair and Vice-Chair of the US House of Representatives ' Committee on Foreign Affairs .
I urge the House to give this the high importance which it deserves and to speak out for those in Uganda who currently are not being heard .
author . - Mr President , last September , a member of the Ugandan Parliament introduced an ' anti-homosexuality bill ' .
This bill would criminalise homosexuality , leading to punishment by imprisonment and even the death penalty .
This would not only apply to these alleged criminals but also to those who failed to report these so-called crimes , or who support human rights and other work in Uganda .
Our concern is that this would violate freedom of sexual orientation as well as freedom of expression , which are human rights : they are not just European values but universal values .
We also reject the death penalty as a whole and want to join the international community in its concern for NGOs which may have to cancel their activities working in Uganda .
We therefore join President Obama and others in the international community who have called for this bill not to be approved and for the review of any laws that would criminalise homosexuality in Uganda .
author . - Mr President , Uganda is a deeply Christian country where traditional values hold sway .
Homosexuality is illegal in Uganda as it is in many African countries .
We must , of course , be sensitive about forcing our more liberal and tolerant values on others , because it can sometimes be counterproductive .
But we should not be afraid to speak out against this outrageous bill , because it is clearly a draconian and hugely disproportionate piece of legislation .
It would not only be seriously detrimental to the safety and freedom of homosexuals in Uganda , but it would also tarnish the image of Uganda throughout the world and make it into a pariah .
Uganda has made many great strides in the past two decades and , in some ways , can be seen as a model for Africa 's development .
Why should Uganda 's parliamentarians choose to throw all that goodwill away ?
Why should they seek to place their country alongside brutal Iran , which regularly executes homosexuals in public ?
Let us hope that , through our mutual outrage - in this House and in many other parliaments throughout the world - at this piece of brutal legislation , we can convince the Ugandan President to veto it .
Mr President , some of the previous speakers have given details of this legislation which is now before the Ugandan Parliament .
I would like to tell you a brief story .
Around four to five years ago , I was in Kampala and one evening I met a group of lesbians , gay men and transgender people in a pizza restaurant , where the owner allowed the meeting to take place .
On the same evening , a government minister said that raids would , in future , take place on any places where lesbians , gay men and transgender people met .
I was rather worried that evening , as were the Ugandan lesbians and gay men .
Luckily nothing happened , but it marked the beginning of increasing homophobia in Uganda .
Now proposed legislation has been introduced which will not only make homosexuality a crime , as is already the case , but will also make it subject to the death penalty .
So many African Heads of State , including Museveni , have done a lot for their countries , but to say on this basis that homosexuality is un-African is simply wrong .
Homosexuality has existed in all cultures on all continents throughout all periods of history and it will continue to exist , regardless of what legislation is passed .
I am pleased that we have succeeded in introducing a joint resolution supported by almost all the groups , because it is important to express our opposition to the legislation and to support lesbians , gay men and transgender people in Uganda .
We must not allow them to be subjected to hate laws and stand by and say nothing .
We in the European Union have an obligation to uphold human rights all over the world and to remind the members of the Ugandan Parliament that the Cotonou Agreement , for example , states that human dignity and human rights apply to everyone and must be defended by everyone .
I also hope that the resolution that we have presented will be adopted in its entirety , because it is important for organisations which defend the rights of lesbians , gay men and transgender people in Uganda to be supported , including by the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , to answer the question , ' Why should the European Parliament concern itself with this issue ? ' , I would say that the anti-homosexual legislation submitted to the Ugandan Parliament shows complete disregard for fundamental freedoms and absolutely must not be adopted .
The Ugandan legislation in force already criminalises homosexuality .
For years , NGOs have been sounding the alarm about the violence committed against these groups .
The fact is , if the new law is adopted in January 2010 , it will exacerbate the situation and make homosexual acts punishable by life imprisonment or by the death penalty for homosexuals who are HIV positive .
This law would also be a major obstacle to the fight against AIDS .
There are other laws against homosexuals in Africa .
However , this one is exceptional because , as Mr Cashman was saying , it forces citizens to report homosexual acts within 24 hours .
If you are the doctor , parent or teacher of a homosexual , you have to report him or her to the police , or face a prison term .
Furthermore , this bill criminalises the legitimate work of non-governmental organisations , international donors and humanitarian associations which strive to defend and promote human rights in Uganda .
As soon as it was presented to the government in Kampala , this bill was strongly condemned by human rights defenders throughout the world , by several states , including France , the United States ...
( The President interrupted the speaker )
and by the European Commissioner for Development , Mr De Gucht .
Uganda must respect its obligations in accordance with international humanitarian law and with the Cotonou Agreement .
Should the situation continue , the European Union must , as a matter of urgency , make representations to the Ugandan authorities and rethink its involvement with Uganda .
Mrs Striffler , you had a further 12 seconds .
You could have read slightly more slowly and then more of your fellow Members would have benefited from an even better translation .
I advise Members who read their speeches to give them to the interpreters in advance , as this helps to improve the quality of the interpreting .
Mr President , some people think we should not get involved with this , because defence of the rights of homosexuals is an unjustified extension of human rights .
This is a misunderstanding .
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognised that human rights include every person and no one must be excluded .
A ban on discrimination because of sexual orientation is nothing new .
The problem is that not everyone wants to recognise this kind of discrimination as a violation of human rights .
In Uganda and some other African countries , there are voices saying that our interest in this subject is an expression of neo-colonialism , or that we are interfering in matters which are none of our concern .
This , too , is a misunderstanding .
For we are talking about general , universal rights .
This is not just a whim .
We respect the independence of Uganda and other states , but we cannot remain silent , when , instead of restricting discrimination , an attempt is being made to extend it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased that we have an opportunity today to talk about the anti-homosexual draft legislation submitted to the Ugandan Parliament on 25 September .
At a time when we are seeing an increasing number of human rights violations , I feel it is crucial , in the light of this anti-freedom law , for the European Parliament to look beyond the divisions that separate its political families and be able to condemn this bill in the strongest possible terms and to call on the Ugandan Parliament to reject the bill and to review its national legislation in order to decriminalise homosexuality .
As Mr Cashman pointed out just now , every single NGO has spoken out against this bill , regarding it , moreover , as a serious obstacle to the fight against AIDS .
The Commission , through Commissioner De Gucht , and a large majority of the Member States - adding their voice to the statements made by President Obama - have already condemned this initiative .
I therefore call on the Commission to rethink our involvement with Uganda if this bill is adopted .
A country that , at that point , would be in violation not only of international law but also of the fundamental principles of the Cotonou agreements could not continue to benefit from the support of the European Union .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to point out that everyone must have the right to freedom of sexual orientation , without fear of imprisonment or death .
This principle is not open to debate .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , I would have liked to start this debate by talking about the case of Aminatou Haidar .
However , due to the reasons we already know , I cannot .
In any case , the question of the eligibility rights in Uganda also deserves our attention , and this reminds us that once again , we are forced to adopt a new text condemning homophobia .
In the past , we have adopted several resolutions on that problem , including protection of minorities and anti-discrimination policies .
Today , we need to add the new text to those already adopted .
The only attempt by a Ugandan MP to table the anti-homosexuality bill deserves a political response .
This proposed law includes provisions to punish those alleged to be lesbian , gay or bisexual with life imprisonment and even the death penalty .
The draft also includes a provision that could lead to the imprisonment for up to three years of anyone , including heterosexual people , who fail to report within 24 hours the identities of everyone they know who is lesbian , gay , bisexual or transgender , or who supports human rights for people who are .
That means that any of us would also be susceptible to be taken to court for these reasons as well .
We have to remind the European Union and the international organisation that sexual orientation is a matter falling within the remit of the individual right to privacy guaranteed by international human rights law , according to which equality and non-discrimination should be promoted , whilst freedom of expression should be guaranteed .
We ask international donors , both governmental and non-governmental , to cease their activities in certain fields should the bill pass .
I strongly reject any move to introduce the use of the death penalty .
If those requests are not met by the Ugandan authorities , then we should call on the Council and Commission to reconsider their engagement with Uganda , should the bill pass into law and breaches of international human rights law take place .
For that reason , I wish to remind the Ugandan Government of its obligations under international law and under the Cotonou Agreement , which call for universal rights to be respected .
( PT ) Europe must intervene on this matter with all the tools it has available , particularly within the scope of the Cotonou Agreement .
We must demand the immediate withdrawal of this draconian bill ; otherwise there will be consequences for economic and political cooperation with Uganda .
When I learnt about the content of this proposed legislation and when I heard reports about the sad fate of homosexuals in Uganda , Sudan , Iran and Nigeria , to mention just a few examples , I realised how deplorably deep-rooted homophobia still is in many cultures , in blatant violation of those countries ' human rights obligations .
The role played by far-right evangelical Christians in the United States in mobilising and financing several initiatives of this kind in Africa is shocking .
Europe and its institutions must do all they can on the ground in the countries in question to neutralise and fight the evil , obscurantist influence of these agents of intolerance , who are instigating a new wave of hate crimes in Africa .
( ES ) Mr President , concerning the Ugandan bill which has provoked such indignation amongst us , I very much welcome the fact that the Members of the different parliamentary groups in the House who have taken the floor on this subject have spoken with one voice .
I believe this is indicative of unanimity across the Chamber .
I have asked for the floor simply to add my voice to theirs before voting accordingly later .
I support Mr Cashman , the authors and group spokespersons .
My reasons are that the fight against intolerance , discrimination and , in this case , also homophobia and the death penalty , requires us to be very firm and call upon the Commission and the Council to be firm too .
We must persevere until we succeed in bringing about the withdrawal of this iniquitous bill .
Taking the bill forward would be tantamount to returning Uganda to colonial conditions .
( RO ) I , too , wish to say that I am appalled by the way in which the law we are discussing is presented .
It goes without saying that we cannot accept in Europe sanctions being imposed against a person for their sexual orientation and for failing to provide information about a person 's sexual orientation .
I would also like to stress that the discussion we are having is taking place in the context where the second review of the Cotonou Agreement is being discussed .
Uganda is a party to this , and this agreement very clearly sets out the need to respect human rights .
I also voted on Monday this week , as part of the Committee on Development , for a report by Mrs Jolie on this topic of the Cotonou Agreement .
I believe that today 's discussion , although it could have taken place earlier last month , puts us in this position where we obviously cannot but reject what is happening in Uganda .
( FI ) Mr President , I would like to contribute to this debate by reminding everyone that a Review Conference of the International Criminal Court Statute is to be held in Kampala , Uganda , next May .
It is now actually 10 years since this important criminal court was founded , and I would hope that the Ugandan Government will examine its own legislation from every angle to ensure that it is in line with international agreements and will comply with the principle of non-discrimination .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is deeply concerned over the draft anti-homosexuality bill introduced recently in the Ugandan Parliament .
The bill , if adopted , raises serious human rights issues which are of great importance to the Commission .
The Commission considers that the penalisation of homosexuality , as foreseen in the bill , would go against the UN human rights conventions .
Uganda has ratified these conventions . Thereby it has the legal obligation to respect them , without distinction or discrimination .
Domestic legislation must be consistent with international human rights obligations .
The bill would also go against the EU-supported UN declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity of 18 December 2008 regarding the decriminalisation of homosexuality .
Commissioner De Gucht personally raised these concerns in a letter to President Museveni last November .
He emphasised that respect for human rights is of the greatest importance to the Commission and to the European Parliament .
However , he expressed his confidence to the President that , under his guidance , such retrogressive legislation will not be allowed .
The Presidency and the Heads of Mission in Uganda also raised this issue with the Ugandan Government on several occasions , during meetings with the Prime Minister and the Minister of Justice , in Article 8 meetings , and with the Uganda Human Rights Commission .
In its latest démarche on 3 December , the EU Presidency and the local troika met the acting Foreign Minister , to whom they again expressed these serious concerns , confirmed their support for fundamental freedoms and reminded Uganda of its international obligations .
The Minister , while mentioning traditional values and cultural traditions that take time to change and alleging evidence of orchestrated campaigns to take advantage of poor people and recruit them into homosexuality , took note of the EU positions and committed himself to reporting them personally to the Cabinet and to Parliament in order to enable them to take an informed decision .
The Commission hopes that , in the vein and in the spirit of the ongoing EU-Uganda partnership , these démarches , together with those of others , will lead to a review of the proposed legislation to make it compatible with international principles of non-discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Azerbaijan : freedom of expression
The next item is the debate on seven motions for a resolution on freedom of expression in Azerbaijan .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe has embarked on an interesting Eastern Partnership project , which has met with support and encouraging collaboration from six countries : Armenia , Belarus , Georgia , Moldova , Ukraine and Azerbaijan .
This operation is improving the relationship between the European Union and these countries and may lead to democratic and economic development of the area , albeit to a varying extent depending on the history of each country .
Given this intelligent political strategy , in my view , it is inappropriate to hold this urgent debate on two young bloggers sentenced following events for which proceedings are still ongoing while we overlook other situations that are truly tragic , such as the recent massacre of 57 people who had come together to support a presidential election candidate in the Philippines .
All parliamentary groups , with the exception of ours , support a motion for a resolution on Azerbaijan that is harsh and out of step with the partnership initiatives that we have undertaken .
I am convinced that the strong views contained in the resolution put to the vote today may not only lead to the Azerbaijani Government stiffening relations with Europe , but may also have a counterproductive effect on the case of these two young people , in that this resolution could jeopardise the granting of a pardon .
In this regard , I would like to remind you of the decision , adopted yesterday in plenary , whereby we rejected a resolution on the Aminatou Haidar case so as not to compromise the ongoing diplomatic negotiations .
I feel that it is also contradictory that in the same session , two resolutions are being put to the vote , one on Belarus and the other on Azerbaijan , both very different in tone , when these two countries are part of the same Eastern Partnership .
When , on 11 November this year , Europe marked the anniversary of the end of the First World War , in Azerbaijan , a sentence of several years ' imprisonment was passed on some journalists who had dared to write about the country 's widespread corruption and unemployment .
The journalists were officially charged with spreading hooliganism and terrorism .
In the ranking produced by Freedom House , Azerbaijan has the status of ' Not Free ' .
Reporters Without Borders say Azerbaijan is in 146th place out of 175 countries surveyed in terms of freedom of speech .
Disturbing signals are also coming from analyses conducted by the Economist Intelligence Unit , which has evaluated Azerbaijan on the question of political freedoms .
In this context , last year 's refusal by the authorities in Azerbaijan to grant concessions to foreign media , such as the BBC and Radio Free Europe , should not surprise anyone .
I think the time has come for the European Union to review its approach to Azerbaijan and , taking advantage of the participation of Baku in the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Policy , to begin to exert greater pressure on the authorities there .
In addition , I would like to add my voice to the appeal of my political group for the unconditional release of the imprisoned journalists and adequate revision of Azerbaijani law .
author . - Mr President , Azerbaijan is signatory to a number of partnerships with the EU .
It is active in the neighbourhood policy as well as in the Eastern Partnership .
This does not only relate to trade .
Azerbaijan has also signed up to respect democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
However , currently , these are all under serious threat with the present regime .
Today we highlight the case of Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizade , which represents a crackdown on free media , free expression and civil society that is much deeper and wider than the case of merely two bloggers , as they have been called .
They did indeed use new media like Facebook and Twitter for their youth organisation 's work , but the fact is that we do not even know why they are imprisoned as evidence to defend their case has not been admitted in the trial , and the trial did not meet international standards - and , indeed , looks fabricated .
If we cannot rely on the Azerbaijani Government to stay true to its commitment to democracy , human rights and the rule of the law through the various agreements it has itself signed with the EU , then Europe cannot consider Azerbaijan to be a credible partner at all ; this is also true of trade relations .
This resolution urges the Azerbaijani Government to adhere to its own promises and to start building its legitimacy in the international community by respecting its own citizens , granting them democratic and human rights and allowing for respect of the rule of law .

Yesterday , we awarded the Sakharov Prize in this House of the European people , and we saw a very impressive speech by the laureate , Mr Kovalev , who said that fear can only be met by freedom of thought , and freedom of thought can only be expressed when freedom of expression is actually guaranteed and when we listen to those people who are simply addressing issues such as opposition to their government , which we , as Europeans , have to guarantee in partnership with Azerbaijan in all areas .
Mr President , the previous speaker has already mentioned some of the details of this resolution .
The resolution was prompted among other things by an incident in July 2009 in which two young bloggers , Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizade , were attacked in a restaurant , went to the police to report the incident and were then arrested themselves .
They were prosecuted and , according to all the international observers , including Amnesty International , the court proceedings were far from fair .
For example , the video which was apparently taken in the restaurant , which clearly showed who had been attacked and that the attackers were other people and not these two bloggers , was not played .
It is therefore clear that the judgment does not meet the criteria required by a state under the rule of law .
I very much hope that all the evidence will have to be presented in the second trial when it takes place .
I am pleased that we have succeeded in introducing a resolution which is supported by almost all the groups .
I regret that Mr Provera 's group is not joining us and instead is emphasising that we should wait for the case to resolve itself and to make use of the diplomatic channels .
Mr Provera , I believe that it is necessary for Parliament , which is in partnership with the Parliament of Azerbaijan , to express itself clearly .
Human rights represent a fundamental issue .
Mrs Schaake referred yesterday to the Sakharov Prize .
We must speak out in support of freedom of thought in all parts of the world and ensure that it is protected .
President Aliyev has often said how important the rights of every journalist are and that they must be defended by the state .
It is our job to remind everyone of this and I very much hope that in future , there will be another resolution on partnership between the Parliament of Azerbaijan and the European Parliament , as unfortunately this was unsuccessful two weeks ago .
author . - Mr President , I welcome the attention drawn to the appalling and consistent crushing of human rights in Azerbaijan : no freedom for the media , dozens of journalists jailed , some beaten , some even killed in recent years .
But we must ask why the regime of Mr Aliyev is implementing such horrific repression .
The reason of course is to try and cover up the regime of enormous corruption which exists in that country .
The ruling elite has enriched itself fabulously , especially in the oil and gas industry , while 90 % of the population of Azerbaijan live in acute poverty and have seen no benefit from the natural resources of their country .
Western governments and multinational corporations act , as usual , with great hypocrisy in this regard .
They routinely deal with the regime to facilitate doing business , and the corporations make massive profits from the exploitation of the natural resources properly belonging to the people of Azerbaijan .
Western governments should be asked why they do not demand that the oil-well be used to transform the lives of the people , instead of propping up this regime .
Members of the European Parliament , quite correctly , are harsh in their condemnation of the crushing of the right to dissent and to demonstrate freely in Azerbaijan , and I cannot let this opportunity pass to also condemn the disgraceful repression of protests by the Danish police in Copenhagen in recent days , who arrested up to 1 000 entirely peaceful protestors , handcuffed them and left them lying for hours in the cold .
When I protested and demanded the release of some CWI colleagues , the police themselves told me that it was preventive arrest , preventive detention .
What goes for Azerbaijan should certainly go for a Member State of the European Union as well .
Mr President , in Azerbaijan , for fairly mild and delicate criticism of the government , two people have gone to prison after being given stiff sentences .
What does this mean ?
Firstly , that the country does not have good legal institutions , and it does not look like such institutions are going to arise .
Secondly , that Azerbaijan has an authoritarian system which is taking control of more and more areas of political life .
Every concession is punished .
What can we do in this situation ?
We should certainly intervene in every specific case of the violation of justice , as we are doing in this debate .
Such interventions have quite often been successful .
It is significantly more difficult to force institutional change .
To date , the efforts of the EU in this area have been unsatisfactory , partly because we are still lenient towards some tyrants and vociferous in our criticism of others .
The representatives of Memorial mentioned this several times in this House .
We also have problems in part because the process of coming out of authoritarianism is very difficult , arduous and prolonged .
It is a very pessimistic conclusion , but I close with this thought : in spite of everything , we should not cease in our efforts , and should be consistent in exerting pressure .
author . - Mr President , at the beginning of this year , the European Union made a statement on freedom and media in Azerbaijan .
I regret the fact that , after concern on media freedom was expressed during the regular meeting with Azerbaijani parliamentarians , there has been no feedback .
The European Parliament therefore has to take a stand .
This is , by the way , going to be our last resolution adopted in 2009 .
The main concern of the EPP Group , and I am happy that all factions share the same concern , is the deterioration of media freedom in that country .
The widespread practice of harassment , persecution and conviction of opposition journalists is alarming .
We call on Azerbaijani authorities to release the journalists in jail without further delay .
This also concerns two young bloggers .
The second problem is a recent decision by Azerbaijani authorities to cancel the FM radio licences of several international radio stations like Radio Free Europe , Voice of America , BBC World Service and others , depriving listeners in this country of valuable and independent sources of information .
Here I ask colleagues to agree to an oral amendment to paragraph 7 of the resolution : namely , not only to voice regret at the situation , but also to urge the Azerbaijani Government to cancel its decision and renew FM licences for the radio stations mentioned .
Variety , freedom and independence of information are key to a robust civil society , as Sergei Kovalev told us yesterday in this Chamber .
This applies fully to the EU 's relations with Azerbaijan too .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , Azerbaijan is an important partner of the European Union .
It is certainly an essential partner in efforts to ensure European energy security .
However , no matter how important oil and gas are , they are not everything .
Azerbaijan has made commitments to work for a democratic and pluralistic society , as enshrined in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement and the Eastern Partnership policy , in which Azerbaijan intends to participate fully .
We should applaud steps in the right direction taken by President Aliyev , for example , to free 119 prisoners , including five journalists , at the end of 2007 .
However , the situation of media freedom is only getting worse .
We have a number of cases to support this claim , such as the situation of bloggers , the licences of the BBC , Radio Free Europe , etc .
We must not shy away from reminding Azerbaijan that people must have the right to speak out freely , even if this means having critical views towards their governments .
That is the basic principle of a democratic society , and a democratic Azerbaijan has to be an aim just as important as ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Freedom of expression is a fundamental human right and a cornerstone of democracy .
Azerbaijan ratified the European Convention on Human Rights and has undertaken to observe the provisions of Article 10 of this convention , which is devoted to freedom of expression and information .
This Article establishes every person 's right to freely express their opinion , receive and share information , without let or hindrance from governing institutions .
Azerbaijan also has made a commitment not to flout human rights and not to impinge on individual freedoms and to safeguard the principles of democracy in its country by participating in the implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership initiative .
However , recently in Azerbaijan , the right to freedom of expression and freedom of association has increasingly come under threat and media activities are restricted .
There is growing violence against journalists and civil society activists .
I would like to urge Azerbaijan to take into account the European Parliament 's proposals and encouragement to improve the human rights protection system and to ensure respect for media freedoms .
Mr President , Azerbaijan has appeared once again on the agenda of the European Parliament .
We spoke about Azerbaijan in the last parliamentary term , when we adopted three resolutions , including one about freedom of the media there .
We also spoke about the Southern Caucasus , again including Azerbaijan .
We are interested in Azerbaijan and have a great deal of goodwill for the country .
It is trying to find its way step-by-step , and , indeed , is moving ever nearer to the western world , and not to the east .
We should appreciate this .
I think that we look upon Azerbaijan with a great deal of goodwill , and also on the authorities there .
However , that goodwill must not order us not to speak out about things we do not like .
Certainly , a situation in which two bloggers are locked up because they say what they think about the authorities is something which should not take place .
We should support the pro-European tendencies of the Azerbaijani authorities , because all the time , a political discussion is going on there about whether to be closer to the European Union or to Russia .
In so doing , we should support all those who want to be closer to the western world .
However , when supporting them , we must talk about the values which make up that world - freedom of the press and freedom of expression are a fundamental value , and we should make this very plain .
Azerbaijan is certainly not in an easy position , because Russia is trying to rebuild its area of political and economic influence , but when helping the Azerbaijani authorities to draw nearer to the EU , we must speak out about the country 's deficiencies .
Freedom of expression is a very important feature of a democratic society .
It is therefore correct that the EU monitors very carefully any actions aimed at intimidating those who openly criticise the mistakes of government officials .
From this perspective , I understand the challenge of the European Parliament to the Azerbaijan office expressing disquiet over the results of a police investigation mounted against young people who make satirical references to visible shortcomings in the political life of the country .
I agree that we cannot ignore the clearly unfavourable signals coming from Azerbaijan and I do not doubt the criticism of the political environment in Azerbaijan , but I also feel that there has been no emphatic criticism from the European Parliament concerning the current events in the Philippines , where 57 political hostages have been murdered .
In my opinion , we should address all issues that shake the democratic world .
( DE ) Mr President , following the first European elections in 1979 , I had the honour of working with Otto von Habsburg , who is now seriously ill , to establish the human rights tradition of the European Parliament , including these topical and urgent debates on a Thursday afternoon .
I was elected to the European Parliament in 1994 and I had the honour of working with Mr Schulz and others to further develop this human rights tradition , which we are rightly proud of .

For this reason I was shocked when Mr Provera said with reference to Mr Schulz , who did not deserve this , that the case should not be taken up and almost repeated the threats made by the regime in Azerbaijan to civil rights activists in the country by saying that they will have to put up with it .
The human rights prize has already been mentioned today .
I remember well that when we expressed our support for Andrei Sakharov , Vytautas Landsbergis and other campaigners for civil rights , people said at the time : Please do not get involved .
We will make use of the diplomatic channels and you are causing more harm than good .
Now we know that it was decisive for these people that Parliament spoke out clearly on their behalf .
Therefore , Mr Schulz , ladies and gentlemen , let us continue our tradition of independence on a Thursday afternoon .
I would like to ask the group chairs to give us some freedom to act .
This has nothing to do with party politics .
During the last session , one Member said that as we were just about to hold meetings with China , we could not talk about China .
Today it was a different subject , the Western Sahara .
Perhaps this is justified in individual cases , but I am seriously concerned about our human rights work .
Ladies and gentlemen , the case of Azerbaijan demonstrates how important it is to be discerning here .
The country was a Soviet satellite state .
Monocultures were established , the country was destroyed and subjected to a brutal regime .
Now it is slowly beginning to become more democratic .
As a member of the Council of Europe , it has committed to human rights and we must help it to continue along this route .
( Applause )
( RO ) I , too , support what Mr Posselt said earlier .
At the same time , I would ask for the Azerbaijani Government to respect the right of freedom of expression of every citizen and to immediately drop the charges against the two young men , accused on the basis of fabricated evidence , as Mrs Lunacek mentioned earlier .
I believe that this action must be taken urgently because the situation with regard to press freedom in this country has deteriorated sharply , as is also indicated by the latest reports from the Council of Europe and OSCE .
I also think that the Azerbaijani Government must take this action urgently because it must respect the commitments arising from both the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Eastern Partnership .
I will conclude by saying that I , too , was shocked by the turn of events today with regard to Mrs Haidar , all the more so as the suffering she is going through could be avoided through good cooperation between the Moroccan and Spanish authorities .
I believe that our resolution would not have done any harm , but actually a lot of good .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to quote from Article 47 of the Constitution of Azerbaijan : ' Everyone may enjoy freedom of thought and speech . '
Unfortunately , they are only empty words , for the constitution is not respected .
For over five years , I have been a member of the EU-Southern Caucasus Parliamentary Cooperation Committees .
I visited Azerbaijan during every joint parliamentary session .
In one of the documents , there is a point about the violation of the principles of freedom of speech , and about how journalists and publishers end up in prison , often on fabricated charges , and that they are not given medical help when they are ill .
We have a case of a journalist who died because he did not receive medical assistance .
I had the opportunity to visit Azeri prisons .
The standards which are found there are far different from those to which we are accustomed in Europe .
It is good , therefore , that we keep on saying that in Azerbaijan , the principles enshrined in the constitution should be respected .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , Azerbaijan is important to the European Union as an energy producer and transit country , and also as a contributor to regional stability in the Southern Caucasus .
Azerbaijan is one of the six partner countries under the Eastern Partnership , and we attach great importance to respect for the common values underpinning this relationship .
A partnership and cooperation agreement has been in place for 10 years .
However , Azerbaijan has expressed its interest in building closer relations with the European Union by concluding an association agreement to replace it .
Following the decision of the